Code of Ordinances CITY OF Kenner, Louisiana 
____________ 
Adopted, August 14, 1972 
Effective, September 15, 1972 
____________ 
Published in 1972 by Order of the Board of Aldermen 
Republished in 2016 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF KENNER, LOUISIANA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joseph S. Yenni 
Mayor 
____________ 
Anthony J. Bertolino- Mayor Pro Tem 
Garner B. Gremillion 
Larry J. Hooper 
Thomas LeBlanc 
Keith L. Woodward 
Aldermen 
____________ 
Salvador J. Lentini 
Chief of Police 
____________ 
Hubert A. Vondenstein 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Dora Mae Aucoin 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a republication of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Kenner, LA. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1972 Code, as supplemented through 2016, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1972 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been appropriately catchlined to facilitate usage. Appropriate footnotes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state laws have been included. Also, the source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and municipal codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash referring to the chapter number and the figure after the dash referring to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the fourteenth section of Chapter 17 is 17-14. Under this system each section is identified with its chapter and, at the same time, new sections, or even whole chapters, can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between Sections 4-4 and 4-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 4-4.1, 4-4.2, 4-4.3, respectively. New chapters may be included by the addition of a fraction after the chapter number; e.g., if the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 121/2. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 SPECIAL ACTS SA:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE SACT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Index 
    The general index of the Code has been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by city officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the index itself which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing for the Code. With this looseleaf system, the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to the holders of the Code with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part hereof, as provided in section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
    By use of the Comparative Table immediately preceding the index, the user can locate any ordinance included in this Code. If a section of an ordinance is not listed in the Table, it has been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete, or for some other reason. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Dennis Sinnett, Supplement Department Vice President, Alexis Legate, Supplement Editor, and Becky Wallace, Proofreader, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Natalie Hall for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kenner, LA. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kenner, LA. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Kenner, LA. 2016. 
ORDINANCE NO. 1427 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code of Ordinances of the City of Kenner, Louisiana: Establishing the Same: Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided: Providing for the Effective Date of Such Code and a Penalty for the Violation Thereof: Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code: and Providing When This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Board of Aldermen of the City of Kenner, Louisiana: 
    Section I. That the Code of Ordinances consisting of Chapters 1 to 16, each inclusive, is hereby adopted and enacted as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, Louisiana" and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive ordinance which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances passed by the Board of Aldermen on or before December 13, 1971, to the extent provided in Section II hereof. 
    Section II. That all provisions of such Code shall be in full force and effect from and after the 15th day of September, 1972, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on final passage on or before the 13th day of December, 1971, and not included in such Code or recognized and continued in force by reference thereto are hereby repealed from and after the 15th day of September, 1972. 
    Section III. The repeal provided for in Section II hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section IV. That whenever in such Code an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of such Code shall be punished as provided in Section 1-9 of such Code. 
    Section V. That any and all additions and amendments to such Code when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the Board of Aldermen to make the same a part thereof shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code so that reference to the "Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, Louisiana" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
    Section VI. In case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty as provided in Section 1-9 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended; or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section VII. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the City Clerk, preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the City Clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the City Clerk or someone authorized by him to insert in their designated places all amendments or Ordinances which indicate the intention of the Board of Aldermen to make the same a part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the Board of Aldermen. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section VIII. That it shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend, by additions or deletions, any part or portion of such Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Kenner to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this Section shall be punished as provided in Section IV of this Ordinance. 
    Section IX. All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
    Section X. This Ordinance shall become effective this 14th day of August, 1972. 
    This Ordinance having been submitted to a vote, the vote thereon was as follows: 
    Yeas: Hooper, LeBlanc, and Woodward 
    Nays: None 
    Absent: Bertolino and Gremillion 
    This Ordinance was declared adopted on this 14th day of August, 1972. 
/s/  Joseph S. Yenni       
Joseph S. Yenni, Mayor 
(SEAL) 
Attest: 
/s/ Dora Mae Aucoin 
Dora Mae Aucoin, City Clerk 
    Published August 18, August 25, September 1, and September 8, 1972. 
CERTIFICATION 
    I, Dora Mae Aucion, clerk for City of Kenner, Louisiana, hereby certify that the above and foregoing is a true and correct copy of Ordinance No. 1427 adopted by the Mayor and Board of Aldermen of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, at a regular assembled meeting held on August 14, 1972. 
Signed and sealed: 
(SEAL) 
/s/ Dora Mae Aucoin 
Clerk, City of Kenner, Louisiana 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
  
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 11,119  7- 7-16 Omitted 1 11,143  8- 4-16 Included 1 11,202 11-17-16 Included 1 11,206 12- 1-16 Omitted 1 11,211 12-15-16 Included 1 11,229  3- 9-17 Included 2 11,248  4-20-17 Included 2 11,269  5- 4-17 Included 2 10,785  7-10-14 Included 3 11,294  6-15-17 Included 3 11,320  8-17-17 Included 3 11,333  9-21-17 Omitted 3 11,334  9-21-17 Omitted 3 11,338 10- 5-17 Included 3 11,341 10-19-17 Included 3 11,349 11- 2-17 Included 3 11,356 12- 7-17 Included 3 11,364 12-21-17 Included 3 11,394  4- 5-18 Included 4 11,409  5-17-18 Included 4 11,435  7-12-18 Omitted 4 11,436  7-12-18 Included 4 11,446  7-26-18 Included 5 11,452  8- 9-18 Included 5 11,459  8-23-18 Included 5 11,478 1- 1-18 Included 5 11,480 11- 1-18 Omitted 5 11,493 12- 6-18 Included 5 11,509  1-18-19 Included 5  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, Louisiana," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Kenner City Code." 
State Law reference- For state law authorizing cities to adopt codes embracing all of the laws which they may enact, see R.S. 33:1361 et seq. and R.S. 33:1364 et seq. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances and resolutions passed by the board of aldermen, the following rules of construction shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the board of aldermen: 
    Board of aldermen. The words "board" or "board of aldermen" shall mean the Board of Aldermen of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, composing the governing body of the city. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Kenner in the Parish of Jefferson and State of Louisiana. 
    City officers and departments. Whenever reference is made to an officer or a department, the same shall be construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Kenner, Louisiana." Reference to a specific officer shall also include his authorized deputies, agents or representatives. 
    Code. The words "this Code" shall mean the Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, Louisiana, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. In computing any period of time mentioned in the provisions of this Code, the day of the act, event or default after which the designated period of time begins to run is not to be included, and the last day of the period so computed is to be included, unless it is a Saturday, Sunday or a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is neither a Saturday, Sunday nor a holiday. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend to and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships, associations and corporations, as well as to males. 
    Highway. The term "highway" shall include any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. Any word importing the singular number shall include the plural and any word importing the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner or joint owner of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. Where criminal prosecution may lie, the officers of any corporation shall jointly and severally be subject to prosecution as being included within the term "person." 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Revised Statutes or R.S. The term "Revised Statutes" or "R.S." shall refer to Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended. 
    Roadway. The word "roadway" shall mean that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic. 
    Shall, may. The word "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
    Signature or subscription. The word "signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when a person cannot write. 
    Standard time. All hours of time mentioned in this Code refer to and shall be determined by Central Standard Time, or Central Daylight Saving Time, as the case may be, except that, if at any future time any different standard of time is established by the State of Louisiana for an area which includes this city, all such hours shall be determined by such officially proclaimed standard, so long as the same remains in effect. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Louisiana. 
    Street. The term "street" shall include any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway in the city, dedicated or devoted to public use. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Written or in writing. The words "written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
Sec. 1-4. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or alter by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Kenner to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
Sec. 1-5. - Amendments or additions to Code. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code by the board of aldermen. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code shall be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "Be it ordained by the board of aldermen of the City of Kenner that section _______ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, Louisiana, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
    In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language shall be used: "Be it ordained by the board of aldermen of the City of Kenner that the Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, Louisiana, is hereby amended by adding a section, which said section reads as follows: ...." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness; 
(2)  Any appropriation ordinance or ordinance providing for the levy of taxes or for an annual budget, or prescribing salaries for city officers and employees; 
(3)  Any ordinance annexing territory to the city or discontinuing territory as a part of the city; 
(4)  Any ordinance granting any franchise; 
(5)  The zoning ordinances of the city; 
(6)  Ordinance No. 395 of August 20, 1956, dedicating part of the Parish Line Canal to be a public navigable waterway. 
(7)  The ordinances of the city creating, regulating, or related to Sewer Districts I and II, including but not limited to ordinances numbered 584, 587, 722 and 738, and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Cross reference- Certain ordinances related to streets not affected by Code, § 13-1; ordinance on agreement on social security for city employees not affected by Code, § 2-40. 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, contracts, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
Sec. 1-8. - Responsibility for violations by firms, corporations or associations. 
    In case of a violation of any of the terms or provisions of this Code or other ordinance by any firm, corporation or association, the officers and agents actively in charge of the business of such firm, corporation or association shall be responsible for such violation and subject to prosecution therefor. 
Sec. 1-9. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city an act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of any such provision of this Code or of any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment; and/or community service work as deemed appropriate by the magistrate court for the City of Kenner not to exceed thirty-two (32) hours. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2313, 6-12-78; Ord. No. 5410, § 1, 6-6-85) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the board of aldermen that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the board without the incorporation in this Code of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Electrical inspector, § 5-42 et seq.; civil defense and disaster relief, § 6-1 et seq.; licenses and taxation, § 10-1 et seq.; police, § 11-1 et seq.; taxicab division, § 16-21 et seq.; special act creating firemen's pension and relief fund, App. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Official seal. 
    The new seal for the city which appears in this section, being a pictorial seal depicting the growth of the city from swamplands through the farming era to its present transportation age, be and is hereby approved as the official seal for the city. The design for the seal shall appear as follows: 
(Ord. No. 1276, § 1, 2-22-71) 
Sec. 2-2. - Time and place established for regular meetings of mayor and aldermen. 
    The regular monthly meetings of the mayor and board of aldermen of the city will be held at the city hall at 1801 Williams Blvd., Kenner, Louisiana, on the second (2nd) and fourth (4th) Monday of each and every month at 7:00 p.m. However, should the second (2nd) or fourth (4th) Monday of any month fall on a legal holiday, then the regular meeting scheduled for the second (2nd) or fourth (4th) Monday which is a legal holiday will be held on the first following day which is not a legal holiday and will also be held at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 1234, § II, 7-28-70) 
Sec. 2-3. - Duties of mayor. 
    The mayor shall preside at all meetings of the board of aldermen, and in case there is an equal division, he shall give the deciding vote. He shall have the superintending control of all offices and affairs of the municipality; shall actively and vigilantly see that all the laws and ordinances are properly executed and enforced. The mayor shall have ten (10) calendar days after any law, bylaw or ordinance shall have been presented to him by the board of aldermen within which to approve or veto it. If he approves it, he shall sign it; if not, he shall return it to the board of aldermen with his objections. The board of aldermen after receipt of the mayor's veto message may at the next regularly scheduled session reconsider the law, bylaw or ordinance and may override the veto by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the elected membership. If the mayor neither signs nor vetoes the law, bylaw or ordinance within the prescribed ten (10) calendar days it shall become effective as if he had signed it. He shall sign commissions and appointments of all the officers elected or appointed by him and the board of aldermen. He shall sign warrants drawn on the treasury for money, and require the clerk to attest the same, to affix thereto the seal of the municipality, and to keep an accurate record thereof in a well bound book to be kept for that purpose. He shall from time to time communicate, in writing, to the board of aldermen information and recommend measures which may tend to the improvement of the finances, the policy, health, security, ornament, comfort, and general prosperity of the municipality. He may require any officer of the municipality to exhibit his accounts or other papers, and to make report to the board of aldermen, in writing, on any matter pertaining to his office. He shall cause all other officers to be dealt with promptly for any neglect or violation of duty. He shall have the jurisdiction vested in him by ordinance over all places within five (5) miles of the corporate limits for the enforcement of any cemetery or waterworks ordinance and regulation thereof. He may call on every male inhabitant of the municipality over eighteen (18) years and under fifty-five (55) years of age, to aid in enforcing the law. He may remit fines and forfeitures and annul penalties for offenses against the ordinances of the municipality, with the consent of the board of aldermen; but a fine or penalty shall not be remitted or annulled unless the reason therefor is entered on the minutes by the clerk, together with and as a part of the order so doing. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:404. 
Sec. 2-4. - Duties of marshal. 
    The marshal shall be the chief of police and shall be ex officio a constable. He shall have general responsibility for law enforcement in the municipality, and shall be charged with the enforcement of all ordinances within the municipality and all applicable state laws. He shall also perform all other duties required of him by the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
Editor's note- For a case concerning the duties of the marshal as prescribed in Ordinance No. 936 of November 14, 1966, see Lentini v. City of Kenner, 211 So ad 311 (June 4, 1968), Sup. Ct. of La. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:423. 
Sec. 2-5. - Duties of city clerk generally; records to be kept. 
    The city clerk shall keep a book to be labeled "Municipal Minutes, City of Kenner," in which he shall record the proceedings of the mayor and board of aldermen, and keep the same fully indexed alphabetically, so that all entries on the minutes can be easily found. The clerk shall be the custodian of the municipal seal, which has been adopted and provided for by the city. The clerk shall keep a book, to be styled "Municipal Docket, City of Kenner," upon which he shall enter each claim against the municipality, and each subject matter to be acted upon by the mayor and board of aldermen. After each meeting he shall make up such docket for the next regular meeting. He shall examine the statutes of the state and the ordinances of the city to ascertain subject matter required or proper to be acted upon at the following meeting, and shall docket all such matters. He shall keep such other books and records as may be provided for by ordinance, and shall file in his office and preserve all records and papers appertaining to the business of the municipality. He shall keep a book to be styled "Tax Record, City of Kenner," in which he shall enter all deeds to individuals, and the list of lands sold to the city by the tax collector, showing: 
(1)  Description of the land, 
(2)  As whose property sold, 
(3)  Date of sale, 
(4)  Amount of taxes, costs, and damages due, and to whom the costs are owing, 
(5)  When redeemed, 
(6)  By whom redeemed, 
(7)  Date of redemption, and 
(8)  Amount paid therefor. 
(Ord. No. 936, § VI, 11-14-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:421. 
Sec. 2-6. - City clerk to act as auditor; paying fines and forfeitures into treasury; inspection of auditor's books. 
    The city clerk shall be the auditor of the city. He shall keep a book in which he shall enter and preserve accounts of each particular fund, and the accounts of each city officer. The city clerk shall not receive money from any source without issuing a receipt therefor. All fines and forfeitures shall be reported by the officer collecting the same, immediately after such collection, and be paid into the treasury. The books of the auditor shall be subject to inspection by the taxpayers of the city at any time during business hours. 
(Ord. No. 936, § VI, 11-14-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:422. 
Sec. 2-7. - Clerk to act as treasurer. 
    The city clerk shall act as treasurer and carry out all the duties of treasurer as prescribed by state law. 
State Law reference- Duties of treasurer, R.S. 33:425. 
Sec. 2-8. - Duties of tax collector generally; liability for shortage of funds; cancellation of bond. 
    The tax collector shall collect, account for, and pay over all taxes levied by the city, and perform all other duties required of him by ordinance, or such as may be required by law of collectors of parish and state taxes, under the same penalties prescribed by law for the collection of state and parish taxes. The tax collector, and the sureties on his official bond, shall be liable to the city for any defalcation, shortage or embezzlement of, or failure to account for, funds of the city collected by him, until he has obtained a quietus or discharge from the city for the amount of such collections, and for all public money with which he may have been entrusted. Notwithstanding his term as tax collector may have expired, the aforesaid liability of the tax collector, and the sureties on his official bond, shall be a continuing liability enforceable by the city against any property of the tax collector, and that of the sureties on his official bond, standing of record in his or their names at the date of the discovery of such defalcation, shortage, embezzlement or failure to account for, said funds, and until such quietus or discharge has been obtained, and regardless of whether the official bond has been placed on record or not. 
    If the surety on the bond should be an indemnity company authorized to do business in this state, or if there are personal sureties, it or the personal sureties, or either of them, or the tax collector, may proceed by rules, taken contradictorily with the city in the district court, to obtain a quietus from the city, and a cancellation of the official bond, if more than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of the discovery of any defalcation, shortage or embezzlement of, or failure to account for, any funds of the city, without legal action having been taken by the city to collect the sum or sums representing the alleged defalcation, shortage or embezzlement of, or unaccounted for, funds, from the tax collector or his sureties. 
    The obligations imposed by this section upon the tax collector, and the sureties on his official bond, and the measure of their respective liabilities on the bond as defined in this section and the effect thereof upon the respective properties of such tax collector, or sureties, shall be implied conditions of the bond fully binding and enforceable against the tax collector and sureties on his bond and their respective properties, as though the same had been specially written therein. 
(Ord. No. 936, 11-14-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:424. 
Sec. 2-9. - Duties of treasurer prescribed. 
    The treasurer shall receive, safely keep, and pay out according to law, all monies belonging to the city. He shall keep accurate accounts of all receipts and disbursements, and shall make report, in writing to the mayor and board of aldermen, at each regular meeting, of the finances of the city; he shall perform all other duties that may be prescribed by ordinance; and he shall pay out money only on the warrant issued by the order of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(Ord. No. 936, 11-14-66) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:425. 
Sec. 2-10. - Public bidding on public projects; disclosure by bidders of subcontractors and material supplies. 
(a)  All contractors submitting proposals for the performance of public works within the City of Kenner, as a condition of having their proposal considered, shall make a full and complete disclosure of any and all subcontractors and/or material suppliers they intend utilizing if awarded a contract pursuant to their proposal. 
(b)  Engineers, project engineers, and architects, acting as agents and representatives of the City of Kenner, in preparing general specifications for public bidding on public works within the City of Kenner shall include, in said general specifications, the provisions and requirements of this section, and shall further design proposal forms in such a manner that the information required of contractors can be logically submitted with their proposals. 
(Ord. No. 1396, §§ 1, 2, 4-24-72) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1396, §§ 1 and 2, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 2-10 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-10.1. - Construction, repair contracts in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) wage specifications. 
    Specifications for every contract in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) to which the City of Kenner is a party, for construction, alteration and/or repair, including painting and decorating of public building or public works of the City of Kenner, within the geographical limits of the City of Kenner, and which require or involve the employment of workmen, mechanics and/or laborers, shall contain a provision stating the minimum wages to be paid various classes of workmen, laborers and mechanics on such job shall be based upon the wages that will be determined by the commissioner of labor of the State of Louisiana to be prevailing in the area for corresponding classes of workmen, laborers and mechanics employed on projects of a character similar to the contract work in the area in which the contract is to be performed. Every such contract shall have such specifications as a part of it, whether required by law to be advertised or not. 
(Ord. No. 1563, 10-8-73) 
Sec. 2-10.2. - Same-Requirements in specifications and contract documents. 
    Specifications for such public works shall contain all the stipulations and statements required by Act No. 65 of 1968 "R.S. 38:2301", and all contracts entered into pursuant to said specifications for public works shall contain all the stipulations and statements required by Act No. 65 of 1968 "R.S. 38:2301", and all contractors or their subcontractors shall be subject to all the provisions of said act including, but not limited to, the compliance and enforcement procedures thereof and the powers and penalties as provided therein. 
(Ord. No. 1563, 10-8-73) 
Sec. 2-10.3. - Same-Inapplicability where compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act is required. 
    Sections 2-10.1 and 2-10.2 and their provisions, shall not be applicable on public works contracts wherein compliance with the Davis-Bacon Act as amended "40 USC 267A-276A-7" is required by the department of the treasury, office of revenue sharing. 
(Ord. No. 1563, 10-8-73) 
Sec. 2-11. - Fiscal year. 
(a)  The fiscal year of the City of Kenner be and is hereby changed to a fiscal year beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30 of each and every year. 
(b)  This change shall be effective on July 1, 1974. 
(c)  In order to fully implement this change of fiscal year and to insure that no inconvenience may arise therefrom, the mayor and board of aldermen shall: 
(1)  On or before December 31, 1973 adopt all necessary budgets for the period of January 1, 1974 through June 30, 1974. 
(2)  Prior to June 30, 1974, adopt all necessary budgets for the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 1974 and ending on June 30, 1975. 
(3)  Adopt all subsequent budgets in accordance with the charter of the City of Kenner which will become effective and fully implemented on July 1, 1974. 
(d)  The mayor of the City of Kenner is hereby authorized, empowered, and directed to sign and execute all acts or documents necessary and proper in the premises to give full force and effect to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1585, §§ 1-4, 11-26-73) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1585, §§ 1-4, did not amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as § 2-11 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 2-12. - Holidays 
(a)  The following legal holidays shall be observed by the city: January 1, New Year's Day; the third Monday in January, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.'s Birthday; Mardi Gras; Good Friday; the last Monday in May, National Memorial Day; July 4, Independence Day; the first Monday in September, Labor Day; the fourth Thursday in November, Thanksgiving Day; and December 25, Christmas. 
(b)  The following days shall also be observed as holidays by the city: Lundi Gras; the Friday after Thanksgiving Day, otherwise known as Acadian Day; December 24, Christmas Eve; and December 31, New Year's Eve. 
(c)  Whenever January 1, New Year's Day; July 4, Independence Day; December 24, Christmas Eve; December 25, Christmas; or December 31, New Year's Eve; falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the following shall apply: 
(1)  City employees who are scheduled to work on said Saturday or Sunday shall observe the holiday on the day on which it falls. 
(2)  City employees who work a standard Monday through Friday schedule shall observe the holiday as follows: 
a.  When July 4, Independence Day; December 24, Christmas Eve; or December 31, New Year's Eve falls on a Saturday, the preceding day, Friday, shall be observed as the said holiday. 
b.  When January 1, New Year's Day; July 4, Independence Day; or December 25, Christmas falls on a Sunday, the succeeding day, Monday, shall be observed as the said holiday. 
(d)  The mayor, by executive proclamation, may authorize the observance of such other holidays as he may deem in keeping with efficient administration of city government. 
(Ord. No. 10,785, § 1, 7-10-14) 
Sec. 2-13. - Legal department to administer all requests for public records. 
(a)  The legal department shall administer and be responsible for fulfilling all requests for public records in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(1)  By letter, the legal department has the authority to delegate to various city departments the responsibility to fulfill certain requests for public records in accordance with applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations. 
(2)  The legal department may establish and collect fees for providing access to public records or for providing copies of public records in accordance with applicable law. 
(Ord. No. 11,446, § 1, 7-26-18) 
Secs. 2-14-2-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The personnel manual for the city, on file in the office of the city clerk, establishes vacations, holidays, sick leaves, etc. for city employees. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-20-2-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RETIREMENT SYSTEM[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- As codified Ord. No. 1407, §§ 1-5, adopted June 26, 1972, supersedes former Div. 2, §§ 2-30-2-34, derived from Ord. No. 407, §§ 1-5, adopted Oct. 15, 1956, extending the provisions of Act No. 356 to eligible city officers and employees. 
Cross reference- Police pension and relief plan, § 11-16 et seq.; special act creating firemen's pension and relief fund, App. B. 
State Law reference- Municipal Employees Retirement System, R.S. 33:7151 et seq. 

Sec. 2-30. - Declaration of policy and purpose to extend coverage. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, to extend the provisions of Act No. 356, Regular Session, Louisiana Legislature of 1954, providing retirement to eligible officers and employees of the City of Kenner, Louisiana. In pursuance of said policy, and for said purpose, the officers and employees of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, shall take such action as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations. The coverage of eligible officers and employees should be retroactive to termination, of previous agreement between the parties hereto. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 1, 6-26-72) 
Sec. 2-31. - Mayor authorized to execute agreement. 
    The mayor of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the board of trustees of the municipal employees' retirement system to secure coverage of eligible officers and employees as provided in section 2-30 hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 2, 6-26-72) 
Sec. 2-32. - Withholdings authorized. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of officers and employees for the purposes provided in section 2-30 hereof are hereby authorized to be made in the amount and at such times as may be required by the board of trustees in accordance with Act No. 356 of 1954, and shall be paid over to the board of trustees in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations of said agency. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 3, 6-26-72) 
Sec. 2-33. - Employer contributions and assessments. 
    Employer contributions and assessments for administrative expenses shall be paid from amounts appropriated for such purposes to the board of trustees in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations of said board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 4, 6-26-72) 
Sec. 2-34. - Duty of clerk to keep records and make reports. 
    The clerk of the City of Kenner shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations of the board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1407, § 5, 6-26-72) 
Secs. 2-35-2-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - SOCIAL SECURITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Old-age and survivors insurance, R.S. § 1001 et seq. 

Sec. 2-40. - Ordinance on agreement on Social Security not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect the agreement on Social Security coverage for city employees which was part of Ordinance No. 309 of November 6, 1953, and such agreement is on file in the office of the city clerk and is recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 2-41. - Declaration of purpose; not retroactive. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend the provisions of Section 1001 et seq. of the Louisiana Revised Statutes, providing Social Security to eligible officers and employees of the city. In pursuance of such policy, and for said purpose, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. The coverage of eligible officers and employees shall not be retroactive. The effective date of coverage shall be November 6, 1953. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 1, 11-6-53) 
Sec. 2-42. - Authority of mayor to execute agreement. 
    The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute an agreement with the Public Employees Board of Louisiana to secure coverage of eligible officers and employees as provided in section 2-41. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 2, 11-6-53) 
Sec. 2-43. - Withholdings from salaries and wages. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of officers and employees for the purposes provided in section 2-41 are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state and federal laws and regulations, and shall be paid over to the public employees board, a state agency, in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws and regulations of said agency. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 3, 11-6-53) 
Sec. 2-44. - Employer contributions and assessments. 
    Employer contributions and assessments for administrative expenses for the purposes set forth in section 2-41 shall be paid from amounts appropriated for such purposes to the state agency in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations of said agency. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 4, 11-6-53) 
Sec. 2-45. - Duty to maintain records and submit reports. 
    The city clerk shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state and federal laws or regulations for the purposes prescribed in section 2-41. 
(Ord. No. 309, § 5, 11-6-53) 
Secs. 2-46-2-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,062, § 4, adopted March 17, 2016, repealed art. III, §§ 2-56-2-70, which pertained to planning commission and zoning commission and derived from Ord. No. 365, §§ I-IV, adopted Sept. 19, 1955; Ord. No. 366, §§ II, III, adopted Sept. 19, 1955. 

Secs. 2-56-2-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SAFETY BOARD 

Sec. 2-71. - Established. 
    A safety board of the city is hereby established. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § I, 11-22-71) 
Sec. 2-72. - Composition; appointment; term. 
    The safety board shall consist of five (5) members. They shall be appointed by the mayor of the city and confirmed by a majority vote of the board of aldermen. One (1) of the members shall be an alderman, one (1) of said members shall be an employee of the street department, one (1) of said members shall be an employee of the sewerage department, one (1) of said members shall be an employee of the police department, and one (1) of said members shall be an employee of the fire department. The members of the board shall serve for a period of one (1) year or until replaced in the manner above provided. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § II, 11-22-71) 
Sec. 2-73. - Compensation. 
    All members of the safety board shall serve without pay. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § II, 11-22-71) 
Sec. 2-74. - Chairman. 
    The safety board shall elect its own chairman who shall be one of its own members. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § II, 11-22-71) 
Sec. 2-75. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The safety board shall review and investigate all accidents and/or incidents involving city employees and city property, resulting in injury to city employees or damage to city property. The findings and determinations of said board shall be submitted to the mayor and board of aldermen of the city. 
(b)  The safety board of the city shall review existing safety measures, make recommendations for improving safety measures and conduct such safety instruction meetings with the various departments of the city as it sees fit. 
(Ord. No. 1362, § IV, 11-22-71) 
Secs. 2-76-2-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPARTMENT OF ARCHITECTURAL CONTROL[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1410, §§ 1-6, adopted July 10, 1972, did not amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as Art. V, §§ 2-81-2-86, was at the discretion of the editors. 

Sec. 2-81. - Appointment of director. 
    The director of the department of regulatory inspections is hereby appointed as the director of the department of architectural control to be known hereafter as the "D.A.C." 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 1, 7-10-72) 
Sec. 2-82. - Duty of director to review plans for residential construction. 
    The director of "D.A.C." shall have the duty to review all plans for residential construction and stamp said plans approved only if all sections of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 2, 7-10-72) 
Sec. 2-83. - Residential building permits to bear stamp of the "D.A.C." 
    All residential building permits hereafter issued by the department of regulatory inspection shall contain the stamp of the "D.A.C." prior to issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 3, 7-10-72) 
Sec. 2-84. - Residential building controls. 
    All residential buildings hereafter constructed shall be governed by the following controls: 
(a)  When two (2) adjacent building sites or two (2) or more contiguous buildings sites fronting on the same street are to be developed, variation in colors and design of the front elevations must occur on both buildings to a sufficient degree to remove similarity between the adjacent buildings. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall apply to adjacent and contiguous building sites fronting on the same street up to and including a total of ten (10) lots with no two (2) structures to be similar. 
(c)  A repetition of facades can only occur when separated by no less than nine (9) continuous building sites which may or may not be developed by a single developer. 
(d)  The director and mayor shall have the authority to render a decision in any special cases. 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 4, 7-10-72) 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations generally, Ch. 5. 
Sec. 2-85. - Appeal from decisions of director. 
    There shall be a means of appeal of all decisions made by the director of "D.A.C." Appeal shall be to the existing City of Kenner Board of Zoning Adjustments and the rules and procedures provided in Article XXI of Ordinance 1374 [Appendix A to this volume] shall apply to such appeals. 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 5, 7-10-72) 
Sec. 2-86. - Violations and penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days or both, for each offense. Each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1410, § 6, 7-10-72) 
Secs. 2-87-2-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - EMPLOYEE'S FREEDOM OF POLITICAL ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 2-90. - Job actions prohibited because of employee political activity. 
    No elected official, director, supervisor, or other employee of the City of Kenner shall hire, fire, promote, refuse to promote, or take any other job action against any City of Kenner employee or job applicant because of that employee's participation, or refusal to participate, in any election or other political activities. 
    No elected official, director, supervisor, or other employee of the City of Kenner shall coerce or threaten any employee with any job action because of that employee's participation, or refusal to participate, in any election or other political activities. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, political activities include, but are not limited to, support or nonsupport of any candidate for public office, fundraising activities, support or nonsupport, of any referendum or millage or similar proposition, or participation in the activities of any political party. 
(b)  Provided, however, that no employee is allowed to engage in political activity while performing their job duties for the City of Kenner during regular employment hours. 
(Ord. No. 7979, § I, 9-3-98; Ord. No. 9207, § 1, 8-18-05) 
Sec. 2-91. - Resignation upon qualifying for certain elected offices. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, upon any City of Kenner employee's qualification as a candidate for any elected position with the municipality of the City of Kenner, that employee shall be deemed, ipso facto, to have resigned their employment from the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 7979, § I, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 2-92. - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article may be fined or penalized pursuant to the provisions of section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 7979, § I, 9-3-98) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Intoxication as defense to crime, § 7-13; sale of intoxicating or spirituous liquors to minors or purchase by minors prohibited, § 7-76; alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles, § 7-132.1; food and food establishments, § 9-1 et seq.; issuance or sale of alcoholic beverage license prior to issuance of parish permit for food service operation prohibited, § 9-2; operation of taxicab while under influence of liquor prohibited, § 16-34. 
State Law reference- Liquors-Alcoholic Beverages, R.S. 26:1 et seq.; authority of municipalities to regulate the business of wholesaling, retailing and dealing in alcoholic beverages, R.S. 26:494. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Refilling used containers prohibited. 
    No person shall refill an original container of alcoholic beverages as defined in section 3-18 with an alcoholic beverage or have in his possession any original container that has been so refilled. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 31, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-2. - Tax on beverages of low alcoholic content. 
    In addition to all license taxes imposed or permitted to be imposed, there is hereby levied a tax on all beverages of low alcoholic content as defined by state law, of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per standard barrel of thirty-one (31) gallons, which tax shall be based on the amount of such beverages sold and consumed within the territorial limits of the city. Such tax shall be collected by the collector of revenue of the state, and the amount thereof collected remitted by him to the city each quarter in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 26:493 and under such rules and regulations as the collector may promulgate in accordance with such provisions. 
(Ord. No. 242, 8-5-46) 
State Law reference- Local gallonage tax of beverages of low alcoholic content, R.S. 26:493. 
Sec. 3-3. - Sale of alcoholic beverages from drive-up windows. 
    It shall be unlawful to distribute, dispense or sell through any opening, window, door or orifice to the exterior of any building, including, but not limited to, commonly described "drive-up windows." 
(Ord. No. 6590, § I, 4-18-90) 
Sec. 3-4. - Information to be provided regarding effects of alcohol during pregnancy. 
(a)  Each alcoholic beverage permittee shall inform all purchasers and potential consumers of alcoholic beverages who enter upon the premises to which the permit applies of the possible dangers to infants born to women who consume alcoholic beverages during pregnancy. Each alcoholic beverage permittee shall discharge this duty by providing the following warning on an informational sign posted in the restrooms of the permitted facility. 
"Warning: Drinking alcoholic beverages during pregnancy may cause severe mental and physical birth defects." 
Such signs shall not be less than eight and one-half (81/2) by eleven (11) inches in size and shall be conspicuously displayed so as to be readable. Letters thereon shall be not less than three-eighths ( 3/8 ) of an inch in height and shall be printed on contrasting background and in a legible manner. 
(b)  The permittee shall not be obliged to provide such warning on an informational sign posted in the restrooms of the permitted facility if they are providing such warning on an informational card distributed to all patrons and/or on menus used in their establishment. Such cards shall be not less than three (3) inches by five (5) inches in size and shall be printed on contrasting background and in a legible manner. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to temporary or special alcoholic beverage permits issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7094, § 1, 9-15-94) 
Secs. 3-5-3-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMIT FOR SALE OF BEVERAGES OF HIGH ALCOHOLIC CONTENT 

Sec. 3-18. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following terms have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this article, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
    Alcoholic beverages means any fluid or solid capable of being converted into fluid, suitable for human consumption and having an alcoholic content of more than six (6) per cent by volume, including alcohol. 
    B-drinker means a person while in any place of business who solicits any patron and/or receives from any patron on such premises any drink or other product of whatever kind sold in such place of business and receives thereof any commission or remuneration in any other way. 
    Bottler of wine means any wine wholesaler who imports wine into the city in bulk and puts it in a closed container for distribution to other wholesale dealers. 
    Certification of qualification (or ABO employee card) is a card issued to any employee dispensing alcoholic beverages on an alcoholic beverage permit holders premises. 
    Cordial liquors and specialties means liquor obtained by the process of mixing or redistilling with or over fruit, flowers, plants, or juices therefrom and to which sugar or dextrose, or both, have been added in an amount not less than two and one-half (21/2) per cent by weight of the finished product. 
    Dealer means any person who, as a business, manufactures, blends, rectifies, distills, processes, imports, stores, uses, handles, holds, sells, offers for sale, solicits orders for the sale of, distributes, delivers, serves, or transports any alcoholic beverages in the city or engages therein in any business transaction relating to any such beverage. 
    Liquor means any distilled or rectified alcoholic beverage. 
    Liquor manufacturer means any person who directly or indirectly, personally or through any agent whatever, engages in the making, blending, rectifying, or processing of any alcoholic beverage in the city. 
    Liquor retailer means any dealer, other than a manufacturer or wholesaler, who sells, offers for sale, exposes for sale, or has in his possession for sale or distribution any alcoholic beverages in any quantity. 
    Liquor wholesaler means any dealer who sells any alcoholic beverage to other licensed liquor wholesale dealers or to licensed retail liquor dealers in the city who sells alcoholic beverages for delivery beyond the borders of the city in amounts to be fixed by the mayor and board of aldermen, or who imports any alcoholic beverages into the city, and who meets the standards set forth in this article. 
    Outlet means a place where any person draws or removes any alcoholic beverage from its container for consumption on the premises. 
    Package house means a place where a person sells alcoholic beverages in closed containers, prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises. 
    Regulated beverage means any alcoholic beverage. 
    Solicitor means any person who offers for sale or solicits any orders for the sale of any regulated beverage, other than in a regularly established and licensed place of business in the city, for delivery or shipment to any point in the city, whether done as owner, agent or servant. 
    Sparkling wine means any effervescent alcoholic beverage derived from the juice of any fruit, or synthesis thereof, charged with carbon dioxide, either artificially or as the result of secondary fermentation with the container. 
    Still wine means any noneffervescent alcoholic beverage derived from the juice of any fruit, or synthesis thereof. 
    Wine package house means a place where a person sells only sparkling wines and still wines in the original package or closed container, prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises. 
    Wine wholesaler means any dealer who sells only sparkling wine and still wine, to other licensed wholesale dealers or to licensed retail dealers for resale within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 2, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 10,211, § 4, 3-3-11; Ord. No. 10,725, § 1, 3-20-14) 
Sec. 3-19. - Exemptions from article; products not to be sold for beverage purposes. 
(a)  The provisions of this article do not apply to the sale of: 
(1)  Patent, antiseptic, and toilet preparations. 
(2)  Flavoring extracts, syrups, and food products. 
(3)  Scientific, chemical, mechanical and industrial products. 
(4)  Alcohol for industrial use or purposes only and which is so denatured as to be unfit for human consumption. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly sell any of these products for beverage purposes or sell any of them under circumstances from which he may reasonably deduce the intention of the purchaser to use them for beverage purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 2, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-20. - Required; state permit required; separate violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling vinous, liquor, or spirituous liquor at wholesale or retail within the limits of the city, under the jurisdiction of the mayor and board of aldermen unless such persons shall have first made application to engage in such business and a permit issued after the application has been approved by the mayor and board of aldermen; and the fee herein provided collected by the tax collector of the city. 
    No person shall do any act for which a permit is required by this section or by local authorities acting hereunder unless he holds the proper state and local permit. Each day's conduct of business by dealer without such a valid, unsuspended permit constitutes a separate violation of this article. 
    A permit is required of any person who does any act as a dealer. 
(Ord. No. 1369, §§ 1, 5, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-21. - Publication of application for retail permit: Publication of application for caterer's permit. 
(a)  Retail permit. Prior to making application for a retail dealer's permit required by this article, each applicant shall twice insert an appropriate signed notice similar to the following in a newspaper published in the municipality in which he desires to operate his business or in the newspaper published nearest to his place of business, if it is not located in a municipality in which a newspaper is published: 
"I am applying for a permit to sell alcoholic beverages at retail at the following address: _______, in the parish of _______." 
The publication of this notice is not required of permittees seeking the renewal of their permits. 
(b)  Caterer's permit. Prior to making application for a caterer's permit required by this article, each applicant shall twice insert an appropriate notice similar to the following in a newspaper in the municipality in which he desires to store alcoholic beverages. The publication of this notice is not required of permittees seeking the renewal of their permits. 
"I am applying to store and/or to sell alcoholic beverages at the following address/s ___________ in the City of Kenner, Parish of Jefferson. The alcoholic beverages present at the above location will be consumed at an offsite location and will not be consumed at the above's location. 
Owner/Owners' Name/s: _____ 
Business and/or Trade Name: _____ 
Manager's/Managers/Name/s: _____ 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 7, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 9987, § 1, 9-3-09) 
Sec. 3-22. - Application; issuance of permit on probationary basis. 
    Applications for city permits to engage in any business or operation regulated by this article shall be in writing and sworn to and shall contain the full name of the applicant, his correct home address, and an accurate description and correct address of the premises wherein the business or operation is to be conducted, which address shall be considered the proper address for all notices to the applicant or permittee required by this article, and shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant showing that he meets qualifications and conditions set out in this article and R.S. 26:79. 
    Unless he is seeking a renewal of his permit, an applicant for a retail dealer's permit shall attach to his application, as a part thereof, a certificate of publication by the publisher of the newspaper, showing the publication of the notice required in this article. 
    All applications for such permit shall be mailed or delivered to the collector for the city. An applicant shall mail or deliver his applications for the state and the city permits within twenty-four (24) hours of each other. If he fails to do so, his city application may be withheld and the permits denied. Upon receipt of an application, the tax collector shall stamp the day, month, and year received. The director may administratively, upon presentation by the applicant of a temporary permit issued by the state agency in charge of regulating alcohol sales in the State of Louisiana, issue such permits on a probationary basis subject to final action on opposition to, or withholding or issuance of, the permits as provided herein. The issuance of a permit on a probationary basis under the provisions of this section does not guarantee approval of the issuance of a final permit. The permit issued under this section shall not exceed sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 1369, §§ 8, 9, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 10,582, § 1, 5-2-13) 
Sec. 3-23. - Qualifications of applicants. 
(a)  Applicants for city permits of all kinds shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  Is a person of good character and reputation and over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state and of the city continuously for a period of not less than two (2) years next preceding the date of the filing of the application. However, the requirements as to city and state citizenship do not apply to wholesalers or retailers who held permits on or prior to January 1, 1946. 
(3)  Is the owner of the premises or has a bona fide written lease therefor. 
(4)  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state or any other state or country. 
(5)  Has not been convicted in this or in any other state or by the United States or any other country of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, or illegally dealing in narcotics. 
(6)  Has not had a license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages, issued by the United States, any state, or by any political subdivision of a state authorized to issue permits or licenses, revoked within one year prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against him involving alcoholic beverages by this city, or any other state or by the United States for one year prior to the application. 
(7)  Has not been adjudged by the board or convicted by a court of violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Has not been convicted of violating the city or parish ordinances adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article. If the applicant has been so convicted, the granting of a permit or of a renewal is within the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen. 
(9)  Is not the spouse of a person whose application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked, unless judicially separated or divorced. 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership or anyone in partnership with or financed by another, all members of the partnership or all the persons in any way financially interested in the business shall also possess the qualifications required of an applicant. The application shall state the full names of all partners and persons financially interested and furnish their proper addresses and each shall furnish his affidavit showing his qualifications, as required of an applicant. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation, all officers and directors and all stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) per cent of the stock and the person who shall conduct or manage the business shall possess the qualifications required of an applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application. However, the requirement as to residence does not apply to officers, directors, and stockholders of a corporation, if the corporation was the holder of a permit on July 28, 1948 and was such on January 1, 1947. 
(d)  If the applicant's business is to be conducted wholly or partly by one or more managers, agents, servants, employees, or other representatives, that person shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application. 
(e)  If the applicant, or any other person required to have the same qualifications, does not possess the required qualifications, the permit may be denied. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 10, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 1755, 8-25-75) 
Sec. 3-23.1. - Certificate of qualifications (ABO employee card). 
(a)  Required. 
(1)  Every alcoholic beverage handling employee shall obtain a certificate of qualifications or ABO employee card prior to entering into employment on an alcoholic beverage permit holder's premises. 
(2)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons selling beverages of low alcoholic content on a volunteer basis without pay on the premises of a city council approved fair or festival when a portion of the proceeds are retained by a nonprofit organization; however, each site or facility from which alcoholic beverages are dispensed shall be under the direct supervision during all hours of operation by a manager holding a current alcoholic beverage handling employee card. 
(3)  Violation of this section is punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(b)  Responsibility of alcoholic beverage permittees. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any alcoholic beverage permit holder to allow any alcoholic beverage handling employee, including, but not limited to, servers, bartenders, managers, dancers, maintenance persons and floorwalkers to be present on the premises when alcoholic beverages or containers thereof are handled, dispensed or consumed on the premises, unless such alcoholic beverages handling employee is in possession of an alcoholic beverage handling employee card issued under authority of this article. 
(c)  Qualifications of applicants. An applicant for an ABO employee card shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  He must be a person of good character and reputation and eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
(2)  He must not have been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, the state or any other state or country. 
(3)  The applicant shall not have been convicted of prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, employing or permitting the presence of B drinkers, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, letting a disorderly place, illegally dealing in controlled dangerous substances or any violation of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law (R.S. 40:961 et seq.), or as such offenses may now or hereafter be otherwise named. 
(4)  He must not have been convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter. 
(5)  He must not have had his alcoholic beverage handling employee card revoked within two years next preceding the application. 
(6)  He must not have been convicted of violating any municipal or parish ordinance relating to alcoholic beverages. In such case, the granting or denial of a card is within the discretion of the mayor or his designee. 
(7)  The applicant shall not have been convicted of any obscene, lewd or immoral act on any premises licensed under this chapter. 
(8)  The applicant must truthfully answer all questions on the application. A material misstatement or suppression of fact in the application or accompanying affidavit is grounds for denial of a permit to handle alcoholic beverages. Violation of this subpart is punishable as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(9)  The applicant may submit either a background check or a notarized affidavit supplied by the Department of Inspection and Code Enforcement attesting to his/her character and fitness required under subpart (c) of this section. 
(d)  Issuance or denial. The mayor or his designee is hereby authorized to issue, without delay, an ABO employee card, in his discretion, he finds the applicant to be qualified or may deny the application. 
(e)  Hearing and appeal when application for permit is denied. The applicant may appeal within ten (10) days of such denial to the Council for a hearing on such denial for the city council to determine if such denial is justified in the exercise of its reasonable and sound discretion. 
(f)  Term. All ABO employee cards shall be issued for a term of two (2) years and shall expire on the anniversary of the date issued. All applications for renewal may be made within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the old card. 
(g)  Valid on premises of any permit holder, exception. An ABO card shall be good and valid for use on the premises of any alcoholic beverage permit holder's premises in the City of Kenner. Each alcoholic beverage permit holder shall maintain a current written list of all ABO employees with their addresses on forms made available by the Department of Inspection and Code Enforcement; and shall make the list available for inspection when requested by an authorized individual. 
(Ord. No. 10,211, § 5, 3-3-11; Ord. No. 10,232, § 2, 5-19-11) 
Sec. 3-24. - Location and physical requirements for issuance; requirements for wholesaler; storage of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a bona fide caterer. 
(a)  No permit shall be granted under this article in contravention of ordinances adopted pursuant to the zoning laws of the city. 
(b)  No permit shall be issued by the board of aldermen to authorize any business in any subdivision of the city where that business has been prohibited by referendum vote. However, in any subdivision where saloons are prohibited, but package sales of liquor are permitted, Class B package liquor permits may be issued in combination with Class A retail beer permits. 
(c)  Except for immovable property, buildings and facilities situated in the Rivertown Historic District as defined in Resolution No. B-3397, no permit shall be granted for any premises situated within three hundred (300) feet, or less distance, of a building occupied exclusively as a church or synagogue, or public library, or public playground, or school, except a school for business education conducted as a business college or school. The measurement of this distance shall be made from the nearest point of the property line of the church, synagogue, library, playground, or school to the nearest point of the property line of the premises to be licensed. 
The prohibition in this subsection does not apply to any premises which are maintained as a bona fide hotel, railway car, or fraternal organization, or to any premises which have been licensed to deal in alcoholic beverages for a period of one (1) year or longer prior to December 13, 1971. 
(d)  No wholesale permit shall be issued or held after issuance by any person unless at all times throughout the license year he meets the standards set forth as follows: 
(1)  Maintains warehouse space either owned or leased by the wholesaler, or dedicated to his use in a public warehouse and such space shall be sufficient to store at one time either: 
a.  A stock of liquor equal to ten (10) per cent or more of the wholesaler's annual case volume of liquor sales to retailers within this city, or 
b.  Maintains at all times in the warehouse a stock of liquor owned by him, not consigned, nor then sold, consisting of not less than five (5) per cent of his annual sales to retailers, and whose cost of acquisition is fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) or more. 
(2)  Maintains delivery equipment which shall be leased, owned or dedicated to his use; 
(3)  Maintains brand representation with at least one (1) distillery, or liquor manufacturer; 
(4)  Maintains sales of liquor to retailers generally within his immediate trade area, making sales to at least twenty (20) per cent of the retailers in said area with separate sales to retailers accounting for at least fifty (50) per cent of the gallonage handled by him. 
(e)  No wholesale permit shall be issued or held after issuance by any person who does not in good faith actually carry on or intend to carry on a bona fide wholesale business by sale to retail permittees of the alcoholic beverages on hand, and the board may revoke any wholesale permit when the permittee fails for a period of forty-five (45) days actively and in good faith to engage in the wholesale business, and shall revoke any wholesale permit for any other violation of this subsection or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to the enforcement hereof. 
(f)  Sale by a wholesaler to himself as a retailer, or as a partner in a retail establishment is not a bona fide wholesale transaction. No wholesaler shall store any of his stock on the premises of any retail establishment. 
(g)  Persons engaged primarily in the sale, handling, distribution, and storage of alcoholic beverages which are ultimately delivered or transported beyond the borders of the city are exempt from complying with the standards above set forth. 
(h)  Bona fide caterers are allowed to store alcoholic beverages on its premise if such alcoholic beverages are to be consumed at offsite catered events and not sold or consumed at their primary business establishment. 
(i)  The board may adopt and publish rules and regulations for the enforcement of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 11, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 9902, § 1, 4-16-09; Ord. No. 10,485, § 1, 11-15-12) 
Editor's note- It should be noted that § 2 of Ord. No. 9902 states "That a bona fide caterer or a bona fide catering business shall be defined as a holder of a State of Louisiana Class A caterer's permit in accordance with the State of Louisiana Alcohol and Tobacco Control Law. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9902, § 1, adopted Apr. 16, 2009 changed the title of § 3-24 from location and physical requirements for issuance; requirements for wholesalers to location and physical requirements for issuance; requirements for wholesaler; storage of alcoholic beverages on the premises of a bona fide caterer. 
Sec. 3-25. - Issuance to interposed persons prohibited; authority to require details of operation. 
    No permit required by this article shall be issued to any person who is an interposed person for the owner or proprietor of a business. The board of aldermen may require a full disclosure, in writing and under oath, of the details of the operation of any person it suspects of being interposed for another. The board may summarily rule before the board for examination, the person suspected of being an interposed person. A person who is subsidized, financed or employed by a liquor manufacturer to operate a business without disclosing the ownership of the liquor manufacturer shall be considered an interposed person for the liquor manufacturer under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 12, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-26. - Misstatement or suppression of fact in application. 
    Any misstatement or suppression of fact in an application or accompanying affidavit for a permit required by this article is a ground for denial of such permit. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 13, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-27. - Combination of wholesale and retail business prohibited; exceptions. 
    Except as provided in paragraphs (1) and (2) of this section, no person shall, at the same time, engage in business, either directly or indirectly, as a wholesaler and as a retailer of any regulated beverage and no wholesaler shall have any interest, direct or indirect, at any time in the business or permit of a retailer. However: 
(1)  Any person who, from January 1, 1940, until July 28, 1948, was continuously a duly licensed manufacturer in the city of any established brand of alcoholic beverage and sold alcoholic beverages at wholesale and retail, may, subject to the other requirements of this article, be issued permits as a manufacturer and as a wholesaler and as a retailer of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Any person who, from January 1, 1947, until July 28, 1948, was the holder of a wholesale or retail permit, or of both, may, subject to the other requirements of this article, procure permits under this article either as a wholesaler or as a retailer, or as both. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 14, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-28. - Fees; procedure and fee for executors, administrators, etc. 
(a)  Prior to receiving the permit required by this article, the applicant shall pay the tax collector therefore according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Manufacturers, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each establishment in the city, except that manufacturers engaged exclusively in the manufacture of wine from state grown fruits and berries shall be exempt from the payment of the annual permit fee. 
(2)  Wholesalers, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each place of business in the city. 
(3)  Retailers. 
a.  Those operating outlets, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each place of business in the city except for restaurants and cafeterias selling light wine as provided in section 3-29. This type of permit is known as a Class A retail liquor permit. 
b.  Those operating package houses, five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each place of business in the city. This permit is known as a Class B retail liquor permit. 
c.  Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, nonprofit organizations which possess Internal Revenue Service tax exempt status shall pay sums as follows: 
1.  For those organizations which do less than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) per year in gross sales of alcoholic beverages the sum of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00); 
2.  For those organizations which do greater than one thousand two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) per year in gross sale of alcoholic beverages the sum of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
d.  Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, the city council shall have the authority to waive payment of fees for alcoholic beverage permits upon written request by any charitable or nonprofit organization with tax exempt status, to sell and/or serve alcoholic beverages at functions, such as fairs, dances,and other social events sponsored by said organizations when such function will not continue for a period in excess of three (3) days. 
e.  Each applicant for a fee waiver shall file with the city council's office a written application therefore which shall contain the following: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant together with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and/or organization to enable the city council to determine whether or not it is a bona fide nonprofit organization or association; 
2.  Names and addresses of its officers; 
3.  The specific type of function intended to be held, operated and/or conducted by said applicants and the place, the date and time when said function will be held; 
4.  The kinds and types of alcoholic beverages to be sold and/or served; 
5.  Items of expense intended to be incurred or paid in connection with said function and the specific purpose(s) to which the entire net proceeds from said function are to be devoted; 
6.  That said applicant meets all of the requirements, conditions and qualifications, where applicable, of section 3-23 of this Code, as amended; 
7.  That the net proceeds derived from the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be devoted entirely to educational, charitable, or religious uses within the city and/or state and that only those necessary expenses and promotional expenses incurred for the conduction of the activity will be deducted from the gross amount received and that no salaries or compensation will be paid to any person from the gross revenues received from said function. 
(4)  For wholesaling or retailing any alcoholic beverages in the city as a broker or where the dealer keeps no stock of alcoholic beverages at his place of business or private warehouse in the city, ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for each place of business in the city. 
(5)  Solicitors, one dollar ($1.00) each. However, no solicitor shall represent more than one (1) dealer and that dealer's name and address shall appear on the solicitor's permit. 
(6)  Bona fide caterers or bona fide catering business as defined in section 3-18 and section 3-62: 
a.  Fees. 
1.  Those storing and/or selling, on the licensed premises, any fluid, or any solid capable of being converted into fluid, suitable for human consumption and containing one-half (1/2) of one (1) percent or more but less than six (6) percent alcohol by volume, including malt, vinous, spirituous, alcohol or intoxicating liquors, beer porter, ale, stout, fruit juices, cider, or wine for consumption off of the licensed premises at a catered function, an annual fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per location listed on the in the application for a caterer's permit. 
2.  Those storing, on the licensed premises any fluid, or any solid capable of being converted into fluid, suitable for human consumption and containing six (6) percent or alcohol more by volume, including malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquors, for consumption off of the licensed premises at a catered function, an annual fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per location listed in the application for a caterer's permit. 
b.  Affidavit. All applicant[s] for a caterer's permit shall execute an affidavit which contains the following language: 
In addition to the affidavit named above, each applicant must submit the below affidavit to his application for a caterer's permit. The affidavit shall be notarized and worded as follows: 
I understand the caterer's permit does not allow the sale of alcoholic beverage for service and/or consumption on or at the location/s listed on my application for the caterer's permit. I further understand that the permit allows only: (1) for storage of alcoholic beverages on the premises of the location/s listed on my application for the caterer's permit; and (2) a sales transaction of ordering and paying for alcoholic beverages to be served at offsite catered events which are not in conflict with local, parish or state laws. 
(b)  The fee for any alcoholic beverage permit issued after July 1 in any year for any new business is one-half (1/2) the annual fee. 
(c)  Any person not otherwise a dealer in alcoholic beverages coming into possession of any alcoholic beverages as executor, administrator, trustee, or other fiduciary, as security for or in payment of a debt, or as an insurer (or its transferee or assignee) for the salvage or liquidation of an insured casualty or damage or less may sell the beverages in one (1) lot or parcel to a duly licensed wholesale or retail dealer without qualifying as a dealer. However, immediately after taking possession of the alcoholic beverages, the person shall register with the tax collector and furnish to him a detailed list of the alcoholic beverages and post with the tax collector a bond in such amount as the collector deems sufficient to protect the city from any taxes due on the alcoholic beverages. The person shall pay to the collector a registration fee of ten dollars ($10.00), which fee shall permit the sale of only the alcoholic beverages detailed in the registration request. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 3, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 3269, § 1, 8-19-82; Ord. No. 6185, § 1, 1-5-89; Ord. No. 9987, § 2, 9-3-09; Ord. No. 10,070, § 2, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 3-29. - Permit for certain restaurants and cafeterias handling light wine. 
(a)  As used in this section "light wine" means any noneffervescent alcoholic beverage, known as still wine, derived from the juice of any fruit or synthesis thereof, of an alcoholic content of not more than fourteen (14) per cent by volume. 
(b)  Before the operator of any restaurant and cafeteria where food or drink is legally sold, in which light wine is legally sold for consumption on the premises in connection with the consumption of food, shall engage in the business of handling such light wine, he shall obtain annually, dating from January first of each year, from the tax collector of the city, before commencing such business, a permit to conduct such retail business, and shall pay for each permit the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall apply only to bona fide restaurants and cafeterias who do at least seventy-five (75) per cent of their total business in the sale of food for consumption on the premises of such restaurants and cafeterias. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 4, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-30. - Procedure for determination to issue or deny. 
    The right to determine what persons shall or shall not be licensed under this article shall be exercised in the following manner: 
(1)  The tax collector shall turn all applications over to the marshal for the city for investigation. The marshal shall upon completion of investigation report to the mayor and board of aldermen on all applications filed for permits. The mayor and board of aldermen shall withhold the issuance of a permit where that action is justified under the provisions of this article. The decision to withhold a permit shall be made within thirty-five (35) calendar days of the filing of the application. Within that period, the withholding authority shall notify the state board in writing that it is withholding the permit and give the reason therefor authorized by this article. Within five (5) calendar days after the decision to withhold a permit the mayor and board of aldermen shall notify the applicant in writing of the action and shall assign the reasons therefor. Such notice shall be either delivered to the applicant in person or sent to him by registered mail at the business address given in his last application. When so addressed and mailed, it shall be conclusively presumed to have been received by the applicant. 
(2)  Any person may oppose the issuance of any permit by filing with the board a sworn petition of opposition within thirty-five (35) days of the date the application for a city permit was received. If this petition is timely filed, the board shall withhold the permit and immediately notify the proper authority, who shall withhold the permit. The board shall summon the applicant and hold a hearing on the petition of opposition in the manner provided by this article. 
    No petition of opposition shall be acted upon by the board unless the petitioner states in an affidavit that he, together with witnesses, if any, will appear at the hearing to establish the allegations of the petition and unless the petition sets forth facts constituting a cause or causes enumerated in or authorized by this article for the withholding of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 15, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-31. - Term, expiration. 
    The permit required by this article shall be obtained annually. The permit shall date from January first of each year. A permit is good only from the time of issuance until December thirty-first of the year in which issued, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1369, §§ 3, 6, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-32. - Renewal generally. 
    Persons holding permits under this article, shall file for renewal thereof for the ensuing year and pay the permit fees on or before March first of each year. If a dealer fails to file and pay the permit fees by that date, there shall be added to the fee, in addition to other penalties provided in this article, a delinquency penalty of five (5) per cent if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) per cent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. If the dealer fails to file before December thirty-first, the mayor and board of aldermen may, without notice or hearing, suspend his right to do business. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 16, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-33. - Form of application for renewal. 
    The mayor and board of aldermen, by regulation, shall prescribe the form of application to be used when the applicant is not seeking a new permit required by this article but only the annual renewal of a current one held by him. However, nothing in this regulation shall alter the qualification required in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 17, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-34. - Transferability; change of location. 
    Permits issued under this article are not assignable or heritable. In the event of the dissolution of a partnership by death, the surviving partner or partners may operate under the partnership permit. Receivers and trustees in bankruptcy may operate under the permit of the person succeeded. 
    Where the location of a place of business is changed, the change shall be noted on the permit by the issuing authority and the permit shall be invalid unless the notation is made. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 6, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-35. - Display. 
    All permits issued under the provisions of this article must be posted in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 6, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-36. - Suspension or revocation generally. 
    In addition to any other causes enumerated in this article, the mayor and board of aldermen may suspend or revoke any permit for any one of the following causes: 
(1)  If the applicant or any of the persons who must possess the same qualifications failed to possess the qualifications required in section 3-23 at the time of application; 
(2)  If there was any misstatement or suppression of fact in the application for the permit; 
(3)  If the permit was issued to an interposed person in contravention of section 3-25; 
(4)  If the permit was granted to any person who is or has been engaged in an alcoholic beverage business with a person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose permit has been revoked; 
(5)  If the holder of any permit has been convicted by any court of competent jurisdiction of any one of the following offenses: 
(a)  Violation of the Sunday closing law; 
(b)  Violation of any municipal or parish ordinance providing for Sunday closing hours; 
(c)  Violation of any municipal or parish ordinance enacted pursuant to the authorization of this article. 
(6)  If, without a proper license, a retailer allows any person to consume any alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises or on any parking lot or open or closed space within or contiguous to the licensed premises; 
(7)  If any dealer or any person listed in section 3-23(b) violates or has violated any provision of this article; 
(8)  If any dealer fails to pay any excise taxes due by any regulated business to the state or to any parish or municipality. 
(9)  If any permittee fails to post a warning as required by section 3-4 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 19, 12-13; Ord. No. 7108, § 1, 10-6-94) 
Sec. 3-37. - Certain acts prohibited on retail premises, suspension or revocation for violation. 
(a)  No person holding a retail dealer's permit under the provisions of this article and no agent, associate, employee, representative, or servant of any such person shall do or permit any of the following acts to be done on or about the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years. 
(2)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any intoxicated person. 
(3)  Invite or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to visit or loiter in or about any place where alcoholic beverages or beer are the principal commodities sold or handled. 
(4)  Permit any person of known or admitted lewd, immoral, or lascivious character, sexual pervert, prostitute, inmate of a brothel or a house of prostitution or assignation, seller or user of narcotics, or a convicted panderer, either paid or unpaid, to congregate in or frequent the licensed premises. 
(5)  Permit prostitution or soliciting of patrons to consort with prostitutes on, within or upon the licensed premises. 
(6)  Permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity, or any lewd, immoral, or improper entertainment, conduct, or practice on the licensed premises. 
a.  Attire and conduct. The following acts or conduct on licensed premises are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral or improper entertainment as prohibited by this subsection and therefore no on-sale permit for beverages of high alcoholic content shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted: 
1.  To employ or use any person in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages in or upon the licensed premises while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the public hair, anus, cleft or the buttocks, vulva or genitals; 
2.  To employ or use the services of any hostess or other person to mingle with the patrons while such hostess or other person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing as described in subsection (6)a.1. above; 
3.  To encourage or permit any person on the licensed premises to touch, caress or fondle the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals of any other person; 
4.  To permit any employee or person to wear or use any device or covering, exposed to view, which simulates the breast, genitals, anus, public hair or any portion thereof. 
b.  Entertainers and conduct. Acts or conduct on licensed premises in violation of this subsection are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral or improper entertainment as prohibited by this subsection and therefore no on-sale permit for beverages of high alcoholic content shall be held at any premises where such conduct and acts are permitted. Live entertainment is permitted on any licensed premises, except that: 
1.  No permittee shall permit any person to perform acts of or acts which simulate: 
i.  Sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
ii.  The touching, caressing or fondling of the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
iii.  The displaying of the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals or nipple of the female breast. 
2.  Subject to the provisions of subsection (6)b.1. hereof, entertainers whose breasts and/or buttocks are exposed to view shall perform only upon a stage at least eighteen (18) inches above the immediate floor level and removed at least three (3) feet from the nearest patron. 
No permittee shall permit any person to use artificial devices or inanimate objects to depict any of the prohibited activities described above. 
c.  Visual displays. The following acts or conduct on licensed premises are deemed to constitute lewd, immoral or improper entertainment as prohibited by this subsection and therefore no on-sale permit for beverages of high alcoholic content shall be held at any premises where such conduct or acts are permitted: The showing of film, still pictures, electronic reproduction or other visual reproductions depicting: 
1.  Acts or simulated acts of sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, flagellation or any sexual acts which are prohibited by law; 
2.  Any person being touched, caressed or fondled on the breasts, buttocks, anus or genitals; 
3.  Scenes wherein a person displays the vulva or the anus or the genitals; 
4.  Scenes wherein artificial devices or inanimate objects are employed to depict, or drawings are employed to portray, any of the prohibited activities described above. 
(7)  Sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises, or on any parking lot or open or closed space within or contiguous to the licensed premises of any kind or type of alcoholic beverage, the sale or possession of which is not authorized under his permit. 
(8)  Employ or permit any person, commonly known as a B-drinker, to solicit patrons, and/or receive from any patron on such premises any drink or other product of whatever kind sold in such place of business and receive thereof any commission or remuneration in any other way. 
(9)  Employ anyone under eighteen (18) years of age when the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages constitutes the main business. However, females over that age may be employed as well as males. If the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business, an employee under the age of eighteen (18) years shall not be permitted to handle, serve, or work with alcoholic beverages. 
(10)  Fail to keep the licensed premises well lighted, and all outside windows and doors open to view from the sidewalk or outside. 
(11)  Permit unsanitary conditions to exist either on the inside and/or on the outside of the premises used for the sale of alcoholic beverages in violation of any state, parish or municipal health law and/or regulation. 
(12)  Permit the playing of pool or billiards by any person under eighteen (18) years of age, or permit such a person to visit or frequent the licensed premises, operating a pool or billiard hall. 
(13)  Illegally sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on or about the licensed from premises of any kind or type of narcotics or habit-forming drugs. 
(14)  Accept food stamp coupons as payment for alcoholic beverages in violation of the provisions of Public Law 88-525. 
(15)  Upon the commission of ten (10) or more calls for service to the Kenner Police Department within a thirty-day period regarding nuisance activities on the alcoholic beverage retail dealer's premises, including the vicinity thereof, whether inside, outside or in the parking lot, including but not limited to, disturbance of the peace, illegal drug activity, public drunkenness, drinking in public, harassment of passersby, gambling, prostitution, sale of stolen goods, public urination, theft, assaults, batteries, acts of vandalism, excessive littering, loitering, graffiti, illegal parking and excessive loud noises. 
(16)  Operate as a business without obtaining proper permits, including but not limited to, a use and occupancy certificate by the City of Kenner Department of Inspection of Code Enforcement and/or a final zoning clearance. 
a.  Employ any person not possessing a certification of qualification to dispense alcoholic beverages in a place licensed for on the premises. Every employee shall have his certification of qualification in his immediate possession at all times while employed and engaged in the dispensing of alcoholic beverages, and shall display it upon demand of any officer or agent of the state board of alcoholic beverages control or any police officer of the state or parish or agent of the City of Kenner. 
b.  That the bi-annual fee of forty dollars ($40.00) shall be imposed by the Department of Inspection and Code Enforcement for the issuance of a certification of qualification to dispense alcoholic beverages. 
(17)  Upon the discharge of any firearm on an alcoholic beverage retail dealer's premises including the vicinity thereof, whether inside, outside or in the parking lot, there will be a hearing within thirty (30) days of said discharge to determine whether or not a fine should be imposed or whether there is cause to suspend or revoke that retail dealer's alcoholic beverage permit. 
(18)  Upon the commission of any unlawful act on an alcoholic beverage retail dealer's premises including the vicinity thereof, whether inside, outside or in the parking lot, which may endanger patrons of the establishment and/or members of the public residing, commuting or patronizing businesses. 
(19)  Permit or allow any person to carry or possess any dangerous weapon as defined by Louisiana State Statue relative to R.S. 14:95 et. seq. while on the alcoholic beverage retail dealer's premises. No concealed handgun permit issued pursuant to the provisions of R.S. 40:1379.3 shall entitle any person to carry a concealed weapon in any portion of the permitted area of an establishment that has been granted a Class A-General retail permit to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises. 
a.  The provisions of subsection (a)(19) of this section shall not be applicable to a property owner, lessee, or other lawful custodian. 
(20)  Maintain a debris-free area of two hundred (200) feet in all directions of the establishment that is accessible and open to the public. 
(b)  Violation of this section by a retail dealer's agent, associate, employee, representative or servant shall be considered the retail dealer's act for purposes of suspension or revocation of the permit. Violation of this section is punishable as provided in section 1-9 and is also sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1369, § 18, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 7850, § 1, 12-4-97; Ord. No. 10,155, § 1, 9-16-10; Ord. No. 10,211, §§ 1, 2, 3-3-11; Ord. No. 10,232, § 1, 5-19-11; Ord. No. 10,725, § 1, 3-20-14) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 10,168, adopted 10-21-2010, states "Section 16(a) of Ordinance No. 10,155 be made effective sixty (60) days from the date of the adoption of this ordinance to allow the department of inspection and code enforcement additional time to fully implement the program for distributing certifications for those persons dispensing alcoholic beverages within the City of Kenner." 
Sec. 3-38. - Investigations and reports by chief of police. 
(a)  The chief of police and law enforcement officers shall make periodic investigations of the businesses of all persons holding alcoholic beverage permits within the city. 
(b)  The chief of police shall submit semi-annual reports to the city council showing the number of arrests made or summonses issued for violations of this section. The chief of police shall also provide a semi-annual report to the city council of permit holders who have been cited for two (2) or more violations of this chapter within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97; Ord. No. 10,155, § 2, 9-16-10) 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 10,155, adopted Sept. 16, 2010, changed the title of § 3-38 from "Investigations" to "Investigations and reports by chief of police." 
Sec. 3-39. - Parties authorized to file affidavit to suspend, revoke, fine, or warn permit holder. 
(a)  The mayor, council, chief of police or duly authorized police representative, may file an affidavit with the clerk of council citing a permit holder under this article to show cause why the permittee should not be warned, fined or permit(s) suspended or revoked for any violation of any section of 3-50 of this chapter. 
(b)  The council shall determine whether or not a permittee should be warned, fined or permit(s) suspended or revoked for any violation of any section of 3-50 of this chapter. If a person holds more than one permit and only one of them is suspended or revoked, the council may suspend or revoke all of his/her permits. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-40. - Committee. 
    There is hereby created a committee of seven (7) residents of this city, one sponsored by each council member. Each appointment shall be for a one-year term, subject to renewal. Appointments shall be made within thirty (30) days of the passing of this ordinance. The committee shall be known as the alcoholic beverage permit review committee and hereinafter called the "committee". 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-41. - Notice. 
(a)  A notice or summons, accompanied by the affidavit, shall be served upon the holder of a permit stating the time and place of the hearing, which shall be not less than ten (10) nor more than sixty (60) calendar days from the date notice is given. The notice or summons shall be issued by the clerk of council or his assistant, and shall list the cause or causes for suspending, revoking, fining or warning the permittee, if not previously listed in the affidavit. 
(b)  The notice may be mailed by registered or certified mail to the permit holder at the address of his/her place of business listed in the permit application. When so addressed and mailed, notice shall be conclusively presumed to have been received by the permit holder. In addition to the above method of service, notice may be served on the permit holder by personal or domiciliary service by a police officer or employee of the department of code enforcement for the city. 
(c)  A reasonable attempt shall be made to provide the same notice and service described in sections (a) and (b) above upon the owner and/or lessor of the premises, but failure to do so shall not prohibit the hearing pertaining to the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97; Ord. No. 8007, § I, 11-5-98) 
Sec. 3-42. - Hearings. 
(a)  Hearings required by this article may be conducted by the council or it may refer any case for hearing to the "committee". All hearings shall be presented by the city attorney or his/her assistant. 
(b)  If the hearing is conducted by the committee, the council shall not be required to conduct another hearing, unless a majority of the council votes to do so. No permit shall be suspended, revoked, permittee fined or written warning issued except by a majority vote of the council. No rehearing shall be granted after a decision of the council has been made. 
(c)  The council or "committee" may administer oaths, issue subpoenas for attendance of witnesses, production of documents, receive testimony and may examine witnesses. 
(d)  Whenever a hearing is conducted before the council or committee, opportunity shall be afforded all parties to present evidence on all issues of fact and law, conduct direct and cross-examinations of witnesses, and submit arguments and legal briefs. 
(e)  Strict rules of evidence and procedures shall not apply. The council or committee may accept any evidence considered of value and relevant. 
(f)  Testimony received shall be taped or stenographically recorded, together with all documentary evidence, oral or written arguments or briefs submitted, and made part of the record. 
(g)  If the permit holder fails to appear and has received prior notice or service, the hearing may proceed without their presence. 
(h)  All requests for the continuance of hearings before the council and/or committee shall be in writing, filed with the clerk of council and shall not be granted by the council or committee except for good cause shown. The failure or inability to retain or procure counsel to appear on one's behalf shall not constitute good cause. Except in the case of an extreme emergency or in unusual circumstances, no request for a continuance will be considered unless filed with the clerk of council at least three (3) working days in advance of the time set for the hearing. A continuance may be granted, prior to the hearing date, upon the concurrence of the council chairman, or vice-chairman in the absence of the chairman, or if a case is referred to the committee, the committee member from permittee's district. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-43. - Duties of committee. 
    If the council refers the affidavit or case to the committee for hearing, the committee shall act as a fact finder only. It shall hear witnesses, evidence, oral arguments, legal briefs and provide the council with written findings of facts and recommendations. These findings shall be made part of the record. Both the record and findings shall be certified by the committee and submitted to the council within fifteen (15) days of the hearing. The council may accept or reject in whole or in part the findings and recommendations of the committee pertaining to the facts and/or penalty. The council may increase, decrease or modify any penalty recommended by the committee for violation or violations of any provisions of this chapter. The council shall make its decision within sixty (60) days of receipt of the record and findings of the committee. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97; Ord. No. 8007, § I, 11-5-98) 
Sec. 3-44. - Penalty. 
    Penalties which the council may impose are as follows: 
(1)  If the violation is of a minor nature or there are extenuating circumstances with reasonable grounds to believe the permit holder will not again violate any of the provisions of this article, the council may issue a written warning to the permittee. 
(2)  If it is felt that a warning is insufficient, and the violation is the permittee's first, then the council may suspend the permit for up to thirty (30) days, or impose a fine up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or both. 
(3)  If the permit holder has been previously warned, fined or had a permit suspended or revoked, or if the violation is flagrant or serious, the council may suspend the permit for a period time it deems appropriate in excess of thirty (30) days, or may revoke the permit. A fine of up to two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) may be imposed in lieu of or in addition to suspension or revocation of a permit. 
(4)  Any warning or fine, suspension or revocation of a permit is in addition to and not in lieu of or in limitation upon any other penalty imposed by law including any penalty imposed for violations under this chapter and under section 1-9 of the city Code of Ordinances. 
(5)  Upon suspension or revocation of a permit, the city shall notify the State of Louisiana of that fact. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-45. - Conviction by court not necessary for suspending or revoking. 
    Conviction by a court for any violation of the provisions of this article is not a condition precedent for the warning or fining of a permittee or for suspension or revocation of a permit under this article. However, when there has been a previous criminal prosecution for the same or similar act upon which the suspension or revocation of a permit is being considered, evidence of an acquittal in a court of competent jurisdiction is admissible in any new proceeding before the council or committee. The council or committee may suspend or revoke permits, or fine or warn permit holders for violations of this article, regardless of any prosecution in any court or the result of any such prosecution. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-46. - Cost of hearing. 
    If hearings of the council or committee result in suspension or revocation or fine, the council or commission shall assess the cost of the hearing to the permittee. The costs are recoverable by the council or committee in any appellant proceeding instituted by the permittee or in any other appropriate judicial proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-47. - Contempt at hearings; penalty. 
    If any person fails to comply with a subpoena issued by the council or committee, or if a witness refuses to testify, the council or committee may find him/her guilty of contempt and issue a penalty as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-48. - Appeals. 
    A permit holder who is aggrieved by a decision by the council may within ten (10) days of notification of the decision take a devolutive appeal to the 24th Judicial District Court and the appeal shall be by trial de novo. Within ten (10) calendar days from the signing of the judgment by the district court the city or the permit holder may devolutive appeal from the judgment of the district court to the court of appeals as in ordinary cases. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-49. - Effect of revocation, suspension. 
    When an alcoholic beverage permit is revoked for any legal cause, the city may order that the city alcoholic beverage permit shall not be issued covering the premises for one (1) year after the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-50. - Acts prohibited on licensed premises; suspension or revocation of permits. 
(a)  Any violation of section 3-37 shall be grounds for suspension, revocation or warnings of permit holders. 
(b)  In addition, any acts prohibited under the provision of Louisiana Revised Statute 26:90, as it currently exists or is subsequently amended, shall be grounds for fine, suspension, revocation or warning. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 3, 12-4-97) 
Secs. 3-51-3-61. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMIT FOR SALE OF BEVERAGES OF LOW ALCOHOLIC CONTENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State permits for dealers in beverages of low alcoholic content, R.S. 26:271; local permits for sale of alcoholic beverages, R.S. 26:273. 

Sec. 3-62. - Definitions. 
    The following terms have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this article, except in those instances where the context indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverages means any fluid or any solid capable of being converted into fluid, suitable for human consumption, and containing more than one-half of one (1/2 of 1) percent alcohol by volume, including malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquors, beer, porter, ale, stout, fruit juices, cider or wine. 
    Beer outlet means a place where any person draws or removes any malt beverages from containers for sale or consumption on the premises. 
    Beverages of high alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. 
    Beverages of low alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing not more than six (6) percent alcohol by volume. 
    Dealer means any person who, as a business, manufactures, blends, rectifies, distills, processes, imports, stores, uses, handles, holds, sells, offers for sale, solicits orders for the sale of, distributes, delivers, serves, or transports any alcoholic beverages in the city or engages therein in any business transaction relating to any such beverage. 
    Handle means sell, use, distribute, store, consume, or otherwise handle. 
    Liquors means all distilled or rectified alcoholic spirits, brandy, whisky, rum, gin, and all similar distilled alcoholic beverages, including all dilutions and mixture of one or more of the foregoing, such as liquors, cordials, and similar compounds. 
    Malt beverages means beverages obtained by alcoholic fermentation of an infusion, or concoction of barley or other grain malt, and hops in water, including, among other things, ale, beer, stout, porter, and the like. Malt beverages are exclusive of all "liquors" whether they be defined as intoxicating or spirituous liquors, as alcoholic, vinous or malt liquors, or however otherwise defined as liquor. 
    Package house means a place where a person sells alcoholic beverages in closed containers, prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises. 
    Premises or premises to be licensed means the building in which beverages of low alcoholic content are sold, except in cases where such beverages are regularly sold or served outside the building, the terms shall also include such outside areas. 
    Retail dealer means every person who offers for sale, exposes for sale, has in his possession for sale or distribution, or sells alcoholic beverages in any quantity to persons other than licensed wholesale or retail dealers. 
    Sparkling wine means champagne and any other effervescent wine charged with carbon dioxide, whether artificially or as the result of secondary fermentation of the wine within the container. 
    Still wine means any noneffervescent wine, including any fortified wine, vermouth, any artificial imitation wine, any compound sold as "still wine," and any fruit juices. 
    Wholesale dealer means those persons who sell alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content to licensed wholesale dealers or licensed retail dealers within the city or to any person for delivery beyond the limits of the city and who conduct a bona fide wholesale business and maintain a warehouse or warehouses for the storage and warehousing of alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content in the area where domiciled and licensed by the city, and conduct and maintain systematic and regular solicitations, distribution, deliveries and sales of said beverages to licensed retail dealers located within the limits of the city where the wholesale dealer makes any sale or delivery. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § III, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-63. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of selling malt, or beverages of low alcoholic content, meaning beverages containing not more than six (6) per cent alcohol by volume at wholesale or retail within the limits of the city, under the jurisdiction of the mayor and board of aldermen unless such person shall have first made an application to engage in such a business and a permit issued after the application has been approved by the mayor and board of aldermen and the fee herein provided collected by the tax collector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § I, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-64. - Issuance prohibited in certain cases. 
(a)  The tax collector shall not: 
(1)  Issue a permit for the conduct of a business of dealing in beverages of low alcoholic content in any subdivision of the city wherein that business has been prohibited. Provided however, that this provision does not apply to the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages containing three and two-tenths (3.2) per cent alcohol by weight or less. 
(2)  Issue a retail dealer's permit to a person or his or her spouse possessing a wholesale dealer's permit. However, this prohibition does not apply to persons who have held both wholesale dealer's and retail dealer's permits continuously since July 31, 1946. 
(3)  Issue a Class A retail dealer's permit to a person or his spouse holding a Class B retail dealer's permit under this article or a Class B retail liquor permit under this article. 
(b)  The terms "person" and "spouse" as used in this section includes an individual, partnership, unincorporated association of individuals, joint stock company or corporation or any stockholders thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § IV, 12-13-70) 
Sec. 3-65. - Publication of notice of application for retail permit. 
    Prior to making application for a permit as required in this article, each applicant shall twice insert the following signed notice in a newspaper published in the area: 
    "Notice: I am applying to the City of Kenner, Louisiana for a permit to sell beverages of low alcoholic content at the following address _______." 
    The publication of this notice is not required of permittees seeking the renewal of their permits. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § VI, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-66. - Application; issuance of permit on probationary basis. 
(a)  Applications for wholesaler or retailer permits required by this article shall be in writing and sworn to and shall contain the full name of the applicant, his correct home address, and an accurate description and correct address of the premises wherein the business or operation is to be conducted, which address shall be considered the proper address for all notices to the applicant or permittee required by this article, and shall be accompanied by an affidavit of the applicant showing that he meets the qualifications and conditions herein, and that he has no interest in a wholesale dealer establishment in the case of applicants for retail dealer permits unless such interest was held prior to July 31, 1946. 
    Unless he is seeking a renewal of his permit, the applicant for a retail dealer's permit shall attach to his application, as a part thereof, a certificate of publication by newspaper, showing the publication of the notice. 
(b)  All applications shall be mailed or delivered to the tax collector, Kenner City Hall, Kenner, Louisiana. Upon receipt of an application, the tax collector for the city shall stamp the day, month, and year received, and may issue the permits immediately after proper investigation. But, for a period of thirty-five (35) days after receipt of the application, such permits shall operate on a probationary basis subject to final action on opposition to, or withholding of, the permit as hereinafter provided. 
(c)  Applicants shall mail or deliver applications for state and city permits within twenty-four (24) hours of each other. If he fails to do so, his state application may be withheld and the permit denied. 
(Ord. No. 1368, §§ VII, VIII, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-67. - Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  Applicants for state and city permits shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  Is a person of good character and reputation over eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state and a resident of the state continuously for a period of not less than two (2) years next preceding the date of the filing of the application. However, the requirements as to state citizenship do not apply to wholesale or retail dealers who have continuously held permits since July 26, 1944. 
(3)  Is the owner of the premises or has a bona fide written lease therefor. In cases where the applicant holds a bona fide written lease, the name and current address of the lessor shall be shown on the application form filed with the tax collector. 
(4)  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state or any other state or country. 
(5)  Has not been convicted in this or any other state or by the United States of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, letting a disorderly place, or illegally dealing in narcotics. 
(6)  Has not had a license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages, issued by the United States or any other state, revoked for five (5) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had judgment against him involving alcoholic beverages by this or any other state or by the United States for five (5) years prior to the application. 
(7)  Has not been convicted of violating any of the provisions of this article. 
(8)  Has not been convicted of violating any municipal or parish ordinance relating to beverages of low alcoholic content adopted pursuant to the provisions of this article or to state law. In such a case, the granting or denial of a permit is within the discretion of the mayor and board of aldermen of the city. 
(9)  Is not the spouse of a person who does not meet the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (5) through (9) of this section, provided that in such cases the age of the ineligible spouse shall be immaterial. 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership or anyone in partnership with or financed by another, all members of the partnership or all the persons furnishing the money shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant. The application shall name all partners or financial backers and furnish their proper addresses. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation, all officers and directors and all stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) per cent of the stock and the person who shall conduct or manage the business shall possess the qualifications required of an applicant. However, the requirements as to citizenship and residence do not apply to officers, directors, and stockholders of corporations. The corporations shall be either organized under the laws of the state or qualified to do business within the city. 
(d)  If the applicant's business is to be conducted wholly or partly by one or more managers, agents, servants, employees, or other representatives, that person shall also possess the qualifications required of the applicant. 
(e)  If the applicant, or any other person required to have the same qualifications, does not possess the required qualifications, the permit may be denied, suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § IX, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 1755, 8-25-75) 
Sec. 3-68. - Issuance for premises three hundred feet or less from schools, churches, etc. 
    No permit required by this article shall be granted for any premises situated within three hundred (300) feet, or less, of a building occupied exclusively as a church or synagogue or public library, or public playground, or school, except, a school for business education conducted as a business college or school. The measurement of this distance shall be made as a person walks from the nearest point of the property line of the church, synagogue, library, playground, or school, to the nearest point of the property line of the premises to be licensed. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § X, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-69. - Misstatement or suppression of fact in application. 
    Any misstatement or suppression of a fact in an application or accompanying affidavit is a ground for denial of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § XI, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-70. - Investigation of applicant; issuance or denial. 
    The right to determine what persons shall or shall not be licensed under this article shall be exercised in the following manner: 
(1)  The tax collector shall turn all applications over to the marshal for the city for investigation. The marshal shall upon completion of investigation report to the mayor and board of aldermen on all applications filed for permits. The mayor and board of aldermen shall withhold the issuance of a permit where that action is justified under the provisions of this article. The decision to withhold a permit shall be made within thirty-five (35) calendar days of the filing of the application. Within the period, the withholding authority shall notify the state board in writing that it is withholding the permit and give the reason therefor authorized by this article. Within five (5) calendar days after the decision to withhold a permit the mayor and board of aldermen shall notify the applicant in writing that it is under action and shall assign the reasons therefor. Such notice shall be either delivered to the applicant in person or sent to him by registered mail at the business address given in his last application. When so addressed and mailed, it shall be conclusively presumed to have been received by the applicant. 
(2)  Any person may oppose the issuance of any permit by filing with the board a sworn petition of opposition within thirty-five (35) days of the date the application for a city permit was received. If this petition is timely filed, the board shall withhold the permit, and immediately notify the proper authority, who shall withhold the permit. The board shall summon the applicant and hold a hearing on the petition of opposition in the manner provided by this article. 
    No petition of opposition shall be acted upon by the board unless the petitioner states in an affidavit that he, together with witnesses, if any, will appear at the hearing to establish the allegations of the petition and unless the petition sets forth facts constituting a cause or causes enumerated in or authorized by this article for the withholding of a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § XII, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-71. - Fees. 
    Prior to receiving the permit required by this article, the applicant shall pay for each permit according to the following schedule: 
(1)  Wholesalers ..... $75.00 
(2)  Retailers-Class A, which authorized the retailer to sell for consumption on or off the licensed premises ..... 35.00 
(3)  Retailers-Class B, which authorized the retailer to sell in sealed containers prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises ..... 35.00 
(Ord. No. 1368, § II, 12-13-71; Ord. No. 3269, § 2, 8-19-82; Ord. No. 10,070, § 3, 4-8-10) 
State Law reference- Fees for municipalities issuing permits for sale of alcoholic beverages prescribed, R.S. 26:273. 
Sec. 3-72. - Term; expiration. 
    The permit required by this article shall be obtained annually. The permit shall date from January first of each year. A permit is good only from the time of issuance until December thirty-first of the year in which issued, unless sooner suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 1368, §§ II, V, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-73. - Permit required for each separate business; transferability; change of location. 
    A permit required by this article shall be obtained for each separate wholesale or retail business. Permits under this article are not assignable or heritable. 
    Where the location of a place of business is changed, the change shall be noted on the permit by the issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § V, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-74. - Display. 
    The permit issued under the provisions of this article shall be prominently displayed by the licensee in his place of business so as to be easily seen and read by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § V, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-75. - Renewal. 
    Persons holding permits under this article, shall file for renewal thereof for the ensuing year and pay the permit fees on or before March first of each year. If a dealer fails to file and pay the permit fees by that date, there shall be added to the fee, in addition to other penalties provided in this article, a delinquency penalty of five (5) per cent if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) per cent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. If the dealer fails to file before December thirty-first, the mayor and board of aldermen may, without notice or hearing, suspend his right to do business. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § XIII, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-76. - Suspension or revocation generally; denial for similar causes. 
    In addition to any other causes enumerated in this article, the board of aldermen may suspend or revoke any permit for any of the following causes: 
(1)  If there was any misstatement or suppression of fact in the application for the permit. 
(2)  If the permit was granted to any person who is or has been engaged in the business of dealing in beverages of low alcoholic content with a person whose application for a permit has been denied or whose employer, employee, or interposed person has been denied such permit. 
(3)  If the permittee has been found guilty by any court of competent jurisdiction of any one of the following offenses: Violation of the payment of any excise taxes by any regulated business to the state or to any parish or this city. 
(4)  If after ninety (90) days of being issued a wholesale dealer's permit, the permittee fails to meet all of the qualifications and requirements of a wholesale dealer as defined. 
    All causes enumerated in this article as sufficient cause for the suspension or revocation of a permit shall also be sufficient cause for the mayor and board to withhold or deny a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1368, § XIV, 12-13-71) 
Sec. 3-77. - Procedure for suspending or revoking. 
    The grounds and procedure for withholding, suspending or revocation of a permit for sale of low content alcoholic beverages shall be the same as that for high content alcoholic beverages as set forth in section 3-38 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 7850, § 4, 12-4-97) 
Sec. 3-78. - Bringing liquor onto an establishment whose alcoholic beverage permit has been revoked or suspended. 
    Neither the owner nor proprietor of an establishment whose alcoholic beverage permit has been suspended or revoked by the State of Louisiana or the City of Kenner may allow any alcoholic beverages on the premises, regardless of who brings them onto the premises, or whether they are intended for personal consumption by the party bringing them onto the premises. 
(Ord. No. 8520, § 1, 8-16-01) 
Secs. 3-79-3-88. - Reserved. 
Sec. 3-89. - Temporary permits for special events. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution, grant temporary permits to nonprofit organizations holding tax exempt status under the provisions of Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c), domiciled within the City of Kenner, to sell beverages of low alcoholic content at special events, provided that the net proceeds of such sales are used exclusively for charitable purposes. 
(b)  Applications for such special permits shall be made on forms provided at the department of inspections and code enforcement, which shall submit the application to the city council with its recommendations. 
(c)  All fees and permits for the sale of alcoholic beverages at special events provided for herein shall be waived. 
(d)  The number of temporary permits issued under the provisions of this section shall be in accordance with applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 7134, § 2, 12-1-94) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 7134, adopted Dec. 1, 1994, repealed former § 3-89, pertaining to exemptions for certain charitable organizations, derived from Ord. No. 1689, § 1, adopted Nov. 11, 1974 and Ord. No. 3579, § 1, adopted July 7, 1983. Further, § 2 of Ord. No. 7134 enacted a new § 3-89 to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 3-90. - Permits for booster clubs. 
(a)  The city council may, by resolution, grant permits to booster clubs domiciled within the City of Kenner, to sell beverages of low alcoholic content at city recreational facilities, provided that the net proceeds of such sales are used exclusively for the benefit of the recreational facilities and activities conducted thereon. 
(b)  Applications for such permits shall be made on forms provided at the department of recreation, which shall submit the application to the city council with its recommendation. 
(c)  All fees for permits for the sale of alcoholic beverages by booster clubs at city recreational facilities shall be waived. 
(d)  The alcoholic beverage permits provided for herein shall be issued on an annual basis, and not as temporary permits. Provided, however, that there shall be no sales of alcoholic beverages at any city recreational facility by booster clubs during scheduled activities for persons under twenty-one (21) years of age, and for a period of thirty (30) minutes prior to and following any such scheduled activity. 
(Ord. No. 7134, § 3, 12-1-94) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 7134, adopted Dec. 1, 1994, repealed former § 3-90 and § 3 of such ordinance enacted a new § 3-90 to read as herein set out. Prior to repeal, former § 3-90 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1689, § 1, adopted Nov. 11, 1974 and Ord. No. 3579, § 2, adopted July 7, 1983. 
Sec. 3-91. - Bringing alcoholic beverages onto playgrounds. 
    No person shall bring, carry, or cause to be brought or carried, any alcoholic beverage of any kind, in any type of container, onto a City of Kenner recreational facility at any time. 
(Ord. No. 7134, § 4, 12-1-94) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 7134, adopted Dec. 1, 1994, repealed former § 3.91 and § 4 of such ordinance enacted a now § 3-91 to read as herein set out. Prior to repeal, former § 3-91 pertained to special permit for booster clubs and derived from Ord. No. 3579, § 3, adopted July 7, 1983. 
Sec. 3-92. - Consumption of alcoholic beverages at playgrounds. 
    No person shall consume alcoholic beverages upon or within a Kenner recreational facility at any time during scheduled activities for persons under twenty-one (21) years of age, and for a period of thirty (30) minutes prior to and following any such scheduled activity. 
(Ord. No. 7134, § 5, 12-1-94) 
Note- See the editor's note following § 3-95. 
Sec. 3-93. - Definitions. 
    As used in sections 3-90 through 3-92 herein, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages: As defined in section 3-62 of Chapter 3, Article III hereof. 
(2)  Booster club: A formally constituted organization domiciled within the City of Kenner, holding tax-exempt status under the provisions of Internal Revenue Code Section 501(c), the sole purpose of which is to foster, encourage and support athletic endeavors undertaken by citizens of the City of Kenner at Kenner recreational facilities. 
    For purposes of meeting the qualifications of a Booster Club as provided herein, tax-exempt status must be obtained within six (6) months of the effective date of Ordinance No. 7134. Failure to do so shall result in the revocation of all permits issued under the provisions of section 3-90. 
(3)  Kenner Recreational Facility shall encompass and include the following city-owned facilities: 
a.  Butch Duhe Gymnasium, 1930 10th Street; 
b.  Butch Duhe Playground, 1710 10th Street; 
c.  Galatas Gymnasium and Playground, 41 Nassau; 
d.  Greenlawn Playground, 3323 Arkansas Avenue; 
e.  Highway Park Playground, 3300 Roosevelt Avenue; 
f.  Lincoln Gymnasium and Playground, 3100 Tifton; 
g.  Lawson Gymnasium and Playground, 1800 Short Street; 
h.  Muss Bertolino Gymnasium and Playground, 620 W. Esplanade Avenue; 
i.  Susan Park Playground, 2900 Gadsden; 
j.  Wentwood Gymnasium, 2 Furman; 
k.  Wentwood Playground, 200 W. Loyola Drive; 
l.  Westgate Playground, 3535 Maine Street; 
m.  Woodlake Playground, 15 W. Esplanade Avenue; 
n.  Keith Woodward Gymnasium, 2001 34th Street. 
(4)  Scheduled activities: Any recreational activity for persons under twenty-one (21) years of age which is organized, supervised and/or administered by the Kenner Recreation Department. 
(Ord. No. 7134, § 6, 12-1-94) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 3-94. - Other provisions apply. 
    Except as specifically altered or superseded by section 3-89 through and including section 3-93, all other provisions of Article III of this chapter shall remain applicable. 
(Ord. No. 7134, § 7, 12-1-94) 
Sec. 3-95. - Sale of low alcoholic content beverages from drive-up windows. 
    No person shall sell or cause to be sold beverages of low alcohol content from drive-up or drive-thru windows. 
(Ord. No. 6590, § III, 4-18-90) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 7134 adopted Dec. 1, 1994, repealed former §§ 3-89-3-91 and §§ 2-7 of the ordinance enacted new sections, §§ 3-89-3-94, to read as herein set out. However, former, § 3-92, pertaining to sale of low alcoholic beverages from drive-up windows, was not specifically repealed by the ordinance and has been renumbered as § 3-95 at the instruction of the city. 
Chapter 4 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 18, 2003, amended Ch. 4 in its entirety and enacted similar provisions as set out herein. The former Ch. 4 derived from Ord. No. 704, § II, adopted Dec. 10, 1962; Ord. No. 779, § V, adopted June 1, 1964; Ord. No. 2233, §§ 1-5, adopted Feb. 6, 1978; Ord. No. 2836, § 1, adopted Dec. 8, 1980; Ord. No. 3674, §§ 2, 3, adopted Sept. 15, 1983; and Ord. No. 5933, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 1987. 
Cross reference- Occupational license for transient vendor of horses, mules or horned cattle, livestock auction, § 10-96; transport of domestic pets in taxicab, § 16-44. 
State Law reference- Animals running at large, R.S. 3:2531 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, and words have the meanings given, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. 
    Adequate feed : Providing enough wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species and age, sufficient to maintain an adequate level of nutrition in each animal. Food must be given at suitable intervals for the species (not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours for mammals, or as appropriate for other species), and must be served in a sanitary container. 
    Adequate water : A constant access to clean, fresh, potable water. Water must be provided at suitable intervals for the species (not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours for mammals, or as appropriate for other species) and must be served in a sanitary container. 
    Animal : Any living creature, except human beings, including, but not limited to, mammals, birds, fowls, reptiles and fish. When referring specifically to the control of rabies, the word "animal" means only mammals. 
    Animal control officer : Any employee of the city in the position of humane officer. 
    Animal shelter : The Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter. 
    At large : An animal is deemed to be at large if it is off the premises of its owner or keeper and not under the immediate physical control of a responsible person. 
    Bite : Any abrasion, puncture, tear or piercing of the skin caused by an animal, or suspected of being caused by an animal. 
    Breeder : A person who raises specific animals. An individual may raise a single litter of offspring per year on his own property without being a commercial breeder. 
    Cat : Any domestic member of the feline family. (any member of the felis catus classification of the felidae species.) 
    Commercial breeder : A breeder who raises animals to sell to another person, dealer, pet shop research facility or corporation. 
    Commercial livery stable : Any stable where a charge is made to use any animal or where instructions in riding or the use of equine species are given for a fee. 
    Commercial stable : Any stable where any charges are made to accommodate equine species. 
    Dealer/dealer breeder : A dealer is anyone who sells animals to another dealer, pet shop, research facility or corporation with the intent of making a profit. A dealer/breeder is anyone other than a breeder or hobby breeder who breeds and sells animals. 
    Dog : Any domestic member of the canine family. (Any member of the canis familiaris classification of the canidae species.) 
    Domestic animal : Any species of animal which is tame by nature or which has been domesticated by man so as to live and breed in a tame condition, or any animal which from time immemorial has been accustomed to the association of man, or by his industry has been subjected to man's will and has no disposition to escape his dominion. Livestock are not included in the classification of domestic animal. 
    Domestic fowl: Any common farm fowl including, but not limited to, turkeys, geese, ducks, chickens and pigeons. 
    Euthanasia : The humane destruction of an animal accomplished by a method that involves instantaneous unconsciousness and immediate death, or by a method that involves anesthesia, produced by an agent which causes painless loss of consciousness and subsequent death during such loss of consciousness. 
    Exotic animal : Any species of animal that is not indigenous to the state and is not classified as wildlife, livestock or domestic animal. 
    Exposed to rabies : Being bitten by a known rabid animal or coming in contact with any animal known to be or suspected of being infected with rabies. 
    Feral animal: Any domestic animal which reverts to a wild state and which is not living under the control of a human. 
    Feral animal control board: A nonprofit organization which has a cooperative endeavor agreement with the city in effect, for the purpose of administering a trap, spay and release program to reduce feral animal populations. 
    Grooming shop : A commercial establishment where animals are bathed, clipped, plucked or otherwise groomed. 
    Hobby breeder : A person who maintains facilities on his premises to breed pets or purebred or pedigreed animals or fowl primarily for personal recreational use, such as participation in recognized conformation shows, trials, scenting, or specialized hunting, or for the primary purpose of improving the physical soundness, temperament and conformation of a given breed. A hobby breeder may sell or exchange at retail only and not for purposes of research, testing or experimentation. The ethics of care and treatment of all animals must follow the standards as set by the individual national breed club. Hobby breeders are exempt from permits. 
    Humane organization : Any organization incorporated under the laws of the state as a nonprofit humane organization, and qualified under section 5.01 (c)3 of the United States Internal Revenue Code. 
    Owner : Any person owning, keeping or harboring any animal, either permanently or temporarily or having in his care an animal on his premises, or any person who regularly provides any animal with food, water, housing or health care. An exception to owner shall be any person acting in their capacity as a member of the feral animal control board. 
    Pet shop : Any person or business retailing animals bred by others, whether as owner, agent or on consignment. 
    Pet : Includes, but is not limited to, dogs, cats, rabbits, parrots, or any other animal kept for the amusement or companionship of people. 
    Private stable : Any stable operated by or for a private owner where no charge or other compensation is made for the use of the facilities. 
    Public auction : The public sale of animals to the highest bidder regardless of whether such animals are offered as individuals, as a group, or by weight. 
    Public kennel : A place or establishment accessible to the public, where animals not owned by the proprietor are sheltered, fed and watered in return for a fee. 
    Stable : Any building, barn, or other premises where: 
(1)  Equine species are kept; or 
(2)  Where equine species are let out for hire, working, training or riding; or 
(3)  From which equine species are provided and used to give instructions in riding; or 
(4)  Where equine species are boarded. The term includes existing stables as well as new construction. 
    Vaccination : Inoculation with a recognized antirabies vaccine, approved by the parish health unit. 
    Veterinarian : Any person currently licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state. 
    Wild animal : Any species of animal which is wild by nature or which because of habit, mode of life or natural instinct is incapable of being completely domesticated and requires the exercise of art, force or skill to keep it in subjection. This includes wildlife, exotic animals, and any other animal whether domestic, livestock or otherwise which is not tame or domesticated. 
    Wildlife : Any species of animal which is indigenous to the State of Louisiana or is under the control and authority of the Louisiana Wildlife and Fisheries Commission, as provided in title 56 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03; Ord. No. 10,217, § 1, 3-17-11) 
Secs. 4-2-4-4. - Reserved 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL AND WELFARE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 4-5. - Public offering of animals for adoption. 
(a)  Generally. No person other than individual owners or licensed breeders or pet shops may offer dogs or cats for adoption by the public without obtaining from the adopter a signed pledge that the animal will be sterilized by spaying or neutering within twenty (20) days, or as soon as it reaches an appropriate age. With the pledge, the adopter must make a cash deposit in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), refundable upon proof of sterilization. 
(b)  Restricted. No person may publicly offer dogs or cats for adoption on any premises other than a public animal shelter, a private animal shelter of a humane society, the residence of the individual owner, the premises of a licensed breeder or a pet shop. 
(c)  [Fierce, dangerous or vicious animals.] No person or humane organization may offer any animal which has been declared fierce, dangerous or vicious for adoption. Any fierce, dangerous or vicious animal surrendered by its owner to the city or the Jefferson Parish animal shelter or to any humane organization shall immediately be euthanized, or placed in the care of a qualified wildlife center, conservation or educational organization, zoological institution or any other qualified entity under full disclosure and understanding of the animal's fierce or vicious disposition or dangerous nature or potential, and an agreement that the animal will not be placed anywhere else. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-6. - Dogs or cats at large. 
(a)  Confinement by owner. The owner or keeper of a dog or cat must have it confined or secured by a humane method within his or her yard or enclosure. If the method of confinement is fencing, then the fence must be high enough and structurally sound enough to prevent the animal from jumping or climbing over, or from going through or under the fence. 
(b)  At large generally. No dog or cat shall be allowed on any street, alleyway, highway, common or public square or the private property of another person unless under the immediate physical control of a competent person and restrained by a substantial chain or leash not exceeding six (6) feet in length. 
(c)  Multiple-occupancy building or yard. No dog or cat is allowed at large in the common grounds of any multiple-occupancy building or yard. 
(d)  School grounds. No dog or cat is allowed on any school ground when school is in session, or in any public recreation area when an organized activity is being conducted, unless the dog or cat is controlled by a leash or similar device. 
(e)  Exceptions. Members of the feral animal control board may free feral animals, after such animals have been spayed or neutered and released, back into a recognized feral colony approved by the city department of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-7. - Enticing animals off premises of owner or keeper prohibited. 
    No person can release or entice any animal that has been secured by the owner or keeper from that secured place. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-8. - Confinement of dogs and cats in heat. 
    Every female dog or cat in heat must be confined so that the animal cannot come into contact with an unneutered male, except for planned breeding. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-9. - Keeping of exotic animals. 
(a)  No person can keep any wild or exotic species of land animals that fall under class I designated by the city department of code enforcement's "Rules for Wild or Exotic Animals". A person may keep a wild or exotic species of land animal that falls under class II designated by the city department of code enforcement's "Rules for Wild or Exotic Animals" only after obtaining a permit which costs one hundred dollars ($100.00). Application procedures and requirements for such permit shall be in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the department of code enforcement. Under no circumstances can any person keep a poisonous or constrictor snake other than in a licensed zoo. A pet shop must obtain a permit for the possession of class II animals in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the department of code enforcement. The cost of that license is fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  The department of code enforcement may issue a temporary permit to keep a wild animal native to this area which is homeless until it can be safely released or until a permanent exotic animal permit is issued as provided in subsection (a). 
(c)  No person may keep an infant or injured wild animal native to this area except as may be allowed by state law. If any person finds an injured or infant wild animal, they must call the department of code enforcement, which will arrange the pickup and suitable disposition of that animal. 
(d)  Subsection (a) does not apply to zoological parks, performing animal exhibitions or circuses. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-9.1 - Keeping of domestic fowl. 
(a)  The keeping of more than three (3) chickens within a recognized residential subdivision on a lot of less than one (1) acre is prohibited. 
(b)  The keeping of domestic fowl is similarly prohibited in recognized residential subdivisions on lots of two (2) acres or less. 
(c)  Any domestic fowl kept in a residential subdivision shall be maintained as follows: 
(1)  All domestic fowl shall be confined to the owner's property at all times. It shall be unlawful for any person raising or keeping domestic fowl to allow or permit the domestic fowl to run at large or be at large. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of every person raising or keeping domestic fowl on private property, to keep them in a pen, coop or enclosure. Such pen, coop or enclosure shall be constructed in such manner that the fowl shall be confined within such pen, coop or enclosure at all times. Such pen, coop or enclosure shall be at a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet from any and every building or structure used for sleeping, dining, living or working and minimum of fifty (50) feet from any residence other than that of the owner. 
(3)  All enclosures shall be kept in a sanitary condition at all times and shall be cleaned regularly to prevent an accumulation of food, fecal matter, or nesting material from creating a nuisance or unsanitary condition due to odor, vermin, debris, or decay. 
(4)  Appropriate food, water, shelter and housing shall be provided to meet the requirements of the domestic fowl in question. 
(5)  No domestic fowl shall cause a nuisance or be kept in such a manner as will be reasonably calculated not to become offensive to adjacent neighbors or to the public. Owners of domestic fowl will be held responsible and liable for any damages they cause in the City of Kenner. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall apply upon receipt of complaint to the director of inspection and code enforcement. When a violation is determined to exist, the owner or keeper shall be ordered to correct the violation within forty-eight (48) hours of receiving such notice. Failure to correct the violation may result in the owner or keeper being issued a summons to appear in court for the violation(s). Each day a violation of this section is continued shall be deemed a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 10,217, § 2, 3-17-11) 
Sec. 4-10. - Animals in restaurants and other businesses. 
    Animals are not [to] be permitted in restaurants or other places serving or selling food or edible products, or in any place of business when prohibited by the owner. This provision shall not apply to professionally trained dogs serving the disabled. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-11. - Cleanup and disposal of excreta. 
    The owner or keeper of any animal which soils by excreta any public or private property, other than his or her own, must promptly remove that excreta and sanitarily dispose of it. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-12. - Feeding at-large dogs and cats prohibited. 
    No person may feed any dogs or cats found at large, unless acting under the auspices of the feral animal control board. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-13. - Animals restricted from parades and other public events. 
    Pets, animals or reptiles, other than those actually participating in a parade or other public event, are prohibited within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the route or site of that function. Beyond one hundred fifty (150) feet of the route or site of that function, owners must leash, muzzle, or cage pets, animals or reptiles which accompany them to that function. The holder of any leash must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and physically capable of maintaining control over the animal. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-14. - Animals in pickup trucks. 
    No animal may be allowed to ride in the rear of an open pickup vehicle unless it is in a cage of appropriate size, as defined in section 4-63, and the cage is secured to the bed or body of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-15. - Feral animal control board. 
    The mayor is hereby authorized to enter into a cooperative endeavor agreement with a nonprofit corporation which shall function as a feral animal control board for the purpose of running a trap, spay and release program to reduce the number of feral animals in the city. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-16. - Number of animals. 
(a)  Anyone wishing to keep more than six (6) cats or dogs at any one (1) location must obtain an annual permit at no cost from the department of code enforcement. 
(b)  Any person owning or keeping animals, regardless of the number kept, must: 
(1)  Keep the premises free from offensive odors to the extent that such odors are disturbing to any person on any adjacent property; 
(2)  Not allow the premises where the animals are kept to become unclean and a threat to the public health or comfort by failing to diligently and systematically remove all animal waste and fecal material from the premises; 
(3)  Not allow the animals or premises to become infested with ticks, fleas, flies or other parasites; 
(4)  Not allow noise from the animals to become a threat to the comfort or peace of any person on any adjacent property; 
(5)  Not allow food or water for the animals to attract any wild animals to the premises. 
(c)  A violation of any of the provisions of subsection 4-16(a), or any other provision of this chapter which affects the health, safety, comfort or peace of any person on any adjacent property shall subject the owner or keeper of the animals to revocation of any animal permit they have and/or require the reduction of and/or elimination of any or all animals from the premises, in addition to any other fine or penalty to which they may be subject. 
(d)  Any premises holding a permit as required in [subsection] (a) above is subject to inspection at any time by the department of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Secs. 4-17-4-19. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANIMAL SHELTER IMPOUNDMENT 

Sec. 4-20. - Reasons for impoundment generally. 
(a)  If animals are kept within any building or on any premises without food or water as appropriate for the species or proper care and attention, or are kept in violation of the provisions of this chapter, or are infected with disease, or kept under conditions which could endanger public health or create a nuisance, any authorized employee of the department of code enforcement, or any person wearing a humane officer badge, may enter the building or premises to remove the abandoned or neglected animals. Impounded animals will not be released before the reason for causing the impoundment has been corrected. 
(b)  Domestic animals found at large may be seized by the humane department and impounded. If the animal has been reconfined and does not present any risk to any human or other animal, then the owner may be issued a summons to magistrate court, in lieu of impoundment. 
(c)  Impounded animals will be held at the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter. The Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter will set the daily boarding fees and any other legal requirements for redemption and may determine the time for keeping any unredeemed animals, taking into consideration that animal's probable value, condition of health and suitability for use. The Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter may determine when an animal may be placed for adoption or if it must be euthanized. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-21. - Taking in and disposition of unwanted animals. 
    Owners of unwanted animals may turn them into the department of code enforcement and execute surrender papers to the department. Any animal surrendered to the department of code enforcement will be turned over to the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter which shall have the sole discretion to make that animal available for adoption or otherwise dispose of it. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Secs. 4-22-4-29. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - REGISTRATION AND VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS 

Sec. 4-30. - Required. 
    The owner or keeper of every dog or cat over four (4) months old must register it with the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter by purchasing a dog or cat license. The license must be issued and dated and numbered at the time the animal is vaccinated by a licensed veterinarian or licensed veterinary technologist with appropriate antirabies vaccine, at the owner's expense. License tags must indicate the current calendar year and the telephone number of the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter. License tags must be fastened to the animal's collar or harness and worn at all times when it is off the premises of the owner. The license must be renewed no later than one (1) year from the latest vaccination date. No dog or cat shall be vaccinated without the issuance of a license or licensed without a current rabies vaccination. If a license tag is lost, a duplicate tag may be issued upon presentation of the original license receipt, at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-31. - Fees; exemptions. 
    Registration fees and exemptions under this division shall be those used by the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-32. - Dealer license option. 
    All dealers who have permits may, at their option, pay the city or its designee an annual registration fee as specified in section 4-50 by January 31 of each year, in lieu of registering his dogs or cats individually in accordance with this division; provided further, that no dog may be sold unless it has been inoculated against distemper, hepatitis and leptospirosis and also for rabies if four (4) months or older, and that no cat may be sold unless it has been inoculated against distemper, rhinotracheitis and calici, and also for rabies if four (4) months or older. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-33. - Tag exemption for hunting and show dogs. 
    Dogs used for hunting, or on exhibition at American Kennel Club or other approved shows, engaged in a specific "dog club" sponsored race or trial, and such dogs while being transported to and from such events, need not wear their collars nor their tags. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-34. - Counterfeiting of tags prohibited. 
    No person may counterfeit or imitate the license tag provided by the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter Department. No person may place any such counterfeit or imitation tag on any dog or cat. No person may use a license tag on any dog or cat for which that license tag was not issued. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-35. - Removal of tags. 
    No person may maliciously or wantonly remove, directly or indirectly, any tag from the dog or cat of another person without that person's permission. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Secs. 4-36-4-39. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - RABIES CONTROL AND BITE CASES 

Sec. 4-40. - General. 
    In addition to other penalties, controls or requirements of this chapter, the provisions of this division shall be applicable whenever an animal bites or inflicts severe injury on a human being. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-41. - Treatment of animals which have bitten persons. 
(a)  Should any animal bite a person or be reported to have bitten a person within the limits of the city, it shall be the duty of the owner or the person having the animal in his possession or under his control immediately to notify the city humane department, the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or an animal control officer or their authorized agents, and surrender the animal to any representative of the city humane department, or the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter, which are herewith authorized and empowered to enter the premises in order to make an inspection or examination of the animal as may be deemed necessary by the city humane department. It shall be the duty of the city humane department, or the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter to impound or cause to be impounded any such dog or animal for a period of ten (10) days for observation either in the hospital facilities of a licensed veterinarian or at the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or require such animal to be confined securely for a period of ten (10) days by the person owning the same or having possession thereof in such manner and on such premises as may be designated by the city humane department, director of the animal shelter, or any of their authorized representatives. The city humane department may alternatively order the destruction of such animal and send its head to the bureau of laboratories of the state department of health for a rabies laboratory test. Home confinement shall be allowed only if the following conditions are met: 
a.  Current vaccination with an approved rabies vaccine; or in cases where an animal is unvaccinated, if the person bitten or scratched is the owner or a member of the owner's immediate family and the owner agrees not to have the animal vaccinated for rabies during the ten-day observation period but shall provide proof of a rabies vaccination and a license within three (3) days of the completion of the ten-day observation period. 
b.  Specific approval of the medical director of the parish health unit; and 
c.  Specific approval of the exposed party and agreement to the confinement conditions by the animal owner. 
(b)  If the director of the animal shelter, the director of code enforcement or their representative determines that such animal may be confined under the control or custody of the owner or person having control over it, the owner or person shall notify the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or the director of code enforcement immediately if the animal shows any symptoms of sickness or abnormal behavior, or escapes, and if such animal dies during confinement, such person having custody thereof shall surrender the carcass to the parish health unit or the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or the director of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-42. - Exemption for certain small caged pets. 
    This division shall not apply except, in the discretion of the parish health unit, to such small caged pets as mice, rats, gerbils, hamsters or guinea pigs and any other animal that may be specifically excluded by the parish health unit. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-43. - Surrender of animals exposed to rabies. 
    If any animal is suspected of having been exposed to rabies, all persons having knowledge of such condition or event shall forthwith surrender such animal to the city humane department or the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or an animal control officer or their agents and shall fully advise same of all facts and circumstances involved. Such animal may be quarantined, confined, humanely destroyed or released under the direction and supervision of the parish health unit as it deems advisable in rabies control cases. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-44. - Refusal to surrender animal. 
    No person shall fail or refuse to surrender an animal for supervised quarantine, confinement or humane destruction as required herein for rabies control when deemed advisable by the parish health unit, the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter, or the city humane department. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-45. - Reports by veterinarians. 
    It shall be the duty of every veterinarian having an animal quarantined for a bite incident to submit a report to the parish health unit or the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or an animal control officer as to the condition of the quarantined animal on the initial day of observation and the tenth day immediately following the date of the bite incident. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-46. - Notification of escaped, sick or dead animal. 
    Any person having possession of or responsibility for any quarantined or confined animal shall immediately notify the parish health unit, the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter, or an animal control officer if such animal escapes, or becomes or appears to become sick or dies; and in case of death of the animal while under quarantine or confinement shall immediately surrender the dead body to the city humane department, the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or an animal control officer for diagnostic purposes. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-47. - Release of animal from quarantine. 
    Any animal impounded or confined for rabies quarantine shall be released upon completion of the ten-day observation period only upon authorization of the director of code enforcement or their authorized representative. Any such animal, if a dog or cat, must have a valid license and vaccination before it may be released. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-48. - Destruction of animals indicating rabies; testing of head. 
    Should any animal undergoing the ten (10) days' observation for having bitten a person show indication of rabies, it shall be the duty of the parish health unit, the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or an animal control officer to destroy such animal after confirming diagnosis by a licensed veterinarian. The parish health unit or the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter shall send the head of any such animal, and also the head of any animal which died during the rabies quarantine, to the bureau of laboratories of the state department of health for a rabies laboratory test. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-49. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS AND STABLES 

Sec. 4-50. - In general. 
(a)  Permit required. No person may operate a pet shop, public kennel, public auction, canine or guard or attack dog service, dealer or breeder service, grooming shop, stable, commercial livery or similar establishment until a permit to operate that establishment has been granted by the department of code enforcement. The department of code enforcement will promulgate application procedures and requirements for those permits. The permit shall be for the calendar year. Permit fees shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  [Additional requirements; penalties.] In addition to all other requirements of this article, each establishment must comply with the specific requirements set forth below. Failure to meet those requirements will be grounds for denial of a permit renewal, or for the revocation of a previously issued permit. 
(c)  Application for permit; temporary permit. Permit application forms may be obtained from the department of code enforcement, or may be requested in writing or by telephone. Completed, notarized forms accompanied by the appropriate fee may be mailed to the department of code enforcement. If an applicant certifies that all of the requirements, rules and regulations are being met in their establishment, the department of code enforcement may issue a temporary permit until it makes a physical inspection of the establishment. A temporary permit shall not be valid for more than three (3) months from date of issue. A temporary permit will be revoked at the time of inspection if all permit requirements are not being met. Once the department of code enforcement certifies that all requirements are being met, a regular permit will be issued which will be valid until December 31 of the year in which was issued. 
(d)  Renewal of permits. Prior to December 31 of each year, holders of an animal handling permit must renew it by applying to the department of code enforcement on the appropriate form and by remitting the appropriate permit fee. 
(e)  Inspection. All establishments holding an animal handling permit are subject to inspection at any time by the department of code enforcement. 
(f)  Records; number and person to contact in emergency. Each establishment holding animal handling permit shall keep available for inspection on the premises a record that shall show the name, current address and telephone number of the owner of each animal kept at the facility, the date such animal entered the facility, the reason for such animal being at the facility such as for boarding, sale, breeding or grooming; the description of the animal, including its age, breed, sex and color. The owner shall place in a visible place the name, address and telephone number of the department of code enforcement, or other party who can be contacted in case of emergency, to assume the care of the animals on the premises. In addition, the holder shall furnish to the department of code enforcement the name, address and telephone number of the veterinarian or other responsible party authorized to act on behalf of the holder in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-51. - Pet shops. 
(a)  Prohibitions. No pet shop may keep or offer for sale to the public any wild or exotic species of land animals, reptiles or birds that falls under class I designated by the city department of code enforcement's "Rules for Wild or Exotic Animals" including, but not limited to: felines other than domestic cats; simians of all types including monkeys, apes and chimpanzees; opossums; skunks; raccoons and poisonous snakes. 
(b)  Minimum standards for care of animals: 
(1)  Fresh water for drinking shall be available to all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be removable for cleaning and be mounted so that the animals cannot turn them over. 
(2)  Cage temperatures shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for the species of animal kept in the cage. 
(3)  All cages and enclosures shall be of metal or nonporous plastic material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size so as to provide the minimum cage area per animal as specified in the tables of sections 4-61 through 4-63, depending upon the period of confinement. Cage floors shall be of solid material, or if of open mesh construction at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall be covered with cardboard, multiple layers of paper, plastic sheet or other continuous substantial material. 
(4)  All animals under three (3) months of age are to be fed at least three (3) times per twenty-four (24) hours. Food for all animals shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate in same. 
(5)  Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed parallel to each other in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds. 
(6)  The water temperature for fish shall be maintained at a constant temperature that is healthful. 
(7)  There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding in each cage to meet the needs of each individual animal. Boxes of sand or prepared litter shall be provided for cats. 
(8)  No animals shall be kept in darkness during daylight hours. 
(9)  All animals must be fed, and watered, and their cages shall be cleaned every day, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(10)  Adult animals of opposite sexes shall not be kept in common cages. 
(11)  Feeding of reptiles is to be conducted before opening hours or after closing hours. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-52. - Public kennels and public auctions. 
(a)  Minimum standards for care of animals: 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  Fresh water for drinking shall be available to all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be removable for cleaning and be mounted so that the animals cannot turn them over. 
(3)  Cage temperatures shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for the species of animal kept in the cage. 
(4)  All cages and enclosures shall be of metal or nonporous plastic material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size to provide the minimum area per animal as given in the tables of sections 4-61 through 4-63, depending upon the period of confinement. Cage floors shall be of solid material, or if of open mesh construction at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall be covered with cardboard, multiple layers of paper, plastic sheet or other continuous substantial material. 
(5)  All animals under three (3) months of age are to be fed at least three (3) times per twenty-four (24) hours. Food for all animals shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate in same. 
(6)  There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding in each cage to meet the needs of each individual animal. Boxes of sand or prepared litter shall be provided for cats. 
(7)  No animals shall be kept in darkness during daylight hours. 
(8)  All animals must be fed, and watered, and their cages shall be cleaned every day, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(9)  Adult animals of opposite sexes shall not be kept in the same cage or run. 
Sec. 4-53. - K-9 or guard or attack dog services. 
(a)  Minimum standards: 
(1)  Fresh water for drinking shall be available to all species at all times Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be removable for cleaning and be mounted so that the animals cannot turn them over. 
(2)  Permanent housing for dogs not on duty or in transport shall consist of runs whose dimensions and areas shall be at least as great as those specified for runs in the table of sections 4-61 through 4-63. Cages may be used for temporary housing not to exceed thirty (30) days, provided that the requirements of the table of sections 4-61 through 4-63 are met. 
(3)  Runs must have at least six-foot-high fences completely surrounding them to which are to be added anticlimbers, or the top must be completely covered. 
(4)  All gates and entrances to the runs, kennel, and training area must be kept locked when not in use. 
(5)  A perimeter fence at least six (6) feet high with anticlimbing devices must be installed to encircle the training and kennel area. Fences must be maintained escape proof. 
(6)  A dog in training as a guard or sentry or attack dog must be confined at all times to its kennel or run or training area, unless he is under leash control of his handler. 
(7)  Cages used for the transportation of guard dogs need not conform to all the minimum dimensions of the table of sections 4-61 through 4-63, however, each cage used must be of sufficient size that a dog placed in it can stand erect with at least six (6) inches of clear space above its withers. The length of the cage must be at least six (6) inches longer than the length of the dog from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail, and the width of the cage should be such as to permit the dog to turn around freely. Cages shall have bottoms of solid material and be covered so as to provide protection from the elements. 
(8)  When transport cages are mounted on a vehicle, sufficient space or ventilation must be provided to prevent cage temperatures from rising more than three (3) degrees Centigrade or five (5) degrees Fahrenheit above ambient air temperature. 
(9)  No dogs shall be left in transport cages, except while actually in transport, for any period longer than a reasonable time for loading or unloading. In no case shall such reasonable time exceed thirty (30) minutes for any one (1) dog. 
(10)  All trainers of dogs for guard service must have had at least two (2) years experience in facilities training dogs. 
(11)  Procedures must be established to notify police and fire departments of the location of guard or sentry dogs placed on guard duty without handlers. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-54. - Dealer breeder and/or dealers. 
(a)  Prohibitions. No dealer breeder shall allow any female dog or cat to produce more than two (2) litters in any one (1) continuous twelve-month period. 
(b)  Minimum standards for care of animals: 
(1)  Fresh water for drinking shall be available to all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be removable for cleaning and be mounted so that the animals cannot turn them over. 
(2)  Cage temperatures shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for the species of animal kept in the cage. 
(3)  All cages and enclosures shall be of metal or nonporous plastic material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size to provide the minimum cage area per animal as specified in the tables of sections 4-61 through 4-63, depending upon the period of confinement. Cage floors shall be of solid material, or if of open mesh construction at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall be covered with cardboard, multiple layers of paper, plastic sheet or other continuous substantial material. 
(4)  All animals under three (3) months of age are to be fed at least three (3) times per twenty-four (24) hours. Food for all animals shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over or defecate or urinate in same. 
(5)  Each bird must have sufficient room to sit on a perch. Perches shall be placed parallel to each other in the same cage. Cages must be cleaned every day and cages must be disinfected when birds are sold. Parrots and other large birds shall have separate cages from smaller birds. 
(6)  There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding in each cage to meet the needs of each individual animal. Boxes of sand or prepared litter shall be provided for cats. 
(7)  No animals shall be kept in darkness during daylight hours. 
(8)  All animals must be fed, and watered, and their cages shall be cleaned every day, including Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
(9)  Adult animals of opposite sexes shall not be kept in common cages. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-55. - Grooming shops. 
(a)  Prohibitions. Dog groomers may not: 
(1)  Tranquilize animals; 
(2)  Expel obviously infected (abscessed) anal sacs; 
(3)  Give medical advice. 
(b)  Minimum standards for care of animals which are kept in cages or runs: 
(1)  Fresh water for drinking shall be available to all species at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. All water containers shall be removable for cleaning and be mounted so that the animals cannot turn them over. This provision shall be applicable only to animals kept over eight (8) hours. 
(2)  Cage temperatures shall be maintained at a level that is healthful for the species of animal kept in the cage. 
(3)  The floors of all cages and enclosures shall be of metal or nonporous plastic material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size so as to provide the minimum cage area per animal as specified in the tables of sections 4-61 through 4-63, depending upon the period of confinement. Cage floors shall be of solid material, or if of open mesh construction at least one-half (1/2) of the floor area shall be covered with cardboard, multiple layers of paper, plastic sheet or other continuous substantial material. 
(4)  Appropriate food shall be provided for any animals retained longer than twelve (12) hours. Food for all animals shall be served in a clean dish so mounted that the animal cannot readily tip it over, or defecate or urinate in same. 
(5)  There shall be sufficient clean, dry bedding in each cage to meet the needs of each individual animal. Boxes of sand or prepared litter shall be provided for cats. 
(7)  No animals shall be kept in darkness during daylight hours. 
(8)  Adult animals of opposite sexes shall not be kept in common cages. 
(c)  Standards for personnel: 
(1)  There must be at least one (1) qualified dog groomer in charge at all times. 
(2)  Groomers must be at least eighteen (18) years of age and have one (1) of the following qualifications: 
(a)  Certificate of graduation from state licensed school of grooming; or 
(b)  Verifiable employment in the profession of dog grooming for a period of one (1) year or longer in a place of access to the general public and certified to be a qualified dog groomer by a licensed school of grooming after passing the school's examination for which a fee must be collected; or 
(c)  Apprenticed for six (6) months (minimum of six hundred (600) hours) in a licensed dog grooming establishment under a groomer holding a certificate of graduation from a licensed school of grooming. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-56. - Stables generally. 
(a)  Building permit. No person shall build, erect, install or alter or replace any stable until a building permit is obtained from the department of inspection and code enforcement. Such a permit shall be issued in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the city humane department under the provisions of this article and shall remain in effect until such structure is erected or until such time as a permit to operate such a stable is granted or denied as herein provided. 
(b)  Requirements for operating permit. No stable shall be granted a permit to operate unless it shall maintain facilities which shall provide: 
(1)  There will be available at all times, for equine species, accommodations suitable as respects construction, size, number of occupants, lighting, ventilation, drainage and cleanliness; 
(2)  In the case of equine species maintained at grass, there will be provided for them at all times during which they are so maintained adequate pasture, shelter, water and supplemental feed where the pasture is insufficient for adequate nutrition; 
(3)  Stabled equine species will be adequately supplied with suitable food, drink and bedding material, and a provision is made to ensure that they will be adequately exercised and rested and (so far as necessary) visited at suitable intervals; 
(4)  All reasonable precautions will be taken to prevent and control the spread among equine species of infectious and contagious diseases; 
(5)  Appropriate steps will be taken for the protection of equine species in case of fire; 
(6)  Equine species will be maintained in a good state of health and that, in the case of an equine species kept for the purpose of its being let out on hire, for riding, or an equine species kept for the purpose of its being used in providing instruction in riding, the equine species will be suitable for the purpose for which it is kept and capable of so performing; 
(7)  Adequate accommodation will be provided for forage, bedding, stable equipment and saddlery; 
(8)  Provision is made for adequate sanitation as well as storage and removal of manure; 
(9)  Stables conform with all zoning and building regulations governing such construction. 
(c)  Building and zoning regulations. The department of inspection and code enforcement may from time to time prescribe reasonable building and zoning regulations which are consistent with the provisions of this article for the construction of stables. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-57. - Permit to operate a commercial stable. 
    No commercial livery stable shall be granted a permit unless it shall attach to its staff as a full-time operator/manager a person certified by the department of code enforcement as qualified, and shall possess equipment, materials and facilities sufficient for the proper care, feeding, bedding and custody of equine species. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-58. - Rules and regulations for permit to own or operate a stable. 
(a)  Minimum standards for care of animals: 
(1)  Feeding. All animals shall be provided with food twice daily and continuously with water, free from contamination. Feed shall be wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements of the animal. 
(2)  Riding equipment. All equipment used for riding must be properly fitted for each animal and be suited to the use of the animal. 
(3)  Sanitation. All structures used for the stabling of animals shall be kept clean and in good repair and shall be kept adequately lighted and ventilated and provide protection from the weather. 
Manure shall be removed from all structures used for stabling of animals at intervals sufficient to assure dry, sanitary, odor free conditions inside the structure. Manure removed from the area must be disposed of or treated in a manner which assures prevention of insect growth, deterrence of disease, and odor control. Manure disposal shall be suited to the size and location of the stable area. 
Any enclosure where animals are kept, other than an enclosed structure, shall be kept graded and drained so as to keep the area reasonably dry. Removal of treatment of fecal matter must provide prevention of insect growth, disease deterrence, and odor control. 
(4)  Fly control. Flies must be controlled through general sanitation practices. The type of product used for fly and insect control should be suited to the size and location of the stable or enclosure. 
(5)  Health of the animals. Animals should show signs of regular attention and care. The name of the attendant veterinarian for each animal should be available to the animal shelter inspector upon request. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-59. - Requirements to manage a commercial livery stable. 
    No person shall receive a certificate to operate a commercial livery stable unless such person is at least eighteen (18) years of age and has never been convicted of cruelty to animals and has had experience as a stable attendant for at least two (2) years. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-60. - Zoos, carnivals and exhibitions. 
    No person shall operate a commercial zoo or exhibition of animals or carnival, circus or other enterprise where animals are used or displayed on public or private property wherein an admission fee is charged, or in the absence of such fee, when the exhibition or zoo is used as an incentive to enter a commercial establishment unless a permit for such operation shall have been granted by the department of code enforcement. Application procedures and requirements for such permit shall be in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by the department of code enforcement under the provisions of this article. The permit period shall be the calendar year for permanently established zoos or exhibitions and the permit fee shall be as stated in section 4-50 for each permit period or part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-61. - Minimum requirements for housing animals for continuous periods of thirty days or longer. 
    The following are minimum requirements for housing animals for continuous periods of thirty (30) days or longer: 
Minimum Cage Dimensions (Inches) Minimum Cage or Run Floor Area per Animal 
(Square Feet) Maximum Number of Animals Per Cage or Run (2) Species Weight or Age Width Depth Height Singles Group Adult dogs 
in cages 0-35 lb. 30 30 30 8 6 4 35-65 lb. 36(1) 36(1) 36(1) 12 10 3 Over 65 lb. 36(1) 36(1) 36(1) 12 10 2 Puppies 
in cages 0 - 15 lb. 30 30 24 6 2 8 Adult cats 
in cages Any 24 24 24 4 3 4 Kittens 
in cages Up to 4 months 24 24 24 4 2 6 Rabbits 
in cages Any 24 24 24 4 3 6 Guinea pigs 
& hamsters 
in cages Any 12 12 12 1 1 6 Adult dogs in runs(2) Any 48 72 - 24 12 4  
(a) These dimensions may require modification to conform to the body sizes of certain breeds. In no case should the cage height be less than six (6) inches plus the height of the dog at the withers, nor should the width or depth be less than six (6) inches plus the length of the dog from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail. (b) Where outdoor runs are provided for the housing of dogs or other animals, each run shall have a covered portion for protection against sunlight and rain. This covered portion shall have a raised floor area per animal at least equal to the minimum cage floor area as provided for in this table for the particular size of animal.  
Sec. 4-62. - Minimum requirements for housing animals for periods from twenty-four hours up to thirty days. 
    The following are minimum requirements for housing animals for periods from twenty-four (24) hours up to thirty (30) days: 
Minimum Cage Dimensions (Inches) Minimum Cage or Run Floor Area per Animal 
(Square Feet) Maximum Number Of Animals Per Cage or Run (2) Species Weight Or Age Width Depth Height Singles Group Adult dogs 
in cages 0-35 lb. 20 30 24 5 4 4 35-65 lb. 30(1) 30(1) 30(1) 7 6 3 Over 65 lb. 30(1) 36(1) 36(1) 10 8 2 Puppies 
in cages 0-15 lb. 20 20 24 3 2 8 Adult cats 
in cages Any 20 20 24 3 21/2 4 Kittens 
in cages Up to 4 Months 20 20 24 2 11/2 6 Rabbits 
in cages Any 20 20 24 3 21/2 6 Guinea pigs 
& hamsters 
in cages Any 12 12 12 1 1 6 Adult dogs 
in runs(2) Any 36 72 - 15 8 4  
(1) These dimensions may require modification to form [conform] to the body sizes of certain breeds. In no case should the cage height be less than six (6) inches plus the height of the dog at the withers, nor should the width or depth be less than six (6) inches plus the length of the dog from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail. (2) Where outdoor runs are provided for the housing of dogs or other animals, each run shall have a covered portion for protection against sunlight and rain. This covered portion shall have a raised floor area per animal at least equal to the minimum cage floor area as provided for in this table for the particular size of animal.  
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-63. - Minimum requirements for housing animals for periods up to twenty-four hours. 
    The following are minimum requirements for housing animals for periods up to twenty-four (24) hours: 
Minimum Cage Dimensions (Inches); Minimum Cage or Run Floor Area per Animal 
(Square feet) Maximum Number of Animals Per Cage or Run (2) Species Weight or Age Width Depth Height Singles Group Adult dogs 
in cages 0-35 lb. 18 24 20 3 3 4 35-65 lb. 20(1) 24(1) 30(1) 5 4 3 Over 65 lb. 24(1) 30(1) 30(1) 6 5 2 Puppies 
in cages 0 - 15 lb. 20 20 20 21/2 11/2 8 Adult cats 
in cages Any 20 20 20 21/2 11/2 4 Kittens 
in cages Up to 4 months 20 20 20 2 1 6 Rabbits 
in cages Any 20 20 20 21/2 11/2 6 Guinea pigs 
& hamsters 
in cages Any 12 12 12 1 1 6 Adult dogs 
in runs(2) Any 36 72 - 12 6 4  
(1) These dimensions may require modification to conform to the body sizes of certain breeds. In no case should the cage height be less than six (6) inches plus the height of the dog at the withers, nor should the width or depth be less than six (6) inches plus the length of the dog from the tip of the nose to the base of the tail. (2) Where outdoor runs are provided for the housing of dogs or other animals, each run shall have a covered portion for protection against sunlight and rain. This covered portion shall have a raised floor area per animal at least equal to the minimum cage floor area as provided for in this table for the particular size of animal.  
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
DIVISION 6. - HUMANE CARE AND TREATMENT 

Sec. 4-64. - Cruelty generally. 
(a)  No person shall ill-treat an animal, nor may an animal be abandoned. No person shall unnecessarily or cruelly beat, mutilate, kill, torture or abuse, or cause or procure to be cruelly beaten, mutilated, killed, tortured, or abused, any animal or commit any act which under any other law constitutes cruel treatment, or fail to provide obviously necessary veterinary care. No animal shall be tethered as the primary means of confinement; such confinement by tethering shall be considered cruel treatment. 
(b)  When a person is charged with cruelty to animals, those animals may be seized by the arresting officer or official issuing the citation and held pending final disposition of the charge. Any animal so seized shall be impounded in the custody of the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter or other location approved by the director of code enforcement. 
(c)  The custodian shall retain custody of the animal for the purpose of evidence upon the trial, subject to the order of the court. All costs incurred in the boarding and treatment for any seized animal pending disposition of any animal cruelty charge, upon conviction of the accused, shall be borne by the person so convicted. If a seized animal is unable to humanely survive the final disposition of the animal cruelty charge, the court may order that such animal be humanely put to death, but only upon the certification of a licensed veterinarian either that the animal is not likely to survive or that in his professional judgment, by reason of the physical condition of the animal, it should be humanely euthanized. 
(d)  Upon a person's conviction of cruelty to animals, in addition to all fines, costs and punishment authorized by law, the person shall be required to pay all kennel fees associated with the impoundment of the animal; further, it shall be proper for the court, in its discretion, to order the forfeiture and final determination of the custody of any animal found to be cruelly treated as part of the sentence; in the event of the acquittal or final discharge without conviction of the accused, the court shall, on demand, direct the delivery of any animal held in custody to the owner thereof and refund any prepaid room and board charges. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-65. - Supply of food and water; leaving animal facilities unattended. 
    All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and wholesome food and water as often as the feeding habits of the respective animals require, but not less than, in the case of puppies and kittens, once every twelve (12) hours and once every twenty-four (24) hours for adults. No animal shall be without attention more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at a commercial or private animal facility, the name, address and telephone number of the city humane department shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property, visible from outside the facility. In addition, the facility shall furnish to the city humane department the name, address and telephone number of a veterinarian or other responsible party authorized to act on behalf of the management of the facility in case of emergency. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-66. - Sale of dogs and cats. 
    No dog or cat under the age of eight (8) weeks shall be brought or shipped into the city for purpose of resale and no such dog or cat shall be offered for sale. Each and every dog or cat sold or offered for sale to the public at retail by any establishment required to have a permit under this chapter within the city must be examined and issued a written certificate of health by a licensed veterinarian. This certificate shall state that the animal has been found to be free of contagious, noncontagious, hereditary and congenital diseases, as far as can be determined considering the animal's age. Each dog sold or offered for sale by an establishment required to have a license under this chapter shall be vaccinated by a veterinarian against distemper, hepatitis and leptospirosis, and each cat sold or offered for sale by any establishment required to have a license under this chapter, shall be vaccinated against distemper, rhinotracheitis and pneumonitis. A certificate providing the same shall be given to the purchaser at the time of the sale, such certificate to be also provided to any other purchaser occasioned by the subsequent resale of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-67. - Sale of chick, ducklings or rabbits. 
    The sale or donation of any chick, duckling, or rabbit of less than four (4) weeks of age is hereby prohibited within the city excepting therefrom the sale of chicks, ducklings, or rabbits in quantities in excess of twelve (12) to an individual person. 
(Ord. No. 11,269, § 1, 5-4-17) 
Sec. 4-67.1. - Sales, raffling, giveaways, or gifts of animals prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall place any animal on public display for the purpose of sale, offer for sale, barter, raffle, or giveaway upon any street, sidewalk, parking lot, shopping center walkway or other public place except wherein registered rescue groups are offering for adoption at re-homing events including but not limited to pet fest. 
(b)  Animals shall not be offered as raffle prizes, prizes, giveaways, awards, premium or advertising device; however, gift certificate(s) to a legitimate animal shelter or pet store for adoption are acceptable. 
(Ord. No. 11,269, § 2, 5-4-17) 
Sec. 4-68. - Artificial coloring of animals. 
    It shall be unlawful to color, dye, stain or otherwise change the natural color of baby chickens, ducklings or other fowl under three (3) weeks old, or rabbits under two (2) months old; or to possess for the purpose of sale any chickens, ducklings, other fowl or rabbits which have been so colored. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-69. - Transport of small animals by commercial establishments. 
    No small animal shall be transported by a commercial kennel, guard dog service, pet shop or dealer, whether by private or public means, unless individually housed in a container designed for that purpose, including provisions for adequate ventilation and food and water. The container must open at one (1) end, have a solid top and bottom and a minimum of fifteen (15) percent of the total accumulated side and end area shall incorporate an open grill for air circulation. Open space shall be maintained around the outside of each animal's container to ensure adequate ventilation. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-70. - Housing facilities. 
(a)  Housing facilities for animals shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, to contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals. 
(b)  Every building or enclosure wherein animals are maintained shall be constructed of material easily cleaned and shall be kept in a sanitary condition. The building shall be properly ventilated to prevent drafts and to remove odors. Heating and cooling shall be provided as required, according to the physical need of the animals, with sufficient light to allow observation of animals and sanitation. 
(c)  All animal rooms, cages, kennels, shipping containers, and runs shall be of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations and protection from the weather for the animals kept therein. As a minimum, sufficient space must be provided for each and every animal in a single enclosure to, separately and together, stand up, lie down, and turn around in a natural position. 
(d)  All confined or restrained animals shall be given exercise proper for the individual animal under the particular conditions. Dog kennel runs, if made of concrete, shall provide adequate draining for proper sanitation. Droppings must be picked up and disposed of and the runs treated periodically with an effective disinfectant. For private kennels, requirements for individual runs and shelters as specified for commercial establishments shall not be required, provided the animals have an adequate supply of drinking water, sanitary sleeping quarters, and adequate shelter and exercise areas appropriate to their size and breed characteristics. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-71. - Avoidance of mistreatment. 
(a)  Every reasonable precaution shall be used to ensure that animals are not teased, abused, mistreated, annoyed, tormented or in any manner made to suffer by any person or means. 
(b)  Animals which are natural enemies, temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible shall not be quartered together or so near each other as to cause injury, fear or torment. If two (2) or more animals are so trained or inclined by nature that they can be placed together and do not attack each other or perform or attempt any hostile act to the others, such animals shall be deemed not to be natural enemies and shall not be required to be kept in separate runs or accommodations or otherwise be arbitrarily segregated. 
(c)  The use of any equipment, device, substance or material that is, or could be, injurious or cause unnecessary cruelty to any animal shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-72. - Maintenance of health. 
(a)  Every animal establishment shall isolate sick or injured animals sufficiently so as not to endanger the health of other animals. 
(b)  Any animal shall be taken to a veterinarian for examination or treatment if the city humane officer finds this is necessary in order to maintain the health of the animal and orders the owner or custodian to do so. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-73. - Use of drugs. 
    No animal shall be given any alcoholic beverage, or narcotic drugs, central nervous system stimulants, hallucinogenic drugs, or barbiturates, unless prescribed by a licensed veterinarian. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-74. - Exposure of poisons. 
    No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same shall be liable to be eaten by any animal, provided that it shall not be unlawful for a person to expose on his own property common rat poison mixed only with vegetable substances. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-75. - Fighting contests. 
    Each and every person convicted of promoting, staging, conducting or participating indirectly as an observer in a dog fight, cock fight, pigeon shoot, turkey shoot, bear wrestling event or other staged animal fighting contest shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-76. - Working animals. 
    Working animals shall be given proper rest periods. Confined or restrained animals shall be given exercise proper for the individual animal under the particular conditions, and no animal which is overheated, weakened, exhausted, sick, injured, diseased, lame or otherwise unfit shall be worked, used or rented. No animal which the humane department has suspended from use shall be worked or used until released by the humane department. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-77. - Display of unhealthy animals for amusement prohibited. 
    No animals bearing evidence of malnutrition, ill health, unhealed injury or having been kept in an unsanitary condition shall be displayed for the amusement of the public. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-78. - School laboratories. 
    No primary, secondary school, college and/or university, either public or private, in the city shall permit students in biology or other laboratories to perform experiments on live animals of any kind or size which will inflict pain or suffering or permanent injury or deformity to the animals. Any headmaster, principal, teacher or instructor who permits or condones such prohibited practices in his school, classroom or laboratory shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-79. - Science fairs. 
    No person shall conduct a science fair or competition in the city wherein any exhibit or project involves the use of live animals of any kind or size wherein pain or suffering is inflicted on the animals or permanent injury or deformity is caused. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-80. - Autoists striking animals. 
    Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop at once and render such assistance as may be possible and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be ascertained and located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the police department or a city humane officer. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-81. - Failure to care for. 
    Failure of any person to adequately house, feed and water animals in his possession or custody shall constitute a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, such person shall be fined and/or imprisoned according to the provisions of section 1-9, or may be both fined and imprisoned in the discretion of the court. Such animals shall be subject to seizure and impoundment and, upon conviction of such person, may be sold or euthanized in the discretion of the Jefferson Parish Animal Shelter. Such failure shall constitute grounds for revocation of any animal handling license, permit, certification or registration by the department. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-82. - Entry upon private premises. 
    The director or other duly designated representatives of the city may enter any establishment holding a permit, where animals are maintained, for investigation or inspection as to whether or not any portion of such premises, buildings, structures, enclosures, pens or cages are being used, kept or maintained in violation of this or any other pertinent state law. This section does not permit any person to enter a private kennel, or cattery, except where necessary to rescue an animal in distress or with a search warrant. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
DIVISION 7. - PUBLIC NUISANCES AND VICIOUS ANIMALS 

Sec. 4-83. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings unless the context shall indicate another or different meaning or intent: 
(a)  Dangerous animal means any dog or other animal: 
(1)  Which when unprovoked: 
a.  Bites, inflicts injury, assaults or otherwise attacks a human being or domestic animal on public or private property; or 
b.  Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks or on any public grounds in a menacing or terrorizing manner or apparent attitude of attack; or 
(2)  Which has a known propensity or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or otherwise endanger the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
(3)  Which has undergone quarantine for rabies observation two (2) or more times within a two-year period; or 
(4)  Which would otherwise be deemed fierce, but upon review of the facts is declared and designated a dangerous animal, after a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Fierce animal means any dog or other animal: 
(1)  Which is not securely confined and jeopardizes any postal carrier, meter reader, utility or building inspector or other lawful invitee on the property of the owner; or 
(2)  Which chases vehicles on public property in a menacing or terrorizing manner; or 
(3)  Which upon review of the facts is declared and designated a fierce animal, after a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Vicious animal means any dog or other animal: 
(1)  Which, according to the records of the City of Kenner Humane Department or other appropriate law enforcement authority: 
a.  Has without provocation inflicted severe injury on a human being on public or private property; or 
b.  Has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or 
c.  Has previously been found to be a "dangerous animal," the owner having received notice of such, and the animal again bites, attacks or endangers the safety of human beings or domestic animals; or 
2.  Which is owned or harbored primarily or in part for the purpose of dog fighting or any dog trained for dog fighting; or 
3.  Which would otherwise be deemed dangerous, but upon review of the facts is declared and designated a vicious animal, after a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(d)  Enclosure means a securely locked fenced pen or structure of at least six (6) feet in height, constructed in accordance with standards established by the department of code enforcement, and which is suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the animal from escaping. Such pen or structure shall have secure sides, top and bottom and shall also provide the animal protection from the elements. 
(e)  Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery, or death of a human being. 
(f)  Notice means notification that an animal was declared fierce, dangerous, or vicious. Notice may be made verbally to the owner at the hearing when such determination is made, or by registered or certified mail to the owner, or by personal or domiciliary service upon the owner by a humane officer. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-84. - Prohibited generally. 
    Every owner or keeper of animals shall exercise proper care and control of such animals so as to prevent them from creating or becoming a public nuisance; and it shall be unlawful to otherwise harbor or keep any animal which is a public nuisance and/or disturbs the peace by loud noises at any time of day or night. Excessive, continuous or untimely barking, howling, yelping, whining, crowing, calling, crying, screeching, caterwauling, bawling, wailing, puling, ululating or other animal noises so as to disturb the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or its residents or to disturb the health or repose of the residents; attacking or molesting passerby or other animals; being repeatedly at large: chasing vehicles; scratching on or digging into or urinating or defecating upon lawns, shrubs, buildings or any property either public or private other than property of the owner or keeper of such an animal shall be deemed to be the creation of public nuisance and the owner or keeper of the animal causing such public nuisance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-85. - Removal of feces. 
    In the case of a nuisance by defecation, the owner or keeper must remove all feces and dispose of them in a sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-86. - Maintenance of premises. 
    Premises on which animals are kept shall be maintained so as to prevent disagreeable odors arising therefrom, or the presence or breeding of flies, mosquitoes and other pests. Provisions shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding, dead animals and debris. Disposal facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestation, odors and disease hazards. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-87. - Ownership of fierce, dangerous or vicious animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own, possess, keep or harbor a fierce, dangerous or vicious animal except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  All vicious animals not otherwise prohibited by this chapter shall be securely confined within a building or locked enclosure. Confinement shall be in such a manner that the animal cannot come in contact with any person other than the owner. 
(c)  Unless a more restrictive confinement is mandated or ordered, dangerous animals shall be within a fenced yard or confined within a building. Confinement shall be in such a manner that the animal cannot come in contact with any person except under supervised conditions and the animal is under physical restraint of the owner or other responsible person. 
(d)  Unless a more restrictive confinement is mandated or ordered, fierce animals shall be confined within a building or fenced yard. Confinement shall be in such a manner that the animal cannot come in contact with any person or other animal except under supervised conditions. 
(e)  If any severe injury form [from] an unprovoked attack of an animal results in the death of a human being, the animal shall be deemed a public menace and shall be euthanized following the appropriate delay period as provided in this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to own an animal which is a public menace. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-88. - Control and restriction of vicious animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to own a vicious animal unless the owner meets the requirements of section 4-89. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to maintain a vicious animal upon any premises which does not have a locked enclosure. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any owner to allow any vicious animal to be outside of the dwelling of the owner or outside of the enclosure unless it is necessary for the owner to obtain veterinary care, or in order to dispose of the animal in accordance with the commands of the director of code enforcement or the administrative hearing officer, in such event, the animal shall be securely muzzled and restrained with a chain having a tensile strength of three hundred (300) pounds and not exceeding three (3) feet in length, and shall be under the direct control, supervision and physical restraint of the owner or other responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but shall prevent it from biting any person or animal. 
(d)  This section shall also be applicable to an animal declared dangerous, after a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when so ordered by the administrative hearing officer or the director of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-89. - Registration and insurance. 
    No vicious or dangerous animal shall be licensed in this city for any licensing period unless the owner of such animal meets the following requirements: 
(1)  The owner procures liability insurance in the amount of at least five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00), covering any property damage or bodily injury which may be caused by such vicious or dangerous animal during the twelve month period for which licensing is sought. The policy of insurance shall contain a provision requiring a thirty-day notice of cancellation or nonrenewal be issued to the department of code enforcement in order for the city to be notified by the insurance company of any cancellation, nonrenewal, termination or expiration of the liability insurance policy. Proof of insurance shall be a certificate of insurance issued by the insurer on a form acceptable to the department of code enforcement. The owner shall also provide proof that the insurance carrier is on notice that exposure to liability from a dangerous animal exists. 
(2)  All dangerous and vicious animals shall, at the expense of the owner, be tattooed with the license number assigned to such animal or such other identification mark as the animal shelter may require; the tattooing shall be done by a licensed veterinarian or other qualified person approved by the animal shelter. The director of code enforcement may, in his or her discretion, designate the particular location of said animal where the tattoo shall be placed. Said tattoo designation shall be noted on the licensing files for such dangerous or vicious animal. For the purposes of this section, "tattoo" shall be defined as any acceptable permanent marking of a vicious animal by means of indelible or permanent ink with the number or mark designated by the administrator of the animal shelter, or any other permanent, acceptable method of tattooing. 
(3)  The owner shall display a sign on his or her premises warning that there is a vicious or dangerous animal on the premises. Said sign shall be visible and capable of being read from the public street, sidewalk or right-of-way abutting the premises. 
(4)  The owner shall sign a statement attesting that: 
a.  The owner shall maintain and not voluntarily cancel the liability insurance required by this section during the twelve-month period for which licensing is sought, unless the owner shall cease to own or keep the animal prior to the expiration of such license. 
b.  The owner of a vicious animal shall, on or prior to the effective date of such license for which application is being made, have an enclosure for the animal on the property where the vicious animal will be kept or maintained. This section shall also be applicable to animal declared dangerous, after a hearing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, when so ordered by the administrative hearing officer or the director of code enforcement. 
c.  The owner shall notify the department of code enforcement immediately if a vicious or dangerous animal is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human being, or had died or had been sold or given away. If the animal has been sold or given away, the owner shall also provide the department of code enforcement with the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the animal. 
(5)  Any animal declared vicious or dangerous pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, or which is otherwise deemed vicious or dangerous shall be required to be identified by either tattoo or insertion of a microchip at the expense of the owner. The owner shall have fifteen (15) days from the rendition of the order by the hearing officer to pay the cost of the procedure to the animal shelter. The owner may select either the tattoo or chip procedure. In the event the fee is not paid, the animal shall be deemed to be forfeited. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-90. - Enforcement authority. 
(a)  Any animal control officer or other law enforcement officer is hereby empowered to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and any such animal control officer or law enforcement officer is hereby empowered to seize and impound any animal whose owner fails to comply with the provisions hereof. 
(b)  In the event that the owner or keeper of the animal refuses to surrender the animal to the animal control officer, the officer may request the appropriate law enforcement agency to obtain a search warrant from a court of competent jurisdiction and to seize the animal upon execution of the warrant. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-91. - Administrative penalties. 
(a)  Any vicious or dangerous animal which is not validly registered, securely confined, properly restrained or tattooed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, or whose owner does not secure the liability insurance required in accordance with the provisions of section 4-89, shall be confiscated by the animal shelter and impounded pending a hearing to determine the proper disposition of said animal. 
(b)  After a hearing, if the circumstances so warrant, the owner may be allowed to redeem an animal confiscated under paragraph (a) upon payment of the appropriate redemption fees; otherwise the animal shall be destroyed in a humane manner following the appropriate delay period as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  If, according to the records of the department of code enforcement or the parish animal shelter or other appropriate law enforcement agency, an owner of a dangerous or vicious animal has, in connection with the same animal or any previously owned dangerous or vicious animal, been determined on a prior occasion to be in violation of provisions of the chapter, or by not securing the liability insurance required in accordance with the provisions of section 4-89, the director of code enforcement may refuse to issue a license or registration to said owner for any subsequently owned dangerous or vicious animal. The provisions of this section shall be in addition to any other penalties provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-92. - Exceptions and exemptions. 
(a)  Sections 4-87 through 4-91 shall not apply to K-9 or other dogs governed by section 4-53 or any dogs owned by a law enforcement agency which are used in a performance of police work. 
(b)  No animal may be declared fierce, dangerous or vicious if an injury or damage is sustained by a person who, at the time such injury or damage was sustained, was committing a willful trespass or other tort upon the premises occupied by the owner of the animal, or was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal, or was committing or attempting to commit a crime. No animal may be declared dangerous or vicious if an injury or damage was sustained by a domestic animal which at the time such injury or damage was sustained was teasing, tormenting, abusing or assaulting the animal; no animal may be declared fierce, dangerous or vicious if the animal was protecting or defending a human being within the immediate vicinity of the animal from an unjustified attack or assault. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-93. - Prohibited ownership; unlawful purpose. 
    No person shall own or harbor any dog for the purpose of dog fighting, or train, torment, badger, bait or use any dog for the purpose of causing or encouraging said dog to unprovoked attacks upon human beings or domestic animals or to otherwise treat said animal for the purpose of intentionally making it vicious. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-94. - Determination of fierce, dangerous or vicious. 
(a)  In the event that an animal control officer or law enforcement officer has probable cause to believe that an animal is fierce, dangerous or vicious, the director of the department of code enforcement may initiate proceedings before the administrative hearing officer pursuant to section 4-95 et seq., for a hearing to determine whether or not the animal should be declared and classified as fierce, dangerous or vicious. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set forth in 4-95 et seq. 
(b)  Any animal control officer or other law enforcement officer may destroy any wild or vicious animal found in violation of this article and which cannot be safely taken up or impounded, but it shall be unlawful for any other person to kill any dog or other animal by shooting or poisoning at any place other than the animal shelter, provided that in the case of a bona fide emergency any person may take such measures as may be necessary for protection of person and property. 
(c)  Any animal not licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall be presumed to be dangerous. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-95. - Administrative hearing officer determinations and orders. 
(a)  After a hearing and upon determination by the administrative hearing officer that a violation has occurred, he shall have the authority to impose any penalty provided by this article; in addition to all fines, costs and penalties, the hearing officer shall also require the person to pay all kennel fees associated with the impoundment of the animal. 
(b)  In cases where a public nuisance is found to exist, the administrative hearing officer may order the revocation of the license of a licensed animal, order a reduction in the number of animals kept by an owner, or require whatever reasonable restrictions in the keeping of animals he may deem necessary to eliminate or mitigate a public nuisance. 
(c)  In cases where an animal is declared to be fierce, dangerous, or vicious or is deemed to be a public nuisance, the administrative hearing officer shall have the authority to order the muzzling, secure confinement, neutering, removal from the City or humane destruction of any such animal and may order any reasonable restrictions required for the keeping of fierce, dangerous or vicious animals permitted by this chapter which he may deem necessary to eliminate any hazard to the public. 
(d)  After a hearing and upon determination by the administrative hearing officer that a violation has occurred, in addition to all other penalties, the hearing officer may also order the animal to undergo training by a trainer approved by the director of code enforcement, that the animal be neutered or spayed, and/or that the number of animals kept or confined on the property be limited. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-96. - Impoundment pending hearing or appeal. 
(a)  The director of code enforcement, at his discretion, may seize, impound and continue to impound at the animal shelter any animal pending a hearing or appeal as provided in this article; the director shall have such right notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary or any provision which imposes a maximum holding period, in exercising this discretion the director may consider the likelihood of an animal being declared dangerous, vicious or a public menace, or that the animal is under observation pursuant to section 4-41, or any other factor which is in the best interest of the public or welfare or the animal. 
(b)  In the event the humane destruction of an animal is ordered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the administrative hearing officer may order that the animal be confined at the animal shelter or other location approved by the director of the code enforcement department during the required delay period and/or pending any appeal by the owner. 
(c)  In any case in which an animal is ordered seized and impounded by the director pending a hearing or appeal, and subject to the provisions of paragraph (a), the director may, upon the request of the owner, allow the animal to be confined and boarded at an approved location selected by the owner and at the owner's expense. 
(d)  In any case in which an animal is ordered seized and impounded pending appeal, the appellant shall post a cash deposit to cover the maintenance for ninety (90) days from the time of rendition of judgment. In the event the appeal is not heard within that period the owner shall be required to post a cash deposit for an additional ninety (90) days unless the city has requested the delay. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-97. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  In addition to any other fee or penalty imposed, the owner of any animal, and any other person violating any provision of division 7 of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction of each such offense for each animal or incident before a court of competent jurisdiction shall be fined and/or imprisoned in accordance with the provisions of section 1-9. 
(b)  The minimum fine and imprisonment schedule for any second or subsequent conviction of violation of provisions of this article, other than those provisions relating to vicious animals, shall be as follows: 
Second Offense Third and Subsequent Offenses Fine $50.00 $100.00 Term of imprisonment 20 days 30 days  
The minimum fine and imprisonment schedule for any second or subsequent conviction of violation of provisions of this article relating to vicious animals shall be as follows: 
Second and Subsequent 
Offenses Fine $500.00 Term of imprisonment in the city jail 30 days  
(c)  Any person convicted of a second offense of cruelty to animals shall be permanently ineligible to be issued any permit or license authorized under this article. 
(d)  Any law enforcement officer may issue a citation for any or all violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
ARTICLE III. - BEEKEEPING 

Sec. 4-98. - Prohibited in residential areas. 
    No person shall keep or maintain an apiary in an area zoned for residential development unless the apiary is situated at least one hundred (100) feet or more from any public private property line of the tract upon which the apiary is situated, as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line; except that a person may keep or maintain an apiary if he obtains written permission from all adult persons residing within three hundred (300) feet or less of the apiary, measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line of the tract upon which each resident's dwelling is situated. For purposes of this article, an apiary shall be defined as an assembly of one (1) or more colonies or hives of bees in a single location, but shall not include any colony of feral or wild bees that may exist naturally in the environment. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-99. - Regulation and compliance. 
    All apiaries shall be registered annually with the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry, and shall be kept in accordance with all applicable state and parish laws. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Sec. 4-100. - Certain conduct prohibited. 
    Notwithstanding compliance with the provisions of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to keep an apiary which causes an unhealthy condition, endangers the health, safety or welfare of another person, or interferes with the normal use and enjoyment of any public property or the property of others. 
(Ord. No. 8956, §§ 1, 2, 12-18-03) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8165, adopted Sept. 2, 1999, amended Ch. 5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. The history of the ordinances from which Ch. 5 derived can be found in the Code Comparative Table at the back of this Code of Ordinances. 
In addition, section 2 of Ord. No. 9425, adopted Jan. 4, 2007, adopted the following codes, known as the State Uniform Construction Code, which are annexed hereto as exhibits "A" through "G" are hereby adopted by reference as if they were copied fully herein, and shall govern all manner of construction hereafter undertaken within the City of Kenner: 
1. International Building Code, 2006 Edition, not including Chapter 1-Administration, Chapter 11-Accessibility, Chapter 27-Electrical and Chapter 29-Plumbing Systems (Exh. "A") 2. International Existing Building Code, 2006 Edition, not including Chapter 1-Administration (Exh. "B") 3. International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, 2006 Edition, not including Chapter 1-Administration, V-Mechanical, VII-Plumbing and VIII-Electrical (Exh. "C")  Chapter 3 of the International Residential Code for One and Two Family Dwellings, 2006 Edition, Section R301.2.1 (Design Criteria) shall be amended to include the following:   a) The American Concrete Institute, Guide to Concrete Masonary Residential Construction in High Wind Areas   b) Institute for Business & Home Safety   c) Federal Alliance for Safe Homes 4. International Fuel Gas Code, 2006 Edition (Exh. "D") 5. International Mechanical Code, 2006 Edition (Exh. "E") 6. Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2000 Edition (Exh. "F") 7. National Electrical Code, 2005 Edition (Exh. "G")  
Cross reference- Planning commission and zoning commission, § 2-56 et seq.; occupational license tax, § 10-53 et seq.; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Construction or demolishing privileges. 
(1)  Materials required for use immediately in connection with the construction or demolishing of a building may be placed upon that portion of the street area in front of the building which is not already used for temporary sidewalks or sidewalk shed as provided for in [Article 302], [International] Building Code]. The maximum width of such space which will be permitted for materials to be used from day to day in connection with the operations for which the building permit has been issued, shall not exceed five (5) feet from the back of the curb to the middle of the street, except where the street contains railway tracks, in which case not more than one-half (1/2) of the distance between the curb and the nearest rail shall be used. The distance from any such material to the nearest rail shall in no case, however, be less than four (4) feet. This unoccupied space shall be kept free from teams, wagons, vehicles, receptacles, etc., which would in any way obstruct such space. On asphalt streets, all sand, gravel or crushed stone shall be confined in bins to prevent damage to the asphalt street. No materials or tools shall be placed on any street within ten (10) feet of the curb lines of intersecting streets, and not over fifty (50) per cent of the frontage of adjoining properties but in no case exceeding fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  If the written consent by the owner of property adjoining the site of the building operations is obtained and is filed with the director, the street or sidewalk occupancy permit may be extended beyond the limits of such building site upon the same conditions as those herein fixed for the occupation of the street in front of the building site, provided the adjoining owners be not unreasonably deprived of ingress to and egress from their property. 
(3)  The gutter or waterway shall not at any time be obstructed by any earth, sand, gravel or other building materials, but such gutters or waterways must at all times be kept clear by the builder to allow the free passage of water in and along same, using a substantial bridge over the gutter if necessary. 
(4)  Any person having the use of any portion of the street or sidewalk shall cause blinking yellow or red lights and barricades to be placed and maintained in a conspicuous place in front of all obstructions from sunset to sunrise each night, during the time such obstructions remain, and in no case shall the sidewalk or portion of the street be used for more than five (5) working days. 
(5)  All excavations below lot grade must be adequately protected for the safety of life, limb and property, and where excavations are left uncovered, adequate means must be provided to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water; all backfilling must be performed promptly. Earth taken from excavations and materials or rubbish taken from buildings shall not be stored upon the sidewalks or streets, but shall be removed from day to day as rapidly as accumulated. When such materials are dry and likely to produce a dust when handled, they shall be kept moist so as to prevent the wind blowing the same about. Materials or rubbish accumulated on upper floors, shall be lowered by elevators in closed receptacles or by closed chutes discharging directly to wagons or trucks. 
(6)  No material, fence or shed shall be placed in any way that will obstruct free approach to any fire hydrant, fire alarm box, street lighting standard, public utility pole, manhole, catch basin, or U.S. mailbox. 
(7)  Any temporary sheds used by the builder shall be removed upon completion of the work. The street and sidewalk shall be cleared of all materials as soon as the use of the street for storage is no longer required. 
(8)  In consideration of the foregoing permission to use streets and sidewalks for the piling and storing of materials and tools, or the use of equipment, the owner of the building shall be obligated in the event that any of the street or sidewalk pavements or the surface of the paved streets, be damaged by the piling or storing of materials or tools, or the use of equipment, to restore the same within thirty (30) days after completion and acceptance of building, to the original condition in which they were before materials or tools were piled up or stored thereon, or before the use of equipment. In every building of reinforced concrete construction, forms of combustible materials shall be stripped from the concrete and removed from the building as soon as practicable and when approved by architect or engineer. 
(9)  In all buildings over fifty (50) feet in height, in which standpipes are required, such standpipes shall be installed as the construction progresses, in such a manner that they are always ready for fire department use to the topmost floor that has been installed. Such standpipes shall be provided with a Siamese fire department connection on the outside of the building at the street level and with one (1) standard hose outlet at each floor. All outlets, connections and fittings shall be designed to fit fire department equipment. 
(10)  In every building operation wherever a toolhouse, storeroom or other shanty is placed, or a room or space is used for storage, dressing room or workshop, at least one (1) approved hand pump tank or portable chemical extinguisher of nonfreezing type or protected against freezing shall be provided and maintained in an accessible location. When a water supply of not less than one hundred (100) gallons per minute at twenty-five (25) pounds nozzle pressure, ready for use at all times, is installed as the building operation progresses, a one and one-half (11/2) inch hose, fifty (50) feet in length, with a half-inch nozzle, may be substituted for each such fire extinguisher. 
(11)  During building construction, free access from the street to fire hydrants and to outside connections for standpipes, sprinklers or other fire extinguishing equipment, whether permanent or temporary, shall be provided and maintained at all times. No material or construction equipment shall be placed within ten (10) feet of such hydrant or connection, nor between it and the center line of the street. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99; Ord. No. 10,070, § 1, 4-8-10) 
Sec. 5-2. - Fill and excavations. 
(1)  Permits. No property shall be filled nor shall any material be deposited on any property for later use as fill on that property unless a permit has first been obtained from the department of regulatory [inspections] for that purpose. 
(2)  Approval. No property shall be filled until the department of regulatory inspections has made an on-site inspection to determine if there are any objectionable materials that can be used as fill. Any objectionable materials must be removed before any fill is placed on the property. 
(3)  Rear fifteen feet of lot depth. The rear fifteen (15) feet of lot depth, excepting any portion of that rear fifteen (15) feet designated as a servitude may be filled with any material except household appliances and furniture, vehicles or parts thereof, tires, pallets, and cans of any type. All trees buried and/or utilized as fill in this designated area shall not exceed ten-foot lengths and all limbs shall be stripped from the tree trunk of trunks exceeding three (3) inches in diameter and the root structure shall be severed from the tree trunk. Any such materials shall be backfilled within seven (7) days of their deposit on the property with a minimum of three (3) feet of soil, the upper one (1) foot of which shall be either pump, spillway or batture sand. No trees shall be buried until they have been inspected and approved by the department of regulatory inspections. 
(4)  Lot area excepting the rear fifteen (15) feet aforedescribed. No material other than pump, spillway, or batture sand, or shell, gravel, asphalt or other masonry products such as brick, mortar, concrete blocks broken so as not to exceed one (1) square foot in area, when covered by a minimum of six (6) inches of pump, spillway or batture sand shall be utilized for filling any portion of any property excepting as provided in subsection (3) aforementioned. All such materials shall be leveled within seven (7) days of their deposit on the property being filled. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-3. - Smoke detectors. 
    Every residential unit of any single or multifamily designation, or rooming house, boarding house, lodging house, hospital, school, day care center or nursery, and other such places where persons may rest or sleep, not necessarily limited to the specific types of structures enumerated herein, and the units and rooms therein, shall have installed smoke-detecting devices of a type approved by the Underwriters' Laboratory. These smoke-detecting devices shall be provided for every eight hundred (800) square feet of living spaced and any fractional portion thereof exceeding four hundred (400) square feet, shall be provided in a location easily accessible to the human ear in the event of the sounding of the alarm, in relationship to bedrooms and other sleeping areas. A building permit shall not be issued for the construction, alteration, or repair of any structure of the aforementioned type, unless the locations of smoke-detecting devices are clearly designated in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-4. - Indoor pistol and firing ranges. 
(1)  General requirements. 
(a)  Any gallery range license applicant within this jurisdiction must show intent to comply with these code requirements before a building permit will be granted, and must demonstrate compliance before occupancy in order to receive a license to operate. 
(b)  The range is understood to include the entire space enclosed by the building structure in which the discharge of firearms may take place. (The space behind the shooters, however great, is included in the range and must comply.) 
(c)  Compliance will be determined from the building plans provided for obtaining the building permit, and from such additional data as may be requested. 
(d)  In recognition that special considerations are sometimes involved, the licensing authority may add further requirements as it sees fit. Furthermore, any of the following requirements may be waived or altered if sufficient reason can be shown. 
(e)  The primary type of shooting activity that will be conducted must be established for the record. All other shooting activities that might be conducted must also be established. In case of conflict the most severe activity will govern compliance. 
(f)  Except as provided in the section for special ranges the range must be of the fixed firing line type in which the shooters remain at one firing line and the targets are brought back and forth to the target line(s) mechanically. 
(g)  Specialized terminology in this code shall be interpreted according to the glossary which follows it. All terminology not included in the glossary shall be interpreted according to Webster's Unabridged International Dictionary, current edition. 
(2)  Special considerations. 
(a)  The length must be sufficiently great that the shooters will never be closer than thirty-five (35) feet to the bullet trap; (as measured by the longest projection of the bullet trap upon the floor) and sufficient for proper door placement as defined later. 
(b)  The width must be sufficient to provide three-foot minimum width shooting points for ranges with shooting separators and five-foot minimum width points for those without separators. (There is no maximum width.) 
(c)  The height at the firing line must be eight-foot minimum from floor to ceiling. (The purpose of this requirement is to discourage attempts to build ranges in spaces that cannot be responsibly equipped and supervised.) 
There shall be no downrange doors into occupied areas. Downrange shall be understood to be from a point three (3) feet behind the firing line to the bullet trap. If there is more than one (1) firing line the most distant one from the trap governs. 
There may be downrange doors into unoccupied areas if human egress is not possible. (This provides for electrical and plumbing cabinets, etc. Of course, it is prudent that these be protected.) 
There may be downrange doors into normally unoccupied areas that permit human egress providing that they are equipped with electrical safety devices that will provide an alarm to the firing line if the area is occupied and that will provide an alarm in the area if any of the ordinary range functions are commenced (turning on target lights, target systems, etc.). (This makes possible the use of storage areas that can only be reached through the range.) 
(d)  Windows are governed by the following requirements (whether noise attenuating, shatterproof or bulletproof is determined by use of the range and is not the purview of this Code): 
1.  There shall be no windows into contiguous areas not controlled by the owner. 
2.  Downrange windows shall be governed as stipulated for downrange doors. 
(3)  Ballistic security. 
(a)  Weapons. It must be established for the record what weapons and ammunition will be used. Handguns shall be of reputable manufacturers and ammunition factory loaded. 
(b)  Secure area. If the range is situated so that an escaped bullet cannot fall into or pass through occupiable areas there is no ballistic security requirement for the structure separating the range from such areas. The range design manuals of the regular military services shall govern the amount of secure area required in such cases. 
(c)  Earth separation. Earth separation of three (3) feet or greater is sufficient to eliminate any ballistical security requirement of the structure in that particular direction. 
(d)  Critical zones. Critical zones must be penetration proof for the heaviest ammunition that might be used on the range fired point blank into it (at ninety (90) degrees to the surface). 
1.  The horizontal critical zone is any surface that a shooter in any shooting point can hit from forty-five (45) degrees downrange on either side to twenty (20) degrees behind him on either side. 
2.  The vertical critical zone is any surface that a shooter in any shooting point can hit when facing downrange from straight down to straight up. 
(4)  Wall construction. 
(a)  Walls in the critical zone may be standard grade concrete blocks with their cavities filled with crushed rock of three-quarter-inch or smaller screen. Sand is not acceptable. Concrete of any density is acceptable as the fill. Other suitable constructions are: Four (4) inches of reinforced concrete, one-quarter inch of mild steel over an appropriate supporting surface, single layer of face brick. 
(b)  Walls in the secondary zone may be standard grade concrete blocks without filled cavities. Other suitable constructions are: Three (3) inches of reinforced concrete, one-eighth inch of mild steel over an appropriate supporting surface. Wood planking, plywood and gypsum board maybe used in sufficient thicknesses to be ballistically equivalent but may result in excessive maintenance. 
(c)  Wall baffles may be used in lieu of the above constructions for either zone. When used there is no ballistical security requirement of the walls. When used the following requirements must be met: 
1.  The baffles must shelter the wall so that misdirected shots from all shooting points are interrupted by the baffles before striking the wall. 
2.  The baffles must be so angled that no bullet may hit any baffle at a greater angle than forty-five (45) degrees. 
3.  The baffle steel must be of sufficient thickness that it is not dented by the heaviest ammunition if left bare. Or if covered with a wood surface it must be of sufficient thickness that even if dented its structural integrity is maintained. 
(d)  Wall construction in residential areas as nonconforming: 
1.  Side walls shall be protected by a one-eighth-inch steel plate or lengthening of shooting separators to guard against misaimed projectiles from striking side walls. 
2.  Rear wall shall be protected by a one-eighth-inch steel plate to guard against fail of venetian or escalator system. 
(5)  Floor construction. 
(a)  In the critical zone floors shall be reinforced concrete of four-inch minimum thickness. In new construction the floor shall be graded to a downrange floor drain. 
(b)  Exposed slab ceiling or roof must be governed by the same requirements as floors. If the bottom surface of the slab is not smooth the following shall govern. 
(c)  Ceiling baffles must be provided to protect any item that may interrupt the downrange travel of bullets from an angle of forty-five (45) degrees to the vertical ahead of the shooter to the bullet trap. 
If the ceiling baffles protect the entire overhead area (each baffle starting its protection where the previous one left off) then there is no ballistical security requirement for the ceiling or roof above. 
The baffle construction must otherwise comply with the requirements for wall baffles. 
(6)  Ceiling system. 
(a)  If the range has a smooth concrete slab ceiling without any beams or protrusions, and no ducts, conduits, etc. need be run through the area, then simple redirective coves for the lights may be adequate. This is rarely the case. In most cases a conventional air space principle safety ceiling system is the best choice. 
(b)  If the owner is doing all of his own work in converting the building to a range, he can fabricate his ceiling system less expensively than buying it. However more and more facilities are being put in by businessmen who are more concerned about getting into profitable operation with a minimum of nuisance than minor savings. In those cases our prefabricated ceiling members are real bargains. In a typical situation sixteen-foot long horizontal members will start at the firing line and extend downrange. This will be followed by four (4) air-space principle baffles and a final redirective cove just ahead of the trap. 
(c)  Columns, pilasters, exposed piping and other protuberances downrange shall be protected from damage and prevented from causing ricochets. 
Angled steel plates may be used for all protuberances. The requirements for wall baffles shall govern. 
Pilasters may be faired to the wall with concrete so that the angle to the wall of the surface of the fairing concrete is thirty (30) degrees or less. 
(7)  Plumbing. 
(a)  In new construction there shall be a floor drain downrange and a hose bib in the range area. 
(b)  In existing construction the floor drain may be waived if a slop sink is located within fifty (50) feet of the range. 
(c)  Wood facings are not allowed for protection of surface unless they are separated from any hard surface (steel or masonry) behind them by an air space of at least one (1) inch. 
(8)  Noise attenuation. 
(a)  The maximum noise that may escape the range into areas not controlled by the owner is 40 db. 
(b)  Sufficient acoustical treatment shall be provided to reduce the sound level from magnum ammunition by 10 db minimum. 
(c)  Acoustical materials subject to spraying (i.e., the sprayed on type) shall not be used. 
(9)  Ventilation. 
(a)  The permissible exposure to toxic lead products of gunfire shall be governed by current U.S. Department of Labor standards. 
(b)  There must be positive flow of air past the shooter in a downrange direction, with all exhaust downrange. 
(c)  The minimum operating temperature shall be fifty (50) degrees Fahrenheit and the maximum ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(10)  Lighting. 
(a)  There shall be general illumination in the firing line area of 30 MFC as measured at the floor. The minimum downrange general illumination shall be 10 MFC at the floor. 
(b)  At least one (1) circuit must be on dual switches so that it may be turned on from the door. 
(c)  There shall be emergency lighting that will automatically illuminate if the lights fail. This must be on standby power. 
(11)  Bullet traps. 
(a)  Locally fabricated plate-and-pit backstops are the chief cause of equipment induced range accidents. Modern bullet traps involve complex considerations that are beyond the capability of the authority to evaluate even if believed to be adequate by the local fabricator. Therefore, the bullet trap shall be from an established manufacturer of range equipment with five (5) years or more successful experience, and for which evidence is submitted of successful applications in other ranges of the same general type. 
(b)  The bullet trap shall be an area type; a trap that covers the entire butts end of the range. 
(c)  The butts end of the range is defined as the total space between the two (2) side walls and from the floor to the sheltered area created by the ceiling system; or in the case of a flat slab roof, up to that roof. 
(12)  Shooting separators. 
(a)  All ranges shall have physical separation between the shooting points unless positive reasons are established to show that this cannot be provided. (Dual use of the area is not an acceptable reason unless it can be shown that there is no other way the secondary activity can be conducted.) 
(b)  The separators shall be structurally sound and functional for the type of range. 
(c)  The separators shall be so designed that any misdirected shot sixty (60) degrees to the right or left of a shooter that hits any portion of the stall will be deflected downrange without further interruption to its line of travel that may cause ricochet back towards the shooters. 
(13)  Site selection. The range must not constitute a nuisance nor a hazard to its contiguous areas. It must be established that the zoning or natural configurations of the contiguous areas prevents them from being occupied by sensitive areas. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-5. - Notification requirements for tunneling and excavation. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, utility company, etc., or agent of the aforenamed, to do or cause to be done any trenching within the dedicated street rights-of-way of the City of Kenner or to do, or cause to be done, any tunneling under and/or removal of sidewalks and street surfacing within the dedicated rights-of-way of the City of Kenner, without full compliance with the following provisions: 
(a)  Notify the City of Kenner, through the department of public works, of the general scope and location of the project prior to actual commencement of work. However, in the event of emergencies, work may be commenced and the department of public works notified at the first reasonable opportunity but in no event later than within one working day thereafter. Notification shall contain a disclosure of the name and address of the owner of facilities being repaired and/or installed and the name and address of the agent and/or contractor actually performing the repair or installation work. 
(b)  With each notification of work to be performed the owner of the facilities to be repaired and/or installed shall designate one individual in owner's employ by name, address and phone number as the responsible designated person to be contacted in the event of inquiry or complaint by the City of Kenner regarding the repairs and/or installations. This provision shall not be applicable if the owner has on file, with the department of public works a letter designating such a responsible designated person in regards to all of owner's repair and/or installation activities within the City of Kenner. 
(c)  Prior to commencement of trenching, tunneling and/or removal of sidewalks, street surfacing, and any removal of earth within street rights-of-way within the City of Kenner street rights-of-way and/or servitudes, photographs shall be taken of the site and adjoining private property. These photographs shall depict the condition of site and all improvements thereon as existing prior to commencement of construction. These photographs shall be retained for a period of six (6) months after completion of construction and shall be made available to the City of Kenner Department of Public Works at no cost upon request. 
(d)  Notify the City of Kenner, through the department of public works of any damage done to City of Kenner, consolidated sewerage district, Parish of Jefferson Water Works, Louisiana Power and Light and South Central Bell facilities. This notice shall be given to the City of Kenner as soon as possible under the circumstances. 
(e)  Damaged City of Kenner or consolidated sewerage district facilities such as underground street light wiring, sewer lines, manholes, etc., shall be timely and properly repaired by owner or contractor causing damages so as to minimize damage to facilities and inconvenience to residents of the City of Kenner. 
(f)  Notify the City of Kenner, through the department of public works, prior to backfilling or filling in excavations. However, if the circumstances of the job require immediate backfilling for safety reasons, the backfilling may be performed and the City of Kenner notified thereof at the first reasonable opportunity. 
(g)  Notify the City of Kenner, through the department of public works, upon completion of the work. 
(h)  All necessary steps and precautions shall be taken during the performance of trenching, tunneling and/or removal of sidewalks and street surfacing within the dedicated rights-of-way of the City of Kenner, as necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of individuals and to protect public property and facilities located thereon. 
(i)  All repairs and/or installations shall be completed within a reasonable length of time so as to minimize inconvenience to the residents of the City of Kenner and the general public and all necessary steps shall be taken to have the condition of street rights-of-way, sidewalk surfacing, and street surfacing be in proper condition upon completion of the work. 
(2)  Failure to give notification prior to commencement of work, or failure to properly repair City of Kenner streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, or damaged facilities: 
(a)  In the event any person, firm, utility company, etc., or agent of the aforenamed, fails to timely and properly repair damage to any City of Kenner street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or facilities, then the City of Kenner may cause necessary repairs to be performed, the cost of which said repairs plus a ten (10) percent administrative fee will be charged to the responsible party. 
(b)  All cost incurred by the City of Kenner for repair to damaged facilities plus ten (10) percent administrative fee shall be paid by the responsible party within ten (10) working days after receipt of invoice. Should payment not be made within ten (10) days, the cost of repairs plus administrative fee, legal interest, court cost, and reasonable attorney fees shall be recoverable by legal action for damages. 
(c)  Failure to give notifications required herein or failure to adequately repair City of Kenner streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and/or facilities as required herein shall constitute a violation of the building code punishable by a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) and/or thirty (30) days in jail or both. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. This provision of enforcement is in addition to remedies provided elsewhere for recovery of damages. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-6. - Fence regulations. 
(1)  A fence is an erection constructed of wood (rails or stakes), wrought iron, solid plastic, chain-link, masonry, vegetation (hedge), metal other than corrugated tin, or other similar materials between two (2) contiguous estates, so as to divide them, or on an estate, so as to divide one part from another. Fences shall be required to provide protection for construction and demolition, swimming pools, canals or ditches, or junk yards. The height of fences shall comply with the Zoning Ordinance. Fences shall be structurally sound and durable. 
(2)  No fragile, readily flammable material such as paper, cloth or canvas shall constitute a part of any fence, nor shall such material be employed as an adjunct or supplement to any fence. In areas zoned residential, fences shall only be made of wood (rails or stakes), wrought iron, solid plastic, chain-link, masonry, and vegetation (hedge). In residential areas, fences may be made of metal other than corrugated tin, provided that they are made from 24- or 26-gauge metal R panel or flair panel with a polyester enamel color finish, capped with five and three-eighths-inch cut and erected with long-life, rustproof screws. 
(3)  Fences over eight (8) feet in height shall not be of combustible material. Barbed wire or other material deemed hazardous by the director shall not be placed less than seven (7) feet above the ground or grade along public thoroughfares, parks or any adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99; Ord. No. 8695, § 1, 7-11-02) 
Secs. 5-7-5-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING CODE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-57. - Title. 
    This article shall be known, shall constitute and may be referred to as the Minimum Housing Standards Code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-58. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following terms shall, for the purposes of this article, have the meanings indicated in this section: 
    Accessory structure shall mean a secondary structure or building other than a dwelling, a multifamily dwelling, a lodging or rooming house, or a boardinghouse. Examples include, but are not limited to, garages, carports, sheds, tool rooms, laundry rooms, greenhouses, etc. 
    Apartment shall mean the same as a dwelling unit. 
    Apartment house shall mean the same as a dwelling. 
    Boardinghouse shall mean a rooming or lodging house where meals are served for compensation to the roomers or lodgers. 
    Dwelling shall mean a building comprising one or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean a group of habitable and nonhabitable rooms which provide complete living facilities for one family, including provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation. 
    Habitable room shall mean a space used for living, sleeping, eating or cooking, or a combination thereof. 
    Lodging or rooming house shall mean a building in which a room or a series of rooms are used for the purpose of sleeping, living and sanitation, but not for cooking or eating. 
    Multifamily dwelling shall mean a building comprising more than one (1) dwelling unit. 
    Nonhabitable room shall mean a space used as a laundry or utility room, hall, bath, or for similar purposes. 
    Plumbing or plumbing fixtures shall mean water heating facilities, hot and cold water pipes, gas pipes, garbage disposal units, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, water closets, installed clothes washing or drying machines, or other similar equipment, catch basins, drains, vents, or other similarly supplied fixtures, together with all connections to water, gas, sewer or vent lines. 
    Rooming unit shall mean a room or series of rooms in a lodging or rooming house. 
(b)  Terms not defined in this section but defined in the building code of the city shall have the meanings ascribed to them in the building code. 
(c)  Terms not defined in this section or in the building code of the city shall have ascribed to them their ordinary accepted meanings unless a different meaning is clearly implied from the content of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-59. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article, and the violation of, or failure to comply with any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-60. - Authority. 
    This article is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 1361 et seq. of Title 33 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 and under any other authority which the city may have. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-61. - Purpose; minimum standards. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public and the owners and occupants of dwellings and dwelling units used or intended to be used for purposes of human habitation. 
    The standards established herein are hereby designated as minimum housing standards for dwellings and dwelling units, and such standards shall determine the fitness of a dwelling or dwelling unit for purposes of human habitation. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-62. - Application. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be used, for human habitation, and to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition thereof. These provisions shall also apply to accessory structures. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-63. - Substandard buildings declared nuisances. 
    All buildings or structures, and all parts thereof, which, after inspection, are found not to meet the minimum housing standards of this article by virtue of being unsafe, unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, or not provided with adequate egress; or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life; or which in relation to existing use constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment; are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal. Demolition or removal shall be in accordance with R.S. 33:4761 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99; Ord. No. 10,070, § 6, 4-8-10; Ord. No. 10,506, § 1, 12-20-12) 
Sec. 5-64. - Maintenance; responsibility of owners and occupants. 
    All buildings or structures, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by this article in a building when erected, altered, or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. 
    Every owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for all of the requirements of this article. 
    Every owner of a dwelling containing two (2) or more dwelling units shall be responsible for maintaining a clean and sanitary condition of the shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof. 
    Every occupant and owner of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall be responsible for: 
(1)  Keeping in a clean and sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit, and premises which he or she occupies and controls; 
(2)  Disposing of his or her rubbish, garbage, and any other organic waste in a clean and sanitary manner. Occupants shall be responsible for the availability of such containers as may be required for the handling and storage of rubbish, garbage or other disposable matter; and 
(3)  Keeping all plumbing fixtures in a clean and sanitary condition, and for exercising reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
    No occupant shall willfully destroy, deface, or impair any of the facilities, equipment, or any part of the structure of a dwelling or dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99; Ord. No. 9194, § 1, 8-18-05) 
Sec. 5-65. - Division of housing improvement. 
    There is hereby created within the department of regulatory inspection, the division of housing improvement to be headed by an administrator. The administrator of the division, under the supervision of the director of the department, shall exercise the powers and shall administer and perform the functions and duties and shall enforce the provisions prescribed by this article. The above delegation of powers and enforcing authority shall not preclude other departments of the city government from enforcing those provisions of this article pertinent to the functions administered by them. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-66. - Right of entry. 
    The administrator of the division of housing improvement or his duly authorized representatives, upon presentation of proper identification to the owner, agent or tenant, may enter any building or structure used or intended to be used for purposes of human habitation during all reasonable hours to make inspections or examinations of the premises. Such inspections or examinations shall be made in such manner as to cause the least inconvenience to the occupants of the premises. 
    In cases of emergency where extreme hazards are known to exist which may involve the potential loss of life or severe property damage, the administrator or his authorized representatives may enter any such building or structure at any time, and the above limitations shall not apply. 
    The owner, agent or tenant of any such building or structure shall give the administrator or his authorized representatives free access thereto and to all parts thereof and to the premises on which it is located for the purpose of such inspection or examination. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-67. - Failure to permit inspection prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either the owner or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit, to refuse admittance thereto of the administrator of the division of housing improvement or his duly authorized representatives for the purpose of inspecting such premises. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-68. - Warrant to search premises. 
    If the owner or occupant of any dwelling or dwelling unit refuses admittance thereto of the administrator of the division of housing improvement or his duly authorized representatives for the purpose of making an examination or inspection of the premises, the administrator or his representative may make an affidavit before any judge of the municipal court of the city that he believes, or has reason to believe, that by a search of certain premises, designated in the affidavit, he will obtain evidence tending to reveal the existence of violations of this article. Upon receiving this affidavit, the judge shall issue a warrant authorizing the administrator of the division of housing improvement or his authorized representative to search the premises named in the affidavit and designated in the warrant to obtain evidence tending to reveal the existence of violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-69. - Inspections; record of violations. 
    The administrator of the division of housing improvement shall, of his own volition or upon receipt of a written and signed complaint, cause to be made such inspections as are necessary to determine the fitness of a dwelling unit for human occupancy. He shall make a record of every such inspection and of all violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-70. - Complaint and notice of hearing. 
    The administrator of the division of housing improvement shall cause to be served upon the owner of, or his agent, or the parties in interest in the dwelling or dwelling unit: 
(1)  A complaint listing the defects that must be corrected; and 
(2)  A notice that a hearing will be held before him or his designated representative at a place therein fixed not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days after the serving of the complaint and that the owner, or his agent, or the parties in interest, may file an answer to the complaint and appear in person, or otherwise, and give testimony at the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-71. - Order to improve; penalties. 
    If, after the notice and hearing required in section 5-70, the administrator of the division of housing improvement determines that the dwelling or dwelling unit under consideration is in one of the two (2) conditions listed below, he shall state in writing his findings of fact in support of that determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the owner thereof an order requiring him, to the extent and within the time specified in the order, to take the steps outlined below or to suffer the penalties indicated: 
(1)  If the determination is that the dwelling or dwelling unit is unfit for human habitation, the order shall require the dwelling or dwelling unit vacated and closed as a place for human habitation. Such order shall be served on the owner or his agent and on each tenant, and if the order is not complied with within the time specified therein, the administrator shall notify the department of police of the violation of the order, and the department of police shall enforce the order by evicting the occupants of such dwelling or dwelling unit. The administrator shall cause to be placed on the main entrance of every such dwelling or dwelling unit ordered vacated and closed a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation; the use or occupation of this building for human habitation is proclaimed unlawful." Any person who rents, leases, or permits the occupancy of such a dwelling or dwelling unit declared unfit for human occupancy, shall upon conviction, be penalized as provided in section 1-9. The administrator shall, within the limits of his own discretion, advise other units of the city government of his actions in ordering dwellings and dwelling units vacated and closed. 
(2)  If the determination is that the dwelling or dwelling unit, though not unfit for human habitation, does violate certain of the minimum housing standards of this article, the order shall require the owner to repair, alter or improve the dwelling or dwelling unit. If the owner fails to comply with such an order, he shall, upon conviction, be penalized as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-72. - Appeals. 
(a)  Whenever it is claimed that the true intent and meaning of this article or its application has been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted by the administrator of the division of housing improvement, or by his representatives, the owner or his duly authorized agent may appeal from such decision to the board of building standards and appeals. Notice of appeal shall be in writing on forms provided by the administrator and filed within thirty (30) days after the written decision is rendered. Appeals involving buildings or structures, which in the opinion of the administrator are unsafe or dangerous, may be required to be filed in a shorter period of time if such a shorter period is specified by the administrator in his order to the owner calling for corrective action. All orders appealed from shall be suspended as to their effectiveness until the appeal has been decided. 
(b)  The board of building standards and appeals, appealed to, shall within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the appeal, hold a hearing at which the appellant and the administrator or his representative shall be afforded full opportunity to be heard. Following the hearing, the board may vary the application of any of the minimum housing standards set forth in this article to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of this article or the public interest or when, in its opinion, the interpretation of the administrator or his representatives should be modified or reversed. The board shall, in all cases where it permits a variance or modifies an order, specify in what manner such variance or modification is made, the conditions upon which it is made, and the reasons therefor. 
(c)  Every decision of the board shall be final, subject however to such remedy as any aggrieved party might have at law or in equity. All decisions of the board shall be in writing, and a certified copy thereof shall be sent by mail or otherwise to the appellant; a copy shall be sent to the administrator. Each decision and copy thereof shall indicate how each member of the board shall be reached on each appeal without unreasonable or unnecessary delay following the hearing thereon. 
(d)  The administrator shall immediately take action in accordance with the decisions of the board. 
(e)  The board shall have jurisdiction over hearing and deciding appeals from the orders, decisions and rulings of the administrator of the division of housing improvement in the enforcement of this article. The board may adopt regulations governing its procedure not inconsistent with the provisions of this Code and other ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-73. - Citizen's advisory committee. 
    The mayor shall appoint a citizens' advisory committee consisting of eight (8) persons to advise and assist the mayor, the board of aldermen, the director of the department of safety and permits, and the administrator of the division of housing improvement in matters concerning the department and the division and to invite and stimulate the cooperation, interest and support of individual citizens, citizen groups, owners, occupants and tenants in the purposes of this article. The citizens' advisory committee shall act as a citizen committee in relation to the city's workable program for community development required by the federal committee and shall elect persons from among its membership to serve as an executive committee. The committee shall also aid and assist the department and the division in program planning and the establishment of policy under this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-74. - Restrictions on employees. 
    No employee connected with the division of housing improvement shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration or maintenance of a building, unless he is the owner of such building. No employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with his duties or with the interests of the division of housing improvement. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-75. - Liability under article. 
    Any officer or employee, or member of the board of housing adjustments and appeals, charged with the enforcement of this article, in the administration of his duties, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and any such officer, employee or member is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. Any suit brought against any such officer, employee or member because of this article shall be defended by the department of law until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-76. - Power over nuisances not affected. 
    Nothing in this article shall impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-77. - Applicability of other laws. 
    All of the minimum requirements established by this article shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the applicable ordinances of the city and laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-78. - Other laws not affected. 
    Nothing in this article abrogates or impairs the power of the courts or any department of the city to enforce any provisions of the other provisions of this Code or other ordinances or regulations or to prevent or punish violations thereof. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this article is for any reason held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-79. - Prohibited activities of unlicensed contractors; penalties. 
(a)  Person shall not: 
(1)  Practice contracting unless the person is the owner of the property or is licensed in the city; 
(2)  Use the name or title "electrical contractor," plumbing contractor," "air condition contractor," "building contractor," or "mechanical contractor" or words to that effect, or advertise himself or herself or a business organization as available to practice electrical, plumbing, or mechanical contracting, when the person is not then the holder of a valid licensed issued by the city; 
(3)  Present as his or her own license of another; 
(4)  Use or attempt to use a license that has been suspended, revoked, or placed on inactive or delinquent status; 
(5)  Employ persons who are not licensed to practice contracting; 
(6)  Knowingly give false or forged evidence to the Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement or a Kenner employee thereof; 
(7)  Operate a business organization engaged in contracting after sixty (60) days following the termination of its only qualifying agent without designating another primary qualifying agent; 
(8)  Conceal information relative to violations of this section; 
(9)  Commence or perform work for which a building permit is required pursuant to Kenner Law without the building permit being in effect; or 
(10)  Willfully or deliberately disregard or violate any municipal, parish or state statute relating to unlicensed, uncertified or unregistered contractors. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). On conviction for a second or subsequent offense, the offender shall be punished by at least a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and five (5) days in jail. 
(Ord. No. 9545, § 1, 8-16-07) 
Sec. 5-80. - Prohibited activities contractors without permits; penalties. 
(a)  A person shall not: 
(1)  Commence building or construction without the proper permits required by law; 
(2)  Commence building or construction, when the person is not then the holder of a valid licensed issued by the City of Kenner or without showing why the proposed building activity is exempt from licensure and executing an affidavit attesting to the claimed exemption; 
(3)  Make any material misrepresentation or false promise to another regarding the possession or necessity of a permit for a building project; 
(4)  Knowingly give false or forged evidence to the Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement or a Kenner employee thereof; 
(5)  Conceal information relative to violations of this part; 
(6)  Commence or perform work for which a building permit is required pursuant to Kenner law without the building permit being in effect; or 
(7)  Willfully or deliberately disregard or violate any municipal, parish or state statute relating to the requirements of building permits. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). On conviction for a second or subsequent conviction, the offender shall be punished by at least a minimum fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 9624, § 1, 2-14-08) 
Secs. 5-81-5-83. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS 

Sec. 5-84. - Establishment of standards generally. 
    The standards enumerated in the succeeding sections of this division are hereby declared to be the minimum standards for all dwellings and dwelling units used, or intended to be used, for human occupancy or habitation. Every such dwelling and dwelling unit shall comply with standards hereinafter prescribed. These standards shall constitute a basis for the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-85. - Drainage. 
    All courts, yards and other areas shall be properly drained so as to prevent the accumulation of water. Grading shall not permit water to drain to adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-86. - Fences and accessory structures. 
(a)  All fences and all accessory structures, including detached garages and sheds, shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition and in good repair. 
(b)  A fence is an erection constructed of wood (rails or stakes), wrought iron, solid plastic, chain-link, masonry, vegetation (hedge), or other similar materials between two contiguous estates, so as to divide them, or on an estate, so as to divide one part from another. 
(c)  In areas zoned residential, fences shall only be made of wood (rails or stakes), wrought iron, solid plastic, chain-link, masonry, and vegetation (hedge). 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-87. - Garbage, rubbish and ash containers. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be provided with such containers as may be necessary to hold all garbage, rubbish and ashes, and such containers shall be maintained in good repair and clean condition. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-88. - Exterior: foundation, walls and roof. 
    Every foundation wall, exterior wall and roof shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent proof. All foundation walls, exterior walls and roof shall be maintained in a safe manner and capable of supporting the loads which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. They shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. All wood and metal surfaces shall be protected from the adverse effects of weather by periodic application of paint or other protective coating. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-89. - Exterior doors, windows and screens. 
    Every window, exterior door and basement door shall be substantially weathertight, watertight, and rodent proof, and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. Every window or other exterior opening used for ventilation shall be provided with a screen covering the operable area. All screen covering shall be not less than sixteen (16) mesh per inch and shall provide protection against the entry of insects. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-90. - Exterior stairs, porches and railings. 
    Every exterior stair, porch, railing and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. Stairs and porches shall be kept free of anything which might impede safe and easy passage. 
    Every porch above the first story shall be provided with a railing at least two (2) feet six (6) inches above the porch floor; stairs leading to porches above the first story shall be provided with railings at least two (2) feet six (6) inches above the treads measured at the nosing and parallel to the run of the stairs. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-91. - Cleanliness; freedom from vermin infestation. 
    All dwellings, dwelling units, and all yards, lawns, courts, alleyways and other areas, including accessory structures, shall be kept clean and free from any accumulation of dirt, filth, garbage, rubbish or similar matter, and shall be kept free from vermin and rodent infestation. All structures shall be ratproofed in accordance with existing ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-92. - Interior hallways and exits. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have direct access to a street, to an open area with access to a street, or to a hallway, landing or stairway with access to a street or to an open area with access to a street. All multi-family dwellings in excess of two (2) stories in height shall have at least two (2) separate exits remote from each other which can be reached by travel in different directions, except that a dead-end corridor up to twenty (20) feet in length may be permitted. Such exits shall lead directly to a street, to an open area with access to a street, or to a hallway, landing or stairway with access to a street or to an open area with access to a street. Stairs and porches shall be kept free of anything which might impede safe and easy passage. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-93. - Interior floors, walls and ceilings. 
    Interior floors, walls and ceilings shall be kept in good repair and free from holes and dampness. Floor surfaces in bathrooms, water closet compartments, kitchens, and areas used for the preparation of food shall be substantially impervious to water and shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. Interior ceilings and walls shall be kept clean and free from loose paint, loose wallpaper, dirt and grime. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-94. - Minimum ceiling height. 
    Habitable and nonhabitable rooms shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven (7) feet. In rooms with sloping ceilings the required ceiling height shall be provided in at least fifty (50) per cent of the room and no portion of any room having a ceiling height of less than five (5) feet shall be considered as contributing to the minimum areas required by section 5-95. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-95. - Rooms occupied for sleeping purposes. 
    Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one (1) occupant shall contain at least seventy (70) square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than one (1) occupant shall contain at least thirty-five (35) square feet (see FHA MPS 602-3.1) of floor area for each occupant twelve (12) years of age and over and shall contain at least thirty-five (35) square feet of floor area for each occupant under twelve (12) years of age. No habitable room shall be less than seven (7) feet in any dimension. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-96. - Rooms for food preparation. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a kitchen. In every area used for the preparation of food there shall be a kitchen sink, space for a cooking appliance, and space for a refrigerator or icebox. Appropriate electrical, plumbing and gas outlets shall be provided for the above appliances. The area to be used for culinary purposes shall be in excess of the minimum habitable room area requirements but in no case shall the combination be less than seventy (70) square feet (see FHA MPS 602-3.1). 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-97. - Heating, plumbing and electrical. 
    All new heating, plumbing and electric installations shall be under permit in accordance with the rules and regulations of the appropriate regulatory agency of the city government. All installations and all heating, plumbing and electric appliances and fixtures shall be maintained in a safe operating condition. Plumbing appliances shall discharge into the municipal sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-98. - Bathroom facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a bathroom which shall be accessible from within the unit. Each bathroom shall be provided with a flush-type water closet, a lavatory, and a bathtub or shower in good working order. Each bathroom shall be used exclusively by the occupants of the dwelling unit and shall be so arranged as to afford privacy to the users thereof. No bathroom or water closet compartment shall be less than thirty (30) inches in width. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-99. - Laundry facilities. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a laundry tray or, in lieu thereof, with the necessary plumbing and electric services for the installation of an automatic washing machine. 
    In apartment houses, the number of laundry trays or the "roughing in" of the necessary electric and plumbing services shall be determined by the number of dwelling units in each apartment house as follows: 1 through 4, 1 for each unit; 5 through 10, 1 for every 2 units; 11 through 20, 1 for every 4 units; 41 through 80, 1 for every 5 units. 
    In all apartment houses consisting of five (5) or more apartments, the above required laundry facilities shall be located in a central laundry room or, in lieu thereof, each apartment shall be provided with its own laundry tray or the "roughing in" for electric and plumbing services. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-100. - Water heater. 
    Every dwelling unit shall be provided with a water heater which shall deliver an adequate supply of water at one hundred twenty (120) degrees Fahrenheit to every bathtub or shower, kitchen sink, bathroom lavatory and laundry facility. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-101. - Electrical service and outlets. 
    Every dwelling and dwelling unit shall be wired for electric service. Every habitable room shall contain at least two (2) well separated electric convenience outlets. In kitchens two (2) well separated wall-type electric convenience outlets and one ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture shall be provided. Every public hall, water closet compartment, bathroom, laundry room or furnace room shall contain at least one (1) electric light fixture. In addition to the electric light fixture in every bathroom and laundry room, there shall be provided at least one (1) electric convenience outlet. 
    At least one (1) source of general illumination in every bathroom shall be operated by a wall switch. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-102. - Light in public hallways, stairways. 
    Every exterior and interior hallway, stairway, and passageway used as a means of ingress or egress to any dwelling unit shall have sufficient sources of light to illuminate its entirety. The above requirement shall be considered to have been met if the total light source on each exterior or interior hallway, stairway, or passageway is equivalent to not less than one-half (1/2) watt per one (1) square foot of floor space illuminated. The distance between light sources shall not exceed twice the distance from the floor to the light source, and the distance from any light source and any wall shall not exceed the distance from the floor to the light source. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-103. - Lighting and ventilation. 
    Every habitable room shall contain a window or windows, other than a fixed window, which can be easily opened directly to the outside air, and the total area of such window or windows shall be not less than ten (10) per cent of the floor area of such room. In renovation, whenever walls or other portions of outside adjacent structures face a window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are located less than three (3) feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window area. 
    All window sashes shall be glazed and provided with suitable hardware and shall be made to open to an extent of not less than five (5) per cent of the floor area of such room. 
    In lieu of windows, a habitable room may be ventilated by mechanically-operated ventilating equipment with a minimum capacity of providing one (1) cubic foot of fresh air per minute per one (1) square foot of floor space of the room ventilated. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-104. - Lighting and ventilation in nonhabitable rooms. 
    Every nonhabitable room shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet compartments equipped with an approved ventilation system which is kept in continuous operation and which has an opening to the outside of not less than one hundred forty-four (144) square inches. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-105. - Heating facilities. 
    In every dwelling unit in which the system for heating is installed by the owner, the heating system shall be capable of heating each dwelling unit in which it is installed to a minimum temperature of plus seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three (3) feet above the floor when the exterior temperature is plus thirty (30) degrees Fahrenheit. 
    When such a system is not provided by the owner, each dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, gas vents, or electric outlets whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to furnish a minimum temperature of plus seventy (70) degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three (3) feet above the floor when the exterior temperature is thirty (30) degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-106. - Kerosene and flammable liquids. 
    The use of kerosene lamps in any dwelling or dwelling unit, other than in emergencies, and the use of kerosene stoves and heaters and other types of unapproved stoves and heaters are prohibited. 
    Flammable liquids in excess of five (5) gallons shall not be permitted in any room, unit, building, or area referred to in this article. Such flammable liquids shall be kept in covered metal containers with screw caps. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-107. - Lodging or rooming houses and boardinghouses; establishment of standards. 
    The standards enumerated in the succeeding sections of this article and those referred to in sections 5-85 through 5-106 are hereby declared to be the minimum standards for lodging or rooming houses and for boardinghouses and the rooms and units therein used, or intended to be used, for human occupancy or habitation. Every such house, room and unit shall comply with the standards hereinafter prescribed and referred to. These standards shall constitute a basis for the enforcement of this article. 
    Every rooming house, boardinghouse, and lodging house, and the units and rooms therein, shall comply with the minimum standards set forth in sections 5-85 through 5-106. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-108. - Same-Sanitary facilities. 
    In rooming and boardinghouses, one (1) bathroom shall be provided for each three (3) sleeping rooms. 
    In dwellings which are composed of not more than two (2) rooming or boarding rooms and a dwelling unit, only one (1) bathroom need be provided. 
    Each bathroom shall be provided with a flush-type water closet, a lavatory, and a bathtub or shower in good working condition. Each bathroom shall be arranged so as to afford privacy to the users thereof. 
    Access to bathrooms shall not be through habitable rooms. Bathrooms shall be located within the residence building served and shall be located not more than one (1) story away from any of the persons using such rooms. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-109. - Same-Screen doors. 
    Each entrance door to a room or unit in a rooming or boardinghouse shall be equipped with a self-closing device or a screen door equipped with a self-closing device. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-110. - Installation of smoke-detecting devices. 
    Every residential unit of any single or multifamily designation, or rooming house, boarding house, lodging house, hospital, school, day care center or nursery, and other such places where persons may rest or sleep, not necessarily limited to the specific types of structures enumerated in this section, and the units and rooms therein, shall have installed by the owner, smoke-detecting devices. These devices shall be of a type approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories and shall be provided for every eight hundred (800) square feet of living space and any fractional portion thereof exceeding four hundred (400) square feet. Units shall be provided in a location easily accessible to the human ear, in the event of the sounding of the alarm, in relationship to bedroom and other sleeping areas. A building permit shall not be issued for the construction or alteration or repairs of any structure of the aforementioned type, unless the locations of smoke-detecting devices are clearly designated in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Secs. 5-111-5-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOVING OF BUILDINGS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 5-120. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the term "building" is a structure designed, built or occupied as a shelter or roof inclosure for persons, animals or property and used for residential, business, mercantile, storage, commercial, industrial, institutional, assembly, educational or recreational purposes. The term "director of regulatory inspections" or his authorized representative is the building inspector of the city for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-121. - Enforcement. 
    The director of regulatory inspections of the city shall enforce and carry out the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-122. - Duties of permittee. 
    Every permittee under this article shall: 
(1)  Use designated streets. Move a building only over streets designated for such use in the written permit. 
(2)  Notify a revised moving time. Notify the director of regulatory inspections and the utility companies of the desired change in moving date and hours as proposed in the application and to set a new date. 
(3)  Notify of damage. Notify the director of regulatory inspections in writing of the damage done to the property located within the city within twenty-four (24) hours after the damage or injury has occurred. 
(4)  Display lights. Cause red lights to be displayed during the nighttime on every side of the building while standing on a street in such a manner as to warn the public of the obstruction and shall at all times erect and maintain barricades across the streets in such manner as to protect the public from damage or injury by reason of removal of the building. 
(5)  Street occupancy. Remove a building from the city streets after two (2) days of such occupancy unless an extension is granted by the director of regulatory inspections. 
(6)  Comply with governing law. Comply with the building code by zone, the zoning ordinance and all other applicable ordinances and laws upon relocating the building in the city. 
(7)  Clear old premises. Remove all rubbish and materials and fill all excavations to existing grade at the original building site so that the premises are left in a safe and sanitary condition. 
(8)  Remove service connections. See that the sewer line is plugged with a concrete stopper, the water shut off, and the meter returned to the office of the waterworks district involved. Permittee shall notify the telephone, gas, and electric service companies to remove their services. 
(9)  Time for completion ready for occupancy. Any building moved into this parish for relocation an any lot or lots of ground within the city shall be completed in accordance with the standards provided in the city building code, as amended, within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of moving. The applicant shall provide the director of regulatory inspections with a precise drawing outlining the location of the building upon the lot or lots. 
(10)  Compliance with other requirements. The applicant shall comply with all the requirements established by ordinance or administrative procedure of the various departments concerning streets, water, drainage, sewerage, and other off-site improvements. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-123. - Compliance with restrictive covenants governing building site required. 
(a)  No building permit shall be issued to anyone moving a residential structure to a location within the incorporated area of the city unless he can show compliance with the restrictive covenants governing the location of the proposed building site, and the department of regulatory inspections shall prepare reasonable regulations governing the necessary proof required to assure compliance with this article. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to those areas of the city not subject to restrictive covenants. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-124. - Permittee liable for expense above deposit. 
    The permittee under this article shall be liable for any expense, damage or cost in excess of deposited amounts or securities and the city attorney shall prosecute an action against the permittee if he does not comply with the requirements of this article and the cost thereof shall be charged against the general deposits. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Secs. 5-125-5-129. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 5-130. - Required. 
    No person shall move any building or structure over, along or across any highway, street, roadway or alley in the city without first obtaining a permit from the director of regulatory inspections; and without first obtaining the permit required by the department of public safety of the state, from the state police and complying with all of the regulations and directives of the department of public safety of the state relative to moving of buildings or structures over, along or across any highway, street, roadway or alley. Any person who shall move any building or structure into the city for relocation on any lot or lots of ground, shall obtain, in addition to the permit provided in this section, a building permit in accordance with the provisions of the city building code, adopted in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-131. - Application. 
    A person seeking issuance of a permit hereunder shall file an application for such permit with the director of regulatory inspections. 
(a)  Forms. The application shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the director of regulatory inspections and shall be filed in the office of the director of regulatory inspections. 
(b)  Contents. The application shall set forth: 
(1)  A description of the building proposed to be moved, giving street number, construction materials, dimensions, number of rooms and condition of exterior and interior. 
(2)  A description of the lot to which it is proposed such building be removed, giving lot, square, block, tract and subdivision. 
(3)  The portion of the lot to be occupied by the building when moved. 
(4)  The highways, streets and alleys over, along or across which the building is proposed to be moved. 
(5)  Proposed moving date and hour. 
(6)  Any additional information which the director of regulatory inspections shall find necessary to a fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. 
(c)  Accompanying papers. 
(1)  Certificate of ownership or entitlement. The applicant, if other than the owner, shall file with the application a written statement or bill of sale signed by the owner, or other sufficient evidence that he is entitled to move the building. 
(2)  The application shall be accompanied by a permit fee established by the director of regulatory inspections. 
(d)  Additional requirements. In order to protect the residential character of properties in the zoning districts classified as R-1 single-family residential, R-2 two-family residential, and R-3 multiple-family residential districts, no permit for the removal or moving of a building or structure into any of such districts shall be issued, regardless of the size of the building or structure, until all the following requirements have been complied with. 
(1)  Plans and specifications of the building or structure, including any proposed changes to be made thereto or thereof, shall be furnished by a registered state architect or a registered state civil engineer, who shall certify that the plans and specifications are correct, and that the building or structure is structurally sound. 
(2)  The plans and specifications of the building or structure on such new location referred to in paragraph (d)(1) above, shall show the floor plan, the number and location of the dwelling units, foundations, front yard, side yard and rear yard areas, off-street parking, sanitation and electrical wiring and shall show compliance with all other requirements of the building code of the city, as amended, and the Unified Development Code of the city, as amended, and all other applicable provisions of this Code and other city ordinances. 
(3)  Said building or structure shall further meet all the requirements of all existing applicable laws and particularly those listed in paragraph (d)(2) above, and the said engineer or architect must certify that the said building or structure is structurally sound after removal to the new site, before being occupied. 
(4)  The applicant shall file a sketch or plan for completing the structure with the director of regulatory inspections. He shall also sign an affidavit that the building or structure will be substantially complete in accordance with the sketch or plan within six (6) months from date of moving and shall be fully complete one (1) year from date of moving. 
(5)  The owner of said building or structure must furnish a surety bond or other security to the city, the condition of the surety bond or security to be that the building or structure will be installed at its new location in accordance with the provisions of the city building code and in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted by the owner in his application for a permit. The type and amount of security, whether a surety bond or other security shall be fixed by the department of regulatory inspections for the city, but in no case shall the amount of said security be less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or greater than the construction cost, when said costs exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), necessary be install the building or structure at its new location in accordance with the provisions of the city building code adopted in this chapter and in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted by the owner. 
(6)  The owner of said building or structure must furnish a certificate issued by a qualified pest control firm certifying that the building or structure is free of termite infestation. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99; Ord. No. 11,062, § 5, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 5-132. - Public utilities-Applicant to furnish route; receipt issued upon payment of expenses. 
    After an applicant has made application with the director of regulatory inspections for a permit under this article, he shall furnish the route approved by the director of regulatory inspections for the proposed move to Louisiana Power and Light Company, South Central Bell Telephone Company, and Louisiana Gas Service Company. When necessary arrangements have been made with Louisiana Power and Light Company and/or South Central Bell Telephone Company and/or Louisiana Gas Service Company in order to accommodate the applicant, the utilities, upon receipt of payment of the cost of rearranging its facilities, shall give applicant a written receipt for delivery to the director of regulatory inspections. If no rearrangements of facilities are necessary, the applicant must still secure a written statement from these utilities for delivery to the director of regulatory inspections. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-133. - Same-Time limit for notifying applicant of approval or disapproval; estimating costs; completing work. 
    Each utility company shall notify the applicant of its approval or written reasons for disapproval within forty-eight (48) working hours after receipt of the request as provided in section 5-132 by the utility company. If extensive work is entailed by the utility company, it shall proceed with the work as soon as possible and shall complete said work within seven (7) working days after deposit of estimated cost by the applicant. The utility shall estimate the advance cost within forty-eight (48) working hours after receipt of the request for permit by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-134. - Same-Where house is seventeen feet or less in height only written notice by mover necessary. 
    In cases where the total height of a building and moving equipment upon which said building is placed is seventeen (17) feet or less from the street surface to the highest projection upon the building, the director of regulatory inspections shall issue a permit without any reference whatsoever to the private utility companies set out in this division except that it shall be required that house movers shall give written notification to utility companies themselves forty-eight (48) hours in advance of moving houses seventeen (17) feet in height or under, and on houses over seventeen (17) feet in height, the usual procedure shall be followed as outlined in this article. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-135. - General deposit; certificate of bond or insurance to accompany application. 
    An application for a permit under this division shall be accompanied by a certificate of bond or insurance in a sum set by the director of regulatory inspections, but never less than that required by the Louisiana Public Service Commission, as an indemnity for any damage which the city may sustain by reason of damage or injury to any highway, street or alley, sidewalk, fire hydrant or other property of the city, which may be caused by or be incidental to the removal of any building over, along or across any street in the city, and to indemnify the city against any claims of damages to persons or private property and to satisfy any claims by private individuals arising out of, caused by or incidental to the moving of any building over, along or across any street in the city. Any unused deposit shall be returned to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-136. - Inspection prior to issuance. 
    The director of regulatory inspections, or an authorized representative, shall inspect the building and the applicant's equipment to determine whether standards for issuance of a permit are met prior to issuance of a permit required by this division. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-137. - Standards for issuance. 
    The director of regulatory inspections shall refuse to issue a permit if he finds: 
(1)  That any application requirement or any fee or deposit required has not been complied with. 
(2)  That the building is too large to move without endangering persons or property in the city. 
(3)  That the building is in such a state of deterioration or disrepair or is otherwise so structurally unsafe that it could not be moved without endangering persons and property in the city. 
(4)  That the building is structurally unsafe or unfit for the purpose for which moved, if the removal location is in the city. 
(5)  That the applicant's equipment is unsafe and that persons and property would be endangered by its use. 
(6)  That zoning or other ordinances would be violated by the building in its new location. 
(7)  That for any other reason persons or property in the city would be endangered by the moving of the building. 
(8)  The electrical and plumbing fixtures are not traceable. All electrical and plumbing fixtures and work must substantially comply with the electrical, plumbing, and building codes of the city, for new construction. 
(9)  That the appearance of the structure to be moved is so at variance with the existing, or intended plan for the immediate neighborhood, that it would clearly result in reduced property values, or would adversely affect the health, safety, and welfare of the city, and the residents of the immediate neighborhood. No moving or building permit for a house or structure to be moved from one location to another, shall be issued unless it has been found as a fact by the director of regulatory inspections after a view of the site of the proposed structure, and an examination of the application papers for a building permit, which shall include exterior elevations of the proposed structure, that the exterior architectural appeal and functional plan of the proposed structure will, when erected, not be so at variance with either the exterior architectural appeal, and functional plan of the structure already constructed, or in the course of construction in the immediate neighborhood or the character of the applicable district, established by the zoning ordinance of the city or any ordinance amendatory thereof, or supplemental thereto, as to cause a substantial depreciation in the property values of said neighborhood within said applicable district; and that the placing of said structure in the new location will not tend to change the pattern of the neighborhood which would cause or tend to downgrade the neighborhood so as to create slums or semi-slum areas. 
(10)  That the structure to be moved does not comply with the interest of the master plan for the City of Kenner, including the zoning ordinance of the city. No structures having actually been used in other areas for commercial use, or for double residences, or multiple dwellings shall be moved into an area of the city zoned more restrictive, for example, a structure used as a double house shall not be allowed to be relocated in a single-family residential area even if the proposed, or alleged use is single-family. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 5-138. - Fees and deposit. 
(a)  All fees and deposits and/or bonds or insurance policies shall be deposited with the director of regulatory inspections. 
(b)  Upon his refusal to issue a permit, the director of regulatory inspections shall return to the applicant all deposits, bonds and insurance policies. Permit fees filed with the application shall not be returned. 
(Ord. No. 8165, 9-2-99) 
Secs. 5-139-5-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION ORDINANCE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,356, §§ 1, 2, adopted Dec. 7, 2017, repealed the former Art. IV, §§ 5-146-5-150, 5-156, 5-160-5-166, 5-170-5-175, 5-180-5-190, and enacted a new Art. IV as set out herein. The former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10,292, § 1, adopted Sept. 15, 2011; and Ord. No. 10,366, § 1, adopted Apr. 5, 2012. 

DIVISION 1. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE, AND METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS 

Sec. 5-146. - Statutory authorization. 
    La.R.S. 38:84 delegates responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to minimize flood losses to comply with the Federal Flood Insurance Act. In the event of conflict between these regulations and state or federal laws or regulations the more restrictive requirement shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-147. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The special flood hazard areas and local flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental service, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(b)  Flood losses may be avoided by development standards described in this chapter including elevating new construction safely above the recognized flood hazard and minimizing cumulative effect of encroachments in special and local flood hazard areas, which may increase flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-148. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the principal purpose of this section to prescribe minimum requirements for land use and control measures for flood-prone areas in the Parish of Jefferson and the city as determined by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). These regulations are based upon relevant technical storm data specific to the parish and the city, as developed by the U.S. Corps of Engineers for the Federal Insurance Administration. These measures must be applied uniformly throughout the community to all privately and publicly owned land within flood-prone areas based upon standards set forth in these regulations as prescribed by the Federal Insurance Administration. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; and 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; and 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; and 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities located in special flood hazard areas and local flood hazard areas; and 
(6)  Ensure that current flood hazard data is available for property owners, prospective buyers, insurance agents, real estate agents, and other interested parties; and 
(7)  Ensure that those who develop in special flood hazard areas or local flood hazard areas do so pursuant to this chapter; and 
(8)  Ensure that those who develop special flood hazard areas or local flood hazard areas assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-149. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions to: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit development which is dangerous to health, safety, and property due to flood hazards, or which result in damaging increases in flood heights or velocities; and 
(2)  Require that development vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such development, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; and 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood waters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwater or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-150. - Department responsibility. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the floodplain administrator and/or CRS coordinator along with the department of inspection and code enforcement to coordinate the efforts of the departments of public works and the department of planning, relative to the implementation and enforcement of all regulations of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in connection with the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) and to submit to FEMA any and all necessary reports required thereby. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Secs. 5-151-5-155. - Reserved 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 5-156. - Definitions 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article it's most reasonable application. 
    Adverse impact means causing increased flood stages, increased flood velocity, or increased flows in or near a special or local flood hazard area, to an extent including to but not limited to an increase in base flood elevation equal or greater than foot on upstream, downstream, or adjacent properties. 
    Anchored means adequately secured to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's determination or action pursuant to, or interpretation of, any provision of this chapter. 
    Applicant means any person who submits an application for a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
    Appurtenant/accessory structure means a structure which is on the same parcel of property as the principal structure and the use of which is incidental to the use of the principal structure provided the structure is solely used for parking and storage or access and does not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet. (If exceeds 1,000 square feet, see Non-Residential.) 
    Area of future conditions flood hazard means the land area that would be inundated by the one (1) percent annual chance flood based on future conditions hydrology. 
    Base flood means a designated flood elevation on any property having a one (1) percent annual chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one (1) percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. The BFE is shown on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) and found in the accompanying flood insurance study (FIS) for zones AE and VE. 
    Basement means an area of a building having its floor below ground level on all sides. 
    Breakaway wall means a wall that is not part of the structural support of the building and is intended through its design and construction to collapse under specific lateral loading forces, without causing damage to the elevated portion of the building or supporting foundation system. 
    Building means a structure with two (2) or more outside rigid walls and fully secured roof, that is affixed to a permanent site; or a manufactured home build on a permanent chassis, transported to its site in one (1) or more sections, and affixed to a permanent foundation; or a travel trailer without wheels, build on a chassis and affixed to a permanent foundation. Note-Building does not mean a gas or liquid storage tank or a recreational vehicle, a park trailer, or other similar vehicle, except as described above. 
    Coastal high hazard area means special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) along the coast that has additional hazards due to wind and wave action. These areas are identified on flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) as zone VE. 
    Community rating system (CRS) means a program developed by FEMA to provide incentives for those communities in the regular program that has gone beyond the minimum floodplain management requirements to develop extra measures to provide protection from flooding. 
    Crawlspace means an under-floor space that has its interior floor area (finished or not) no more than five (5) feet below the top of next-higher floor. Crawlspaces generally have solid foundation walls. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Cumulative substantial damage means flood-related damages sustained by a structure on two (2) separate occasions during a rolling ten-year period for which the cost of repairing the flood damage, on the average, equals or exceeds twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred. 
    Date of construction means the date that the building permit was issued provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means for insurance purposes, a non-basement building, which has its lowest elevated floor, raised above ground level by foundation walls, shear walls, posts, piers, pilings, or columns. 
    Enclosure or enclosed area means an area below the base flood elevation that is either partially or fully shut with rigid walls. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Federal insurance administrator means the individual to whom the Secretary of the Department of Homeland Security has delegated the administration of the program (34F.R.2680-81, February 27, 1969). 
    Flood, flooding, or floodwater means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters, the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood boundary and floodway map mean the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
    Flood hazard boundary map means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the parish. 
    Flood insurance study (FIS) means the official report of the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the FEMA base flood, represented as a flood with a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to flooding in the base flood. 
    Floodplain management means the operation of a program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain. 
    Floodplain management regulations means this chapter, zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, special purpose ordinances such as grading and erosion control and other parish ordinances and regulations which control development in flood-prone areas. 
    Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. 
    Freeboard means an additional amount of height above the base flood elevation used as a factor of safely in determining the level at which a structure's lowest flood must be elevated or flood-proofed to be in accordance with state or community floodplain management regulations. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which must be located in close proximity to water, including only docking facilities, port facilities necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and repair facilities, and not including long-term storage or manufacturing facilities. 
    Garage means a building on the same lot as a dwelling or a portion of a main building for the housing of noncommercial vehicles of the occupants of the dwelling. A garage has an opening ten (10) feet or more in width. 
(1)  An attached garage is constructed horizontally adjacent to a house or underneath a house. 
(2)  A detached garage is not structurally connected to a house. 
    Grading means the act or result of digging, excavating, transporting, spreading, depositing, filling, compacting, settling, or shaping of land surfaces and slopes, and other operations performed by or controlled by human activity involving the physical movement of rock or soil. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed perimeter of a building. 
    Historic building means a pre-FIRM building or structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; or 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Land use and control measures means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, and other applications and extensions of the normal police power to provide standards and effective enforcement provisions for the prudent use and occupancy of flood-prone areas. 
    Letter of map amendment (LOMA) means an amendment to the currently effective FEMA map which establishes that a property is not located in a special flood hazard area (SFHA). A LOMA is issued only by FEMA. 
    Levee means a man-made structure or earthen embankment, which contains, controls or diverts the flow of water to provide protection from flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest adjacent grade means the lowest elevation of the ground surface after construction next to the perimeter of a building. 
    Lowest floor elevation means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the building in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this chapter. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one (1) or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" may include a mobile home that does not constitute a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel, or contiguous parcels, of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Market value means the price that the seller is willing to accept and the buyer is to pay on the open market and in an arm's length transaction. 
    New construction means any construction of a new structure commencing on or after the date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads, is completed on or after the issuance of the first FIRM. 
    Non-residential building means a commercial or mixed-use building where the use is commercial or non-habitational. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988 means the vertical control datum established for vertical control surveying in the United States of America based upon the General Adjustment of the North American Datum of 1988. It replaced the NGVD in 1929. 
    Out-as-shown determination means an alternative outcome of the FEMA LOMA review process stating that a specific property is located outside the special flood hazard area (SFHA) on the FIRM. 
    One hundred-year flood/storm means the highest level of flooding that, on the average, is likely to occur once in every one hundred (100) years; that has a one-percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. This is the regulatory standard also referred to as the "100-year flood." 
    Overtopping means the amount of water passing over the top of a structure as a result of wave run-up or surge action. 
    Ponding means the storage behind a water-retaining structure of water from interior runoffs or the overtopping of a structure. 
    Post-firm building means a building for which construction or substantial improvement occurred on or after July 9, 1976. 
    Pre-firm building means a building for which construction or substantial improvement occurred before July 9, 1976. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Used for temporary living quarters (less than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days); or for recreation, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Repetitive loss structure means a structure that has sustained flood-related damages resulting in two (2) or more claim payments of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each from the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) within any rolling ten-year period for a home or business. 
    Residential building means a non-commercial building, or portion thereof, designed for habitation by one (1) or more families or a mixed-use building that qualifies as a single-family, two (2) to four (4) family, or other residential building not including trailers, hotels, motels, and motor lodges. 
    Severe repetitive loss structure means a building that is covered under an NFIP flood insurance policy, having two (2) of the referenced claims within any ten-year period but greater than ten (10) days apart, and either: 
(1)  Has at least four (4) NFIP claim payments (including building and contents) over five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) each, and the cumulative amount of such claims payments exceeds twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00); or 
(2)  For which at least two (2) separate claims payments (building payments only) have been made with the cumulative amount of the building portion of such claims exceeding the fair market value of the building. 
    Special flood hazard area (SFHA) means an area shown in the FEMA flood insurance study and FIRM as zone AE or VE 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348) includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means, for floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank (not including water tanks smaller than five thousand (5,000) gallons), a manufactured home that is affixed to a permanent site or foundation and a travel trailer without wheels. For floodplain management purposes, a utility box is not a structure unless it is large enough to allow human walk-in access. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a building whereby the cost of restoring the building to the before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvements means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or alteration of a building, or any part thereof, the cumulative cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the building prior to start of construction. Start of construction is the point at which a building permit for the improvements is issued. The term does not include either: 
(1)  Any project for improvement of a building to correct existing violations or state or local, health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(2)  Any alteration of a "historic building" provided that the alteration would not preclude the building's continued designation as a "historic building". 
    Surge means the mass of water causing an increase in elevation of water surface at the time of a hurricane or storm. 
    Vertical datum means the National Geodetic Survey Vertical Datum North American Vertical Datum 1988 (NAVD88) used parish wide for floodplain mapping. 
    (Note: NAVD88 replaces the previous city vertical datum NGVD29. All flood insurance rate maps preceding March 23, 1995 are in NGVD29.) 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which allows development in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to currently adopted vertical datum, where specified, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in floodplain areas. 
    Watercourse means a river, stream, creek, tributary, basin, lake, pond, waterway, or channel, natural or man-made having a defined bed and banks on or over which water flows at least periodically. 
    Zone AE means a special flood hazard area as shown in the FEMA flood insurance study and depicted on the FIRM with an assigned base flood elevation. 
    Zone VE means a special flood hazard area as shown in the FEMA flood insurance study and depicted on the FIRM with an assigned base flood elevation. 
    Zone X, X-Protected by Levee , and 0.2% Chance means a local flood hazard area as shown in the FEMA flood insurance study and depicted on the FIRM. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Secs. 5-157-5-159. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5-160. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) and local flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-161. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The special flood hazard areas represented as zone AE and zone VE identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the most recent effective flood insurance study (FIS) dated February 2, 2018 for the Parish of Jefferson and accompanying flood insurance rate maps and their subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. This FIS and FIRM are the minimum area of applicability of this chapter. Current and historic maps are on file with the parish department of floodplain management and hazard mitigation. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-162. - Basis for establishing the areas of local flood hazard. 
    The areas of local flood hazard are represented by zones X, X-Protected by Levee, and 0.2% Chance of Flooding by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the most recent effective flood insurance study (FIS) dated February 2, 2018 for the Parish of Jefferson and accompanying flood insurance rate maps and their subsequent amendments and/or revisions. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-163. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be filled, graded, developed, constructed, reconstructed, rehabilitated, or altered without complying with the terms of this chapter and 44 CFR Part 60. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-164. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, deed restrictions or ordinances. Where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-165. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be considered as minimum requirements and shall be liberally construed in favor of the city and shall not be deemed to limit or repeal any other powers granted by state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-166. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside of areas designated as special flood hazard areas or local flood hazard areas or uses allowed within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the parish, any officer or employee thereof, for any damages or injuries that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Secs. 5-167-5-169. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 5-170. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The floodplain administrator and/or CRS coordinator are hereby authorized to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (Emergency Management and Assistance-National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management in conjunction with the departments of inspection and code enforcement, public works, and planning. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-171. - Responsibilities of the floodplain administrator/CRS coordinator. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator/CRS coordinator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
(a)  Review and use of any other base flood data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, other flooding studies, measured high water elevations from historic flooding events, local topography, or other available information in order to administer this chapter and establish base flood elevations. Any base flood elevation established by the floodplain administrator shall not be lower than the base flood elevation established in the FIS for the same location. 
(b)  Notification of other agencies. In alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
(1)  Notify affected communities prior to alteration or relocation; 
(2)  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and 
(3)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
(c)  Map determinations. Make interpretations as to the location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard where there is conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. 
(d)  Map changes. Notify FEMA of changes to the floodplain. 
(e)  Community rating system. Prepare, obtain, and maintain all documentation necessary for the annual certification of the community rating system program review and designated renewal period to complete certification of the program. 
    Director of the department of inspection and code enforcement or designee shall ensure that permits issued: 
(a)  Comply with general standards. Any new or substantial damage/improvement structure within zones AE and VE (SFHAs) complies with the general standards of this chapter. 
(b)  Comply with elevation standards. 
(1)  The elevation of any new or substantial damage/improvement structure within zones AE and VE (SFHAs) complies with the elevation standards of this chapter; and 
(2)  The elevation of new structures within zone X (local flood hazard) complies with the elevation standards of this chapter. 
(c)  Review elevation certificate. 
(1)  Upon application for a building permit, notation of the required first floor elevation shall be made on the face of building permits. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a completion certificate a final elevation certificate shall prove the structure meets the elevation standards of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-172. - Securing a permit. 
(a)  In the city, it shall be unlawful to proceed with any new development, construction, substantial improvement, to include "repetitive loss" and "substantial damaged structures", or manufactured homes, without having obtained a permit properly numbered and approved from the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the department of inspection and code enforcement to see that such work requiring a permit is authorized. All work must comply with the building code, as well as this chapter, and shall be subject to inspection whether a permit is required or not, and is subject to citation at the discretion of the director. 
(c)  All necessary permits must be received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including Section 404 of the Federal Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1973, 33 U.S.C. 1334. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-173. - Permit application. 
    Application for a floodplain development building permit shall be presented to the department of inspection and code enforcement on forms furnished by the department and may include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  Plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions; and 
(2)  Proposed elevation in NAVD 88 to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed. A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood-proofed structure shall meet the flood proofing criteria of this chapter; 
(3)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
(4)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-174. - Permit review. 
    Approval or denial of a floodplain development building permit by the department of inspection and code enforcement shall be based on all of the provisions of this chapter and may consider the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; and 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; and 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; and 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; and 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; and 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems; and 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; and 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Secs. 5-175-5-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - STANDARDS OF CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 5-181. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards, the following provisions for permits are required for all new construction and substantial damage/improvement to insure sites are reasonably safe from flooding: 
(1)  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the building resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads including the effects of buoyancy. All manufactured homes shall also meet the standards of section 14-06.05. 
(2)  Construction materials and methods. All new construction and substantial damage/improvement shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage and using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during flooding. 
(3)  Tanks. Underground and above-ground tanks shall be designed, constructed, installed and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement resulting from floodwater loads, including the effects of buoyancy, hydrostatic pressure, and velocity. Tank inlets, fill openings, outlets, and vents shall be installed one (1) foot above the base flood elevation or fitted with covers designed to prevent the inflow of floodwater and outflow of the contents of the tank during the base flood. 
(4)  Foundations. Foundations and walls constructed below the base flood elevation shall be vented to equalize hydrostatic pressures. 
(5)  Vents. Vent openings shall be permanent openings in the walls that allow for the free passage of water automatically in both directions without human intervention. Such venting shall be on at least two (2) sides of the structure, or enclosure, have a bottom at no more than one (1) foot above the ground elevation. The total area of such venting shall be at least one (1) square inch per square foot of enclosed footprint. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or automated float control in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin TB #1-08. Foundations and walls below the base flood elevation shall be constructed of flood resistant materials in accordance with FEMA Technical Bulletin TB #2-08. Alternatively, the project proponent may submit a design that will allow for automatic equalization of hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls, signed and stamped by a registered civil engineer and approved by the floodplain administrator. A window, a door, or a garage door is not considered a vent opening. If there are multiple enclosed areas within the foundation, each area must be vented as herewith described. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-182. - Elevation standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards (zone AE and VE) and areas of local flood hazard (zone X, X-Protected by Levee, and 0.2% Annual Chance), the following higher regulatory provisions for permits are required for all new construction and substantial damage/improvement (as further denied below) to insure sites are reasonably safe from flooding. In all instances of higher regulatory standards written below the term lowest floor includes basement, mechanical and utility equipment, and ductwork. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the department of inspection and code enforcement that the standard of this chapter is satisfied. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-183. - Residential elevation-New construction. 
    Permits issued for new construction of any residential structure, must have the required NAVD 88 elevation of the lowest floor or lowest horizontal portion of the structural member and the base flood elevation noted on the permit. 
(1)  In zone X, X-Protected by Levee, and 0.2% Annual Chance inside the hurricane storm damage risk reduction system (HSDRRS), the lowest floor shall be at the highest of either: 
a.  Eighteen (18) inches above the centerline of the street; or 
b.  -3.5 NAVD 88. 
(2)  In zone AE the lowest floor shall be at the highest of either: 
a.  The BFE on the FIRM; or 
b.  Eighteen (18) inches above the centerline of the street; or 
c.  -3.5 NAVD 88. 
(3)  In zone VE, the bottom of the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) shall be: 
a.  At the BFE on the FIRM; and 
b.  The space below the lowest floor shall be free of obstructions or shall be constructed of breakaway walls. Total floor area of any enclosed area below the BFE shall not exceed two hundred ninety-nine (299) square feet, including breakaway walls; and 
c.  Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-184. - Residential elevation-Substantial damage/improvement. 
    Permits issued for substantial damage/improvement of any residential structure, must have the required NAVD 88 elevation of the lowest floor (including basement) and the base flood elevation noted on the permit. 
(1)  In zone AE the lowest floor shall be at the highest of either: 
a.  The BFE on the FIRM; or 
b.  Eighteen (18) inches above the centerline of the street. 
(2)  In zone VE, the bottom of the bottom of the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns)shall be: 
a.  At the BFE on the FIRM; and 
b.  The space below the lowest floor shall be free of obstructions or shall be constructed of breakaway walls. Total floor area of any enclosed area below the BFE shall not exceed two hundred ninety-nine (299) square feet, including breakaway walls; and 
c.  Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-185. - Non-residential elevation and/or floodproofing-New construction. 
    Permits issued for new construction of any non-residential structure including accessory structure greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet, must have the required NAVD 88 elevation of the lowest floor or lowest horizontal portion of the structural members and the base flood elevation noted on the permit. In lieu of meeting the elevation requirement stated below, a non-residential structure in zone X and zone AE may be flood-proofed so that structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including the effects of buoyancy and be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. 
(1)  In Zone X, X Protected by Levee, and 0.2% Annual Chance inside the hurricane storm damage risk reduction system (HSDRRS), the lowest floor shall be at the highest of either: 
a.  Six (6) inches above the centerline of the street; or 
b.  -3.5 NAVD 88. 
(2)  In zone AE the lowest finished floor of the building shall be at the highest of either: 
a.  The BFE on the FIRM; or 
b.  Six (6) inches above the centerline of the street; or 
c.  -3.5 NAVD 88. 
(3)  In zone VE, the bottom of the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) shall be: 
a.  At the BFE on the FIRM; and 
b.  The space below the lowest floor shall be free of obstructions or shall be constructed of breakaway walls. Total floor area of any enclosed area below the BFE shall not exceed two hundred ninety-nine (299) square feet, including breakaway walls; and 
c.  Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-186. - Non-residential elevation and/or floodproofing-Substantial damage/improvement. 
    Permits issued for substantial damage/improvement of any non-residential structure including accessory structure greater than one thousand (1,000) square feet, must have the required NAVD 88 elevation of the lowest floor or lowest horizontal portion of the structural members and the base flood elevation noted on the permit. In lieu of meeting the elevation requirement stated below, a non-residential structure in zone AE may be flood-proofed so that structural components are capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads including the effects of buoyancy and be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this section are satisfied. 
(1)  In zone X, X-Protected by Levee, and 0.2% Annual Chance inside the hurricane storm damage risk reduction system (HSDRRS), the lowest floor shall be at the highest of either: 
a.  Six (6) inches above the centerline of the street; or 
b.  -3.5 NAVD 88. 
(2)  In zone AE inside the hurricane storm damage risk reduction system (HSDRRS), the lowest finished floor of the building shall be at the highest of either: 
a.  The BFE on the FIRM; or 
b.  Six (6) inches above the centerline of the street; or 
c.  -3.5 NAVD 88. 
(3)  In zone AE outside the hurricane storm damage risk reduction system (HSDRRS), the lowest finished floor shall be at the BFE on the FIRM plus two (2) feet of freeboard. 
(4)  In zone VE, the bottom of the lowest horizontal portion of the structural members of the lowest floor (excluding pilings or columns) shall be: 
a.  At the BFE on the FIRM; and 
b.  The space below the lowest floor shall be free of obstructions or shall be constructed of breakaway walls. Total floor area of any enclosed area below the BFE shall not exceed two hundred ninety-nine (299) square feet, including breakaway walls; and 
c.  Fill shall not be used for structural support of buildings. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-187. - Enclosure standards. 
    New construction and substantial damage/improvement, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two (2) openings on separate walls having a total net area of not less than one (1) square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided; and 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade. Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(3)  In areas outside the hurricane storm damage risk reduction system (HSDRRS), the total floor area of any enclosed area below the BFE of a residential structure shall not exceed two hundred ninety-nine (299) square feet, including breakaway walls. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-188. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
    All subdivision development proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall: 
(1)  Be consistent with this chapter; and 
(2)  Meet floodplain development permit requirements of this chapter; and 
(3)  Generate base flood elevation data for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to this chapter; and 
(4)  Have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(5)  Have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and 
(6)  Detain stormwater runoff as follows: 
a.  For all proposed developments, other than single-family residential, totaling ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more (all phases), and all single-family residential developments totaling five (5) acres or more (all phases), the ten-year storm event post-development rate of run-off shall not exceed the ten-year storm event pre-development rate of run-off. To insure that the post-development rate of run-off does not exceed the pre-development rate of run-off, on site detention will be required in a manner approved by the city department of public works. The detention system cannot release water from the site at a rate greater than the pre-development rate of run-off; and 
b.  The design concepts for detention facilities and determination of storm run-off shall be consistent with sound hydrological and hydraulic engineering principles and practices, and the provisions of the Jefferson Parish "Storm Drainage Design Manual" dated 1981, or any subsequent revision thereof, and "Parking Lot Storm Run-Off Detention Manual" prepared by the engineering division of the parish department of public works. The director of public works shall approve any and all modifications to the drainage manuals; and 
c.  The developer shall submit drainage design calculations including a drainage map along with engineering plans to the city department of public works for approval by the director of the department of public works. The drainage map shall include a lien diagram reflecting the existing drainage system from the outfall end of the proposed development to the receiving outfall canal, reflected in the applicable current master drainage plan. The developer shall also submit calculations showing the impacts to the detention facility from a one hundred-year storm event; and 
d.  Drainage calculations shall consider all relevant information that would affect the hydraulics of the drainage system including, but not limited to, the following: (1) drainage basin characteristics; (2) system hydraulics; and (3) other external influences upstream and downstream from the drainage system that may impact or be impacted by the proposed system. Drainage calculations shall consist of: (1) ten-year pre-development flow; (2) ten-year post-development flow; (3) description of release facility and volume of release versus depth of storage in detention facility for ten-year and one hundred-year storm events; (4) maximum depth of water in the detention facility for design storms; (5) description of impact to the proposed facility resulting from increased depth of storage; and (6) the description of how the system will be maintained; and 
e.  Unless unstable or highly erosive soil conditions indicate a lower design velocity is desirable, or unless ditch paving at the outlet is provided, the maximum velocity for culvert design shall adhere to the criteria in the Jefferson Parish "Storm Drainage Design Manual" dated 1981, or any subsequent revision thereto; and 
f.  The city director of the department of public works shall review for approval each proposed development covered by this section prior to the issuance of permits to proceed with said development. Any decision in which the city director of public works denies a request or which requires a variance shall be submitted to the board of zoning adjustments for review and recommendation. Decisions of the board of zoning and adjustments recommending approval of a variance shall be submitted for final approval by the city council; and 
g.  Any denial of a variance request by the board of zoning and adjustments may be appealed to the city council for final resolution. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-189. - Standards for manufactured homes. 
    All new or substantial damage/improvement manufactured homes within the special flood hazard area outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, in a new or existing manufactured home park or subdivision, in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage and shall: 
(1)  Be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces including but not limited to: 
a.  Over-the-top ties at each of the four (4) corners of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate locations, and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring one (1) additional tie per side; 
b.  Frame ties at each corner of the home with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, and manufactured homes less than fifty (50) feet long requiring four (4) additional ties per side; 
c.  All components of the anchoring system be capable of carrying a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds; and 
d.  Any additions to the manufactured home are similarly anchored. 
(2)  Be elevated on a permanent foundation of compacted fill or pilings such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated at or above the elevation standards of this chapter (section 14-06). 
a.  If pilings are used for elevation: 
i.  Lots shall be large enough to permit steps; and 
ii.  Piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no more than ten (10) feet apart; and 
iii.  Reinforcement shall be provided for pilings more than six (6) feet above the ground level; and 
(3)  Adequate access and drainage shall be provided and access for a hauler are provided; and 
(4)  Upon the completion of an installation the elevation of the lowest floor shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, and verified by the community building-inspector to be properly elevated; and 
(5)  No new manufactured home shall be placed in a coastal high hazard area, except in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-190. - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
    All new recreational vehicle parks or additions to parks in a special flood hazard area shall clearly post the hazard and methods of flood warning. All recreational vehicles placed on sites within special flood hazard areas shall: 
(1)  Be on wheels, mobile, fully licensed, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices; and 
(2)  Be on the site fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days; and 
(3)  Have no attached additions on adjoining foundation; or 
(4)  Meet the anchoring and elevation requirements for manufactured homes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-191. - Certification requirements. 
    When development occurs on property that has been identified by the floodplain administrator as being located in a special flood hazard area or local flood hazard area, the following shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided to the department of inspection and Code enforcement: 
(1)  Flood zone; and 
(2)  Base flood elevation; and 
(3)  Elevation of the lowest floor of all detached buildings; and 
(4)  Elevation of the lowest adjacent grade; and 
(5)  Elevation of the highest adjacent grade; and 
(6)  Elevation of the centerline of the street; and 
(7)  Elevation to which a structure has been flood-proofed (if applicable); and 
(8)  Elevation of swimming pools, utilities, and any other structures, as requested by the floodplain administrator; and 
(9)  Calculation of vent space for crawlspaces. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
DIVISION 6. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 5-192. - Variances. 
    The board of zoning and adjustments, as established by the community, shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter. 
(1)  Any applicant for a permit from the department of inspection and code enforcement required by this chapter whose application has been refused or revoked, or any person who has been ordered by the director in incurring any expense, or any person who feels that there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships involved in carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, or where it is alleged that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or any determination made by the director may, within fifteen (15) days after being notified of such refusal or order, appeal from the decision of the director to the board of zoning and adjustments by giving the director notice in writing that he does so appeal. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the board of zoning and adjustments to: 
a.  Hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the director in the enforcement of this chapter; and 
b.  Hear and decide all matters referred to it or upon which it is required to pass under this chapter; and 
c.  Pass upon appeals where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, to vary or modify the application of any of the regulations or provisions of this chapter relating to the construction or alteration of buildings or structures so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done; and 
d.  Interpret the intent or meaning of this chapter and so advise the director and to recommend to the council such amendments or revisions which may be required to clarify the wording as well as recommend amendments or revisions as may be required from time to time to meet the changing condition. 
(3)  Variances may be issued: 
a.  In cases generally limited to construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood elevation, in conformance with: 
1.  A showing of good and sufficient cause; and 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in: 
i.  Increased flood heights; or 
ii.  Additional threats to public safety; or 
iii.  Extraordinary public expense; or 
iv.  Create nuisances; or 
v.  Cause fraud on or victimization of the public; or 
vi.  Conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
b.  Only upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard to affect relief and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use; and 
c.  In situations which could result in an undue delay in construction when all of the above conditions have been met and the requested variance will not increase the cost of the flood insurance, the board may grant a variance. 
(4)  In order to execute the above mentioned powers, the board of zoning and adjustments may reverse or affirm wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination of the director, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matters on which it is required to pass under this chapter. 
(5)  Decisions of the board of zoning and adjustments should state the variances or denials granted and conditions, if any, as they may require in such action. The decisions shall be filed in the department of inspection and code enforcement within ten (10) working days after the hearing and a certified copy sent to the applicant by certified mail. The director must abide in the actions taken by the board. 
(6)  In those instances where a variance is granted, the appellate shall be given a written notice that a structure built with the lowest floor elevation below the BFE will then have the cost of flood insurance commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-193. - Appeals. 
    If the applicant for a permit, the permittee, or other persons whose property rights may be affected, is dissatisfied with any determination made by the floodplain administrator or the board of zoning and adjustments, such person may appeal to the city council. Any such appeal shall be in writing, shall state the specific reasons therefore and grounds asserted for relief, and shall be filed with the clerk of the city council. If it is deemed that the proposed variance may negatively affect the city's standing in the National Flood Insurance Program, adequate public notice and public hearing shall be required before the city council may act on the proposal. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-194. - Recording of a variance affidavit. 
    Any applicant whose variance from the base flood elevation is approved by the board of zoning and adjustments or the city council shall record in the conveyance records of the clerk of court of the parish an affidavit indicating that the applicant's property does not meet the required base flood elevation of the parish. Verification of the applicant's recorded affidavit shall be presented to the department of inspection and code enforcement prior to the issuance of a use and occupancy certificate. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-195. - Penalties for non-compliance. 
    Under the authority of the building code of the city, the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement is authorized to enforce the provisions of the current adopted technical codes. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. The owner or general agent of the building or premises where a violation of any regulation pertinent to the special flood hazard areas has been committed or exists, or the general agent, architect, building contractor, or any other person who assists in any violation of the pertinent flood regulations or who maintains any building or premises in which the violation exists shall be punished as provided in chapter 1, section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-196. - Adjoining communities. 
(a)  Consideration of overall flood management in the metropolitan New Orleans area shall be given to individual floodplain management programs in the parishes of Jefferson, Orleans, Plaquemines, and St. Charles Parishes. 
(b)  In riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating office will be notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and copies of such notification will be submitted to FIA. The flood-carrying capacity of altered or relocated portions of any watercourse will be maintained. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Sec. 5-197. - Priority of flood-prone area regulations. 
    All regulations described in this chapter represent minimum standards and supersede all existing ordinances which require lower standards. 
(Ord. No. 11,356, § 2, 12-7-17) 
Secs. 5-198-5-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,455, §§ 1-7, adopted Sept. 20, 2012, did not specify manner of inclusion; hence, codification as Art. V, §§ 5-201-5-207 was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 5-201. - Legislative findings, intent and purpose. 
(a)  The City of Kenner hereby adopts and incorporates into this article the above recitals, as if fully restated herein. 
(b)  The City of Kenner finds that abandoned real property is unsightly, unsafe and has a negative impact on the community. The City of Kenner hereby declares that all abandoned residential property in the City of Kenner that has been foreclosed upon or is subject of foreclosure actions or proceedings is a public nuisance, the abatement of which pursuant to the city's police power, is hereby declared to be necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Kenner. 
(c)  It is the intent and purpose of this article to protect and preserve public safety, security, and quiet enjoyment of occupants, abutters, and neighborhoods by: 
(1)  Identifying vacant properties; 
(2)  Requiring all mortgage holders, including lenders, trustees, and service companies, to register abandoned residential properties that have been foreclosed upon or are the subject of foreclosure actions or proceedings; and 
(3)  Regulating the maintenance of abandoned residential properties that have been foreclosed upon or are the subject of foreclosure actions or proceedings, to prevent blighted and unsecured residences. 
(Ord. No. 10,455, § 1, 9-20-12) 
Sec. 5-202. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates and requires a different meaning. 
    Abandoned residential property shall mean one-to-four-family residential property that is vacant as the result of the relinquishment of physical possession or control by a homeowner or any other person or entity. Property may be deemed abandoned when there is evidence of conditions, taken separately or as a whole, that would lead a reasonable person to conclude that the property was unoccupied, including but not limited to evidence of vacancy. For purposes of this article only, property does not include property owned or subject to the control of the city or any of its governmental bodies. 
    Code enforcement inspector or police officer means any authorized agent or employee of the City of Kenner whose duty it is to assure code compliance or a police officer for the City of Kenner. 
    Days means consecutive calendar days. 
    Evidence of vacancy shall mean a condition that on its own, or combined with other conditions present, would lead a reasonable person to believe that the property is vacant. Such conditions include but are not limited to overgrown or dead vegetation, accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, or mail, past due utility notices or disconnected utilities, accumulation of trash, junk or debris, the absence of window coverings such as curtains, blinds or shutters, the absence of furnishings or personal items consistent with residential habitation, and statements by neighbors, passersby, delivery agents, or government employees that the property is unoccupied. 
    Foreclosure means the legal process by which a parcel, tract, lot or other defined area of real property, placed as security for a real estate loan, is prepared for sale by the lender/mortgagee to satisfy the debt if the borrower/mortgagor defaults. This definition shall include all processes, activities and actions, by whatever name, associated with the described process. 
    Local means within the boundaries of the Parish of Jefferson. 
    Local agent means the agent designated by the mortgage holder upon registration as required under this article. 
    Maintenance for purposes of this article only, includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  The property shall be kept free of weeds, grass, vegetation growth between sidewalk and/or driveway flags or from cracks in the pavement, dry brush, dead vegetation, trash, junk, debris, building materials, rodent harborage, any accumulation of newspapers, circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state or municipality law, discarded items including, but not limited to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, printed material, signage, containers, equipment, construction materials, or any illegal outside storage of vehicles. Property subject to this article must comply with the minimum security fencing, barrier and maintenance requirements of the municipality building, construction, and property maintenance codes. 
(2)  The property shall be maintained free of graffiti, tagging or similar markings by removal or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the color of the exterior structure. 
(3)  The property shall be landscaped and properly maintained. Landscaping includes, but is not limited to, grass, ground covers, bushes, shrubs, hedges or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark designed and maintained in an appropriate manner. Landscaping does not include weeds, gravel, broken concrete, asphalt, decomposed materials, plastic sheeting, indoor-outdoor carpet, or any similar material. Maintenance, as defined in this subsection includes, but is not limited to, regular watering, irrigation, cutting, pruning and mowing of landscaping and removal of all trimmings. 
(4)  Pools, spas, and other water features shall be kept in working order or drained and kept dry to ensure that the water remains clear and free of pollutants and debris, and must comply with the minimum security fencing, barrier and maintenance requirements of the municipality building, construction, and property maintenance codes. 
(5)  Properties subject to this section shall be maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. Secure manner includes, but is not limited to, repairing or replacing broken glass windows, repairing or replacing exterior doors, repairing or replacing soffit, fascia, shutters, and siding, repairing or replacing fences, the closure and locking of windows, doors (walk-through, sliding and garage), gates and any other opening of such size that it may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure(s). Broken windows and doors must be repaired or replaced within forty-five (45) days of notice. Boarding of broken windows and doors by the owners and/or mortgage holders shall be used only as a temporary corrective measure within the forty-five (45) days. For purposes of this article only, the time delays regarding boarding do not apply to governmental entities or its agents. 
    Mortgage holder means the creditor, including but not limited to, trustees; service companies; lenders in a mortgage agreement; any agent, servant, or employee of the creditor; any successor in interest; or any assignee of the creditor's rights, interests or obligations under the mortgage agreement. For purposes of this article only, the term mortgage holders do not apply to governmental entities. 
    Owner means any person with care, custody, or control of the property at issue including, but not limited to, record owners, seizing creditors, mortgage holders, lienholders, loan servicers of foreclosed property pending title transfer, or an agent or assignee of the seizing creditor, mortgage holders, lien holders, or loan servicer. 
    Securing means any measures that assist in making the property inaccessible to unauthorized persons. 
(Ord. No. 10,455, § 2, 9-20-12) 
Sec. 5-203. - Registration of abandoned residential properties; duty to provide written notice of abandoned property. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an action to foreclose upon a mortgage or similar instrument, all mortgage holders must register with the City of Kenner Inspection and Code Enforcement Department, Office of Occupational License, on forms provided by the department or, when available, electronically, all abandoned residential property within ten (10) days after the owner and/or mortgage holder determine the property is abandoned. The owner and/or mortgage holder must designate and retain a local individual or local property management company as the local agent responsible for the security and maintenance of the property. All registrations must state the property address; the owner's name, mailing address, and telephone number; the mortgage holder's name, mailing address, and telephone number; and the local agent's name, mailing address, telephone number and email address. Mailing addresses may not be a post office box. This registration must also certify that the property was inspected and is abandoned. 
(b)  All property registrations are valid for one (1) calendar year. Subsequent annual registrations and fees are due within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the previous registration. 
(c)  Once the property is no longer abandoned or is sold, the owners and/or mortgage holders must provide proof of sale or written notice and proof of occupancy to the City of Kenner Inspection and Code Enforcement Department, Office of Occupational Licenses. 
(d)  Any owner or mortgage holder that has registered a property under this article must report any change of information contained in the registration within ten (10) days of the change. 
(Ord. No. 10,455, § 3, 9-20-12) 
Sec. 5-204. - Maintenance requirements. 
(a)  All owners and/or mortgage holders are responsible for maintaining their abandoned residential properties in accordance with the provisions of this article and all other applicable City of Kenner codes and ordinances. 
(b)  If the of the property is a company and/or mortgage holder, the owner shall contract with the owner's local agent to perform monthly inspections on the property, as required by subsection 5-206(a) of this article, to verify compliance with the requirements of this article, and any other applicable laws, for the duration of the abandonment. 
(c)  Properties subject to this article must be maintained in accordance with the relevant sanitary codes, building codes, and local regulations concerning external and/or visible maintenance. 
(d)  Adherence to this article does not relieve the owner of any applicable obligations set forth elsewhere in the City of Kenner Code of Ordinances. It is recommended that the owner and/or mortgage holder also contact the respective homeowner association regarding any covenants, conditions and restrictions and/or homeowner's association rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10,455, § 4, 9-20-12) 
Sec. 5-205. - Security requirements. 
(a)  All owners and/or mortgage holders are responsible for maintaining their abandoned properties in a secure manner so as not to be accessible to unauthorized persons. 
(b)  A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such size that may allow a child to access the interior of the property and/or structure. Broken windows shall be secured by reglazing or replacing of the window. 
(c)  Any excavations, swimming pools or other unattractive nuisances must be filled in with dirt or properly closed. 
(Ord. No. 10,455, § 5, 9-20-12) 
Sec. 5-206. - Inspections. 
(a)  The owner's local agent shall inspect the property on a monthly basis to ensure that the property is in compliance with this article. 
(b)  The City of Kenner Inspection and Code Enforcement Department shall have the authority to inspect properties subject to this article for compliance and to issue notices for any violations. The City of Kenner Inspection and Code Enforcement Department shall have the discretion to determine when and how such inspections are to be made, provided that its policies are reasonably calculated to ensure that this article is enforced. 
(Ord. No. 10,455, § 6, 9-20-12) 
Sec. 5-207. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  The city may enforce the provisions of this article by any means available to the city under the City of Kenner Code of Ordinances or as may be available under state law. 
(b)  The penalties for violation of this article shall be as set forth in the code enforcement method asserted by the city under the City of Kenner Code of Ordinances or as may be available under state law. 
(c)  Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10,455, § 7, 9-20-12) 
Secs. 5-208-5-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PROBLEMATIC RENTAL PROPERTIES 

Sec. 5-211. - Legislative findings, intent, and purpose. 
(a)  The City of Kenner hereby finds that problematic rental properties as defined herein contribute to crime and blight and negatively affect the quality of life in the City of Kenner. 
(b)  The intent and purpose of this article is to protect public health safety and welfare and to assist in abating problematic rental properties and related nuisances. 
(Ord. No. 11,058, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 5-212. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    Problematic rental property means a building, dwelling, establishment, premises or place that is leased, rented, or otherwise occupied by someone other than the owner of the property, and where prohibited conduct occurs; includes outside area contiguous to and surrounding a structure, such as a yard or lot under the same ownership. If the building, dwelling, establishment, premises or place is a multiple-unit dwelling or residence, hotel or motel, or commercial or office building, this definition applies only to that dwelling unit, room, or suite of rooms in the hotel or motel, office rooms or suite, store, lot, or yard in or on which prohibited conduct occurs. 
    Owner means the record owner of the property, as reflected in the records of the Jefferson Parish Clerk of Court's Mortgage and Conveyance records, and/or on the records of the Jefferson Parish Assessor's Office; and any party with a mortgage or other legal interest in the property provided that such interest is recorded in the mortgage or conveyance records of Jefferson Parish. 
    Vacant means a building which is lacking the habitual presence of human beings who have a legal right to be on the premises, or at which substantially all lawful business operations or residential occupancy has ceased for a period of twelve (12) months or more. 
    Prohibited conduct means activities occurring in violation of statutes or ordinances relating to any of the following: 
(1)  Gambling as defined by R.S. 14:98, et seq. or under Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-114; 
(2)  Battery as defined in R.S. 14:33, et seq. 
(3)  Contributing to the delinquency of a minor, as defined in R.S. 14:92.1, et seq. as well as under Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-115; 
(4)  Rape and sexual battery as defined in R.S. 14:41, et seq.; 
(5)  Kidnapping as defined in R.S. 14:44, et seq.; 
(6)  Armed robbery as defined by R.S. 14:64, et seq.; 
(7)  Resisting law enforcement and offenses affecting law enforcement, as defined in R.S. 14:108, et seq. or Kenner Code of Ordinances [section] 7-150; 
(8)  Illegal carrying and discharge of weapons as described in R.S. 14:94, et seq. or Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-124; 
(9)  Arson and use of explosives as defined by R.S. 14:51, et seq.; 
(10)  Burglary as defined by R.S. 14:60, et seq.; 
(11)  Failure to comply with Kenner Code of Ordinances section 5-91 for "cleanliness; freedom from vermin infestation;" 
(12)  Criminal mischief as defined by Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-82; 
(13)  Institutional vandalism as defined by Kenner Code of Ordinances [section] 7-83; 
(14)  Defacing of buildings as defined by Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-83; 
(15)  Letting of premises for obscenity as defined by Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-110; 
(16)  Obscene live conduct as defined by Kenner Code of Ordinances [section] 7-111; 
(17)  Possession of handguns by juveniles and minors pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-126; 
(18)  Disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-127; 
(19)  Keeping a disorderly place pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-129; 
(20)  Letting a disorderly place pursuant to Kenner code of Ordinances section 7-130; 
(21)  Drug traffic loitering pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-131; 
(22)  Flight from an officer pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-154; 
(23)  Discharge of a firearm pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-165; 
(24)  Violations of unnecessary noise pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-166; 
(25)  Cruelty to animals pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-170; 
(26)  Littering pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-171; 
(27)  Prohibition of abandoned motor vehicles on private property pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-171.1, et seq.; 
(28)  Gang loitering pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-186; 
(29)  Chemical compounds for human consumption pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-188; 
(20)  Possession of marijuana pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-191; 
(31)  Possession of drug paraphernalia pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 7-192; 
(32)  Violations of accumulation and collection of refuse pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 91/2-4; 
(33)  Violations of regulations for removal of weeds, grass, or other noxious matter pursuant to Kenner Code of Ordinances section 91/2-7; 
(34)  Use of the dwelling or property in violation of the "permitted uses" as defined by Appendix A-Zoning, section 6.02; 
(35)  Violations of any of the Louisiana statutes governing the sale, possession, delivery, or receipt of alcoholic beverages pursuant to R.S. 14:93.10, et seq.; 
(36)  Prostitution in violation of R.S. 14:82, et seq.; 
(37)  Violations of any of the racketeering activity in violation of 18 USC 1955; and 
(38)  Any and all violations of the codes enforced by the authority of the City of Kenner, Department of Code Enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 11,058, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 5-213. - Notice to abate. 
    Whenever the Kenner Police Department or the City of Kenner Office of Code Enforcement has probable cause to believe that prohibited conduct as defined in section 5-212 has occurred in or upon a building, dwelling, establishment, premises, or place, the owner and occupants of the property shall be notified that the building, dwelling establishment, premises, or place is a problematic rental property and as such constitutes a public nuisance and that they must abate the public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 11,058, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 5-214. - Manner of serving notice. 
    The city shall provide notice to the owner of the property and the occupants of the property in the same manner as the department of inspection and code enforcement provides notice of all other code violations and other summons pertaining to code enforcement hearings are provided. The city deems the owner of the property and the occupants of the property responsible for any and all prohibited conduct occurring upon the premises after receipt of the notice. Notice shall be provided as follows: 
(1)  By issuance of summons in the same manner as code violations are provided. 
(2)  In the event a summons is unable to be issued or served, by certified mail to the owner of the property and to the occupant and simultaneous notice in the official journal of the City of Kenner providing thirty (30) days' notice prior to an appearance in mayor's court with respect to such violations; and 
(3)  Following attempt to issue summons as described in subsection (a) above and following notice provided by subsection (b) above, the City of Kenner shall be authorized to appoint a curator for the filing of a lien and/or filing suit against the property with respect to said violations. 
(Ord. No. 11,058, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 5-215. - Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, or occupant to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this article, and the violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. In determining the amount of the fine to be imposed, the court may consider the attempts of the property owners or occupants to address the public nuisance as mitigating factors to reduce the fines assessed for such violations. 
(Ord. No. 11,058, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 5-216. - Eviction proceedings as a defense. 
    No owner shall be liable for a violation of this section if such owner initiates an eviction proceeding within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice of the prohibited conduct set forth in this section, and diligently pursues eviction proceedings to completion. 
(Ord. No. 11,058, 3-17-16) 
Chapter 6 - CIVIL DEFENSE AND DISASTER RELIEF 

Sec. 6-1. - Mayor's emergency authority; charging unusual prices during emergency prohibited. 
(a)  The mayor of the city, or in his absence the mayor pro tem, is hereby invested with emergency authority whenever the city is in imminent possibility of the occurrence of a disaster of unprecedented size and destructiveness from either enemy attack, sabotage or other hostile action or from fire, flood, earthquake or other natural cause, and he may declare that a state of emergency exists within any given area within this city. 
(b)  Once the mayor of the city, or in his absence the mayor pro tem, has declared an emergency exists, then it shall be unlawful for any person to sell any merchandise, commodity or service during the period of emergency for any price greater than that ordinarily charged by said person for said commodity, service or merchandise immediately prior to the declaration of said emergency. 
(c)  The mayor of the city, or in his absence the mayor pro tem, may use such agencies of the city as he deems necessary to investigate complaints of excessive charges for merchandise, services or commodities charged during the period of emergency and to furnish to the mayor and board of aldermen of the city the names of persons making such excessive charges. 
(d)  Any person found violating any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 1325, § 4, 8-9-71) 
Sec. 6-2. - Municipal Civil Defense Council-Created; composed. 
    There is hereby created the Kenner Municipal Civil Defense Council, referred to herein as the civil defense council, which shall consist of the following: 
(1)  The mayor of the city, who shall serve as chairman of the council, and who shall also be known as the director of civil defense of the city; 
(2)  The assistant director of civil defense of the city who shall be charged with the preparation of the civil defense plan for the city, together with such other duties as the director may prescribe. The assistant director shall be appointed by and hold his position at the pleasure of the director of civil defense. The assistant director shall serve as vice-chairman of the municipal civil defense council; 
(3)  The deputy directors of divisions and the chiefs of services of such divisions as may be provided for by resolution by the city; 
(4)  Representatives not to exceed seven (7) in number from civic, business, industry, labor, veterans, professional, or other groups to be selected and appointed by the mayor. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 1, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-3. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The powers and duties of the municipal civil defense council shall include the recommendation for adoption by the city of a civil defense plan for the city and the recommendation for adoption by the city of any and all agreements which are deemed essential for the implementation of such civil defense plan. The duties of such civil defense council shall also include a continuing study of need for amendments and improvements in the civil defense plan adopted by the city. The municipal civil defense council shall meet upon the call of either the chairman or the vice-chairman. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 2, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-4. - Director of civil defense generally. 
    The office of director of civil defense is hereby created. The director of civil defense shall have the authority to request the declaration of the existence of an emergency by the city or by higher authority. In the event that it is deemed necessary to declare the existence of an emergency without delay, the director may, if the city is not in session do so, but such action shall be subject to confirmation by the city at its next meeting. 
    The duties and responsibilities of the director of civil defense shall include the following: 
(1)  The control and direction of the actual or training efforts of the civil defense organization of the city; 
(2)  The determination of all questions of authority and responsibility that may arise within the civil defense organization of the city; 
(3)  The maintenance of necessary liaison with other municipal, area, state, regional, federal or other civil defense organizations; 
(4)  The marshaling, after the declaration of an emergency as provided for above, of all necessary personnel, equipment or supplies from any department of the city to aid in the carrying out of the civil defense plan; 
(5)  The issuance of all necessary proclamations as to the existence of an emergency and the immediate operational effectiveness of the civil defense plan; 
(6)  The issuance of reasonable rules and regulations which are necessary for the protection of life and property in the city, including but not limited to rules and regulations applicable to blackouts and air raids; 
(7)  The supervision of and final authorization for the procurement of all necessary supplies and equipment, including acceptance of private contributions. 
(8)  The authorizing of agreements, after approval of the city attorney, for the use of private property for air raid shelters and other purposes. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 3, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-5. - Operational civil defense organization. 
    The operational civil defense organization of the city shall consist of the officers and employees of the city designated by the director of civil defense as well as all volunteer municipal defense workers. The functions and duties of this organization shall be distributed among such divisions, services and special staff as the city shall prescribe by resolution. Any such resolution shall set forth the form of organization, establish and designate divisions and services, assign functions, duties and powers and designate officers and employees to carry out the provisions of this ordinance. Insofar as possible, the form of organization, titles and terminology shall conform to the recommendations of the federal government and the recommendations of the civil defense agency of the state. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 4, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-6. - Oath required. 
    Each person serving as a member of the municipal civil defense council or as an officer, employee or volunteer in any capacity in the municipal civil defense organization created by resolution pursuant to the authority conferred in this chapter, shall, prior to assuming their duty or duties, take an oath which shall be substantially as follows: 
    "I, _______, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the State of Louisiana against all enemies, foreign and domestic; that I will bear true faith and allegiance to the same; that I take this obligation freely, without any mental reservation or purpose of evasion; and that I will well and faithfully discharge the duties upon which I am about to enter. And I do further swear (or affirm) that I do not advocate, nor am I a member or an affiliate of any political party or organization group or combination of persons that advocates the overthrow of the government of the United States or of this state by force or violence; and that during such time as I am a member of the Municipal Defense Council of the City of Kenner I will not advocate nor become a member or an affiliate of any organization, group, or combination of persons or of any political party that advocates the overthrow of the Government of the United States or of this state by force or violence." 
(Ord. No. 773, § 5, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-7. - Unauthorized lights in emergencies. 
    Any light displayed contrary to any order, rule or regulation promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter constitutes a public nuisance and when deemed necessary in order to protect life or property during blackouts or air raids, the police are authorized and directed to enter upon any premises within the city, using reasonable force, and extinguish lights or take other necessary action to make effective any order, rule or regulation promulgated under the authority conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 6, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-8. - Unauthorized operation of sirens, signals, etc., prohibited. 
    Any unauthorized person who shall operate a siren or other device so as to simulate a blackout signal or air raid, or the termination of a blackout or air raid, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this section and shall be subject to the penalties imposed by the general penalty of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 7, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-9. - Orders, rules, and regulations under chapter supersede conflicting laws. 
    At all times when the orders, rules and regulations made and promulgated pursuant to this chapter shall be in effect, they shall supersede all existing ordinances, orders, rules and regulations insofar as the latter may be inconsistent therewith. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 8, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-10. - Chapter not to conflict with state, federal, or military regulation. 
    This chapter shall not be construed so as to conflict with any state or federal statute or with any military or naval order, rule or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 9, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-11. - Personal liability for damages. 
    This chapter is an exercise by the city of its governmental functions for the protection of the public peace, health and safety and neither the city, the agents and representatives of said city, or any individual, receiver, firm, partnership, corporation, association, or trustee, or any of the agents thereof, in good faith carrying out, complying with or attempting to comply with, any order, rule, or regulation, promulgated pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be liable for any damage sustained to person or property as the result of said activity. Any person owning or controlling real estate or other premises who voluntarily and without compensation grants to the city a license or privilege or otherwise permits the city to inspect, designate and use the whole or any part or parts of such real estate or premises for the purpose of sheltering persons during an actual, impending or practice enemy attack, together with his successors in interest, if any, shall not be civilly liable for the death of or injury to any person on or about such real estate or premises under such license, privilege or other permission or for loss of, or damage to, the property of such person. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 10, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-12. - Expenditure and contract approval required. 
    No person shall have the right to expend any public funds of the city in carrying out any civil defense activity authorized by this chapter without prior approval by the city, nor shall any person have any right to bind the city by contract, agreement or otherwise without prior and specific approval of the city. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 11, 4-13-64) 
Sec. 6-13. - Obstructing chapter enforcement prohibited; wrongful display of identification as organization member prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person wilfully to obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the civil defense organization in the enforcement of any rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or to do any act forbidden by any rule or regulation issued pursuant to the authority contained in this chapter. It shall likewise be unlawful for any person to wear, carry or display any emblem, insignia or any other means of identification as a member of the civil defense organization of the city unless authority so to do has been granted to such person by the proper officials. 
(Ord. No. 773, § 12, 4-13-64) 
Chapter 7 - CRIMES-MISCELLANEOUS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7297, § 1, adopted Sept. 21, 1995, repealed Ch. 7, §§ 7-1-7-21 and 7-32-7-139, pertaining to similar subject matter. Section 2 of Ord. No. 7297 enacted a new Ch. 7 to read as herein set out. Due to the extensive derivation of former Ch. 7, the user is directed to the Code Comparative Table for the history of that chapter. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 7-1. - Title; additions; amendments. 
    This chapter shall be known, shall constitute, and may be referred to as the city criminal code, and that any and all additions and amendments to said code, when adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the mayor and council to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such code so that reference to the "City of Kenner Criminal Code" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-2. - Definitions. 
    In this chapter the terms enumerated shall have the designated meanings: 
    Another means any person or legal entity, including the state or any subdivision thereof. 
    Anything of value must be given the broadest possible construction, including any conceivable thing of the slightest value, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, public or private, and including transportation, telephone, and telegraph services or any other services available for hire. It must be construed in the broadest popular sense of the phrase, and not necessarily as synonymous with the traditional legal term "property". 
    Child pornography means images containing a visual representation of a minor under eighteen (18) years of age engaging in sexually explicit conduct, as defined herein, in 18 U.S.C. § 2256 or in La. Rev. Stat. 14:81.1. 
    Dangerous weapon means any gas, liquid or other substance or instrumentality, which, in the manner used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm. 
    Domestic violence means the occurrence of one or more of the following acts by a family or household member, but does not include acts of self-defense: 
(1)  Attempting to cause or causing physical harm to another family or household member; 
(2)  Placing another family or household member in fear of physical harm; 
(3)  Causing another family or household member to engage in involuntary sexual activity by force, threat of force, or duress; or 
(4)  Committing one or more of the following crimes against another family or household member; 
a.  Arson, of any grade; 
b.  Assault and/or battery, of any grade; 
c.  Burglary, of any grade; 
d.  Criminal damage to property; 
e.  Homicide, of any grade; 
f.  Kidnapping, of any grade; 
g.  Sex offenses, of any grade; 
h.  Any offense involving stolen property; 
i.  Any weapon law violation; 
j.  Disorderly conduct; 
k.  Stalking; and 
l.  Criminal trespass of property. 
    Family or household members means as follows: 
(1)  Adults or minors who are current or former spouses; 
(2)  Adults or minors who live together or who have lived together within five (5) years of the occurrence; 
(3)  Adults or minors who are dating or who have dated within five (5) years of the occurrence; 
(4)  Adults or minors who are engaged in or who have engaged in any type of sex act within five (5) years of the occurrence; 
(5)  Adults or minors who are related by blood or adoption; 
(6)  Adults or minors who are related or formerly related by marriage; or 
(7)  Persons who have a child in common; and, minor children of a person with whom the offender has been or is in a relationship that is described in subsections (1) through (6) of this definition. 
    Foreseeable means that which ordinarily would be anticipated by a human being of average, reasonable intelligence and perception. 
    Municipality means the City of Kenner or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of the City of Kenner. 
    Person means a human being from the moment of fertilization and implantation and also includes a body of persons, whether incorporated or not. 
    Property means both public and private property, movable and immovable, corporeal and incorporeal property. 
    Public officer, public office, public employee or position of public authority means and applies to any executive, ministerial, administrative, judicial, or legislative officer, office, employee or position of authority respectively, of the state, or any parish, municipality, district, or other political subdivision thereof, or of any agency, board, commission, department or institution of said state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. 
    State means the State of Louisiana, or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of said state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. 
    Whoever in a penalty clause refers only to natural persons insofar as imprisonment is provided; but, insofar as a fine may be imposed, "whoever" in a penalty clause refers to any person. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 1, 9-3-98; Ord. No. 8556, § 1, 10-18-01; Ord. No. 10,741, § 1, 5-1-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:2. 
Sec. 7-3. - Violations; penalties; separate offenses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provisions of this chapter or any amendments to the chapter; and, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of, or failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter, or any amendments to such chapter, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. Each day that any violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
    Any person who is found guilty or who enters a plea of guilty for offenses against persons in which the victim is the age of sixty-five (65) years old or older the court shall impose the maximum sentence of five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisonment for not less than ten (10) days but no more then sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 9953, § 1, 7-9-09) 
Sec. 7-4. - Conduct prohibited under several sections; how prosecuted. 
    Prosecution may proceed under either provision, in the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, whenever an offender's conduct is: 
(1)  Prohibited according to a general or special section of this code; or 
(2)  Prohibited according to a section of this code and also according to some other ordinance or state statute. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-5. - Lesser and included offenses. 
    An offender who commits an offense which includes all the elements of other lesser offenses may be prosecuted for, and convicted of, either the greater offense or one of the lesser and included offenses. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-6. - Suspension of sentence or probation. 
(a)  When a defendant has been convicted of a misdemeanor pursuant to this chapter or any amendments to this chapter, the court may suspend the execution of the whole or any part of the sentence imposed and release the defendant during his good behavior. Such suspension of sentence and release shall be for a period of one (1) year or such shorter period as the court may specify. Release of a defendant "during his good behavior" means that the defendant must not be convicted of any other offense during the period of the suspended sentence. 
(b)  The court may suspend a misdemeanor sentence at the time of sentencing or after the defendant has begun to serve the sentence. 
(c)  When the imposition of sentence has been suspended by the court, as authorized by this section, and the court finds at the conclusion of the period of release or probationary period that the probation or release of the defendant has been satisfactory, the court may set the conviction aside and dismiss the prosecution and the dismissal of the prosecution shall have the same effect as acquittal, except that said conviction may be considered as a first offense and provide the basis for subsequent prosecution of the party as a multiple offender. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-7. - Conditions of probation. 
(a)  When the court suspends the imposition or execution of sentence and places a defendant on probation, the defendant shall be required to refrain from criminal conduct, and it may impose any specific conditions reasonably related to his rehabilitation, including, but not restricted to, the following: 
(b)  The defendant shall: 
(1)  Make a full and truthful report at the end of each month; 
(2)  Meet his specified family responsibilities; 
(3)  Report to the person or authority designated by the court as directed; 
(4)  Permit the person or authority designated by the court to visit him at his home or elsewhere; 
(5)  Devote himself to an approved employment or occupation; 
(6)  Refrain from owning or possessing firearms or other dangerous weapons; 
(7)  Make reasonable reparation or restitution to the aggrieved party for damage or loss caused by his offense in an amount to be determined by the court; and 
(8)  Refrain from frequenting unlawful or disreputable places or consorting with disreputable persons. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-8. - Interpretation. 
    The sections of this chapter cannot be extended by analogy so as to create crimes not provided for herein; however, in order to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law, all of its provisions shall be given a genuine construction, according to the fair import of their words, taken in their usual sense, in connection with the context, and with reference to the purpose of the provision. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:3. 
Sec. 7-9. - Civil remedies not affected. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall affect any civil remedy provided by the law pertaining to civil matters, or any legal power to inflict penalties for contempt. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:6. 
Secs. 7-10-7-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELEMENTS OF OFFENSES 

Sec. 7-20. - Crime. 
    A crime is that conduct which is defined as criminal in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:7. 
Sec. 7-21. - Criminal conduct. 
    Criminal conduct consists of: 
(1)  An act, or a failure to act, that produces criminal consequences, and which is combined with criminal intent; or 
(2)  A mere act, or failure to act, that produces criminal consequences, where there is no requirement of criminal intent; or 
(3)  Criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:8. 
Sec. 7-22. - Criminal consequences. 
    Criminal consequences are any set of consequences prescribed in the various sections of this chapter as necessary to constitute any of the various crimes defined therein. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:9. 
Sec. 7-23. - Criminal intent. 
    Criminal intent may be specific or general: 
(1)  Specific criminal intent is that state of mind which exists when the circumstances indicate that the offender actively desired the prescribed criminal consequences to follow his act or failure to act. 
(2)  General criminal intent is present whenever there is specific intent and also when the circumstances indicate that the offender, in the ordinary course of human experience, must have averted to the prescribed criminal consequences as reasonably certain to result from his act or failure to act. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:10. 
Sec. 7-24. - Criminal intent; how expressed. 
    The definitions of some crimes require a specific criminal intent, while in others no intent is required. Some crimes consist merely of criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. However, in the absence of qualifying provisions, the terms "intent" and "intentional" have reference to "general criminal intent". 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:11. 
Sec. 7-25. - Criminal negligence. 
    Criminal negligence exists when, although neither specific nor general criminal intent is present, there is such disregard of the interest of others that the offender's conduct amounts to a gross deviation below the standard of care expected to be maintained by a reasonably careful man under like circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:12. 
Secs. 7-26-7-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CULPABILITY 

Sec. 7-30. - Insanity. 
    If the circumstances indicate that because of a mental disease or mental defect the offender was incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong with reference to the conduct in question, the offender shall be exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:14. 
Sec. 7-31. - Intoxication. 
    The fact of an intoxicated or drugged condition of the offender at the time of the commission of the crime is immaterial, except as follows: 
(1)  Where the production of the intoxicated or drugged condition has been involuntary, and the circumstances indicate this condition is the direct cause of the commission of the crimes, the offender is exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(2)  Where the circumstances indicate that an intoxicated or drugged condition has precluded the presence of a specific criminal intent or of special knowledge required in a particular crime, this fact constitutes a defense to a prosecution for that crime. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:15. 
Sec. 7-32. - Mistake of fact. 
    Unless there is a provision to the contrary in the definition of a crime, reasonable ignorance of fact or mistake of fact which precludes the presence of any mental element required in that crime is a defense to any prosecution for that crime. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:16. 
Sec. 7-33. - Mistake of ordinance. 
    Ignorance of the provision of this chapter is not a defense to any criminal prosecution. However, mistake of ordinance which results in the lack of an intention that consequences which are criminal shall follow is a defense to a criminal prosecution under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the offender reasonably relies on the act of the mayor and council in repealing an existing criminal provision or in otherwise purporting to make the offender's conduct lawful; or 
(2)  Where the offender reasonably relied on a final judgment of a competent court of last resort that a provision making the conduct in question criminal was unconstitutional. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:17. 
Sec. 7-34. - Justification; general provisions. 
    The fact that an offender's conduct is justifiable, although otherwise criminal, shall constitute a defense to prosecution for any crime based on that conduct. This defense of justification can be claimed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the offender's conduct is an apparently authorized and reasonable fulfillment of any duties of public office; or 
(2)  When the offender's conduct is a reasonable accomplishment of an arrest which is lawful under the laws of the state or of this chapter; or 
(3)  When for any reason the offender's conduct is authorized by law; or 
(4)  When the offender's conduct is reasonable discipline of minors by their parents, tutors or teachers; or 
(5)  When the crime consists of a failure to perform an affirmative duty and the failure to perform is caused by physical impossibility; or 
(6)  When any crime is committed through the compulsion of threats by another of death or great bodily harm and the offender reasonably believes the person making the threats is present and would immediately carry out the threats if the crime were not committed; or 
(7)  When the offender's conduct is in defense of persons or of property under any of the circumstances described in sections 7-35, 7-36, and 7-37, or under any of the circumstances described in Articles 19 through 22 of the Louisiana Criminal Code. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:18. 
Sec. 7-35. - Use of force or violence in defense. 
    The use of force or violence upon the person of another is justifiable when committed for the purpose of preventing a forcible offense against the person or a forcible offense or trespass against property in a person's lawful possession; provided that the force or violence used must be reasonable and apparently necessary to prevent such offense, and that this section shall not apply where the force of violence results in a homicide. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:19. 
Sec. 7-36. - Aggressor cannot claim self-defense. 
    A person who is the aggressor or who brings on a difficulty cannot claim the right of self-defense unless he withdraws from the conflict in good faith and in such a manner that his adversary knows or should know that he desires to withdraw and discontinues the conflict. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:21. 
Sec. 7-37. - Defense of others. 
    It is justifiable to use force or violence in the defense of another person when it is reasonably apparent that the person attacked could have justifiably used such means himself, and when it is reasonably believed that such intervention is necessary to protect the other person. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:22. 
Sec. 7-38. - Principals. 
    All persons concerned in the commission of a crime, whether present or absent, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, aid and abet in its commission or directly or indirectly counsel or procure another to commit the crime, are principals. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:24. 
Sec. 7-39. - Conspiracy. 
    Conspiracy is the agreement or combination of two (2) or more persons for the specific purpose of committing any offense; provided that an agreement or combination to commit an offense shall not amount to a conspiracy unless, in addition to such agreement or combination, one or more of such parties does an act in furtherance of the object of the agreement or combination. If the intended basic offense has been consummated, the conspirators may be tried for either the conspiracy or the completed offense, and a conviction for one shall not bar prosecution for the other. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the same manner as for the offense contemplated by the conspirators, but such fine or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the largest fine, or one-half (1/2) the longest term of imprisonment prescribed for such offense, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-40. - Attempt. 
(a)  Any person, who, having a specific intent to commit a crime, does or omits an act for the purpose of and tending directly towards the accomplishing of his object is guilty of an attempt to commit the offense intended; and it shall be immaterial whether, under the circumstances, he would have actually accomplished his purpose. 
(b)  Mere preparation to commit a crime shall not be sufficient to constitute an attempt; but lying in wait with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, or searching for the intended victim with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, shall be sufficient to constitute an attempt to commit the offense intended. 
(c)  An attempt is a separate but lesser grade of the intended crime; and any person may be convicted of an attempt to commit a crime, although it appears on the trial that the crime intended or attempted was actually perpetrated by such person in pursuance of such attempt. 
(d)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined or imprisoned or both, in the same manner as for the offense attempted; but, such fine or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the largest fine or one-half (1/2) of the longest imprisonment prescribed for the offense so attempted or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:27. 
Secs. 7-41-7-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TIME LIMITATIONS 

Sec. 7-50. - Limitation of prosecution. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this section, no trial shall be commenced in misdemeanor cases after one (1) year from the date of institution of the prosecution. No person shall be prosecuted, tried or punished for an offense unless the prosecution is instituted within the following periods of time after the offense has been committed: 
(1)  Two (2) years for a misdemeanor punishable by a fine or imprisonment or both; or 
(2)  Six (6) months for a misdemeanor punishable only by a fine or forfeiture. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-51. - Interruption of time limitation. 
    The period of limitation established by section 7-50 shall be interrupted as follows and commence to run anew from the date the cause of interruption no longer exists: 
(1)  If the defendant at any time, with the purpose to avoid detection, apprehensions or prosecution, flees from the state, is outside the state, or is absent from his usual place of abode within the state; or 
(2)  If the defendant cannot be tried because of insanity or because his presence for trial cannot be obtained by legal process or for any other cause beyond the control of the city; or 
(3)  If the defendant fails to appear at any proceeding pursuant to actual notice, proof of which appears of record. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-52. - Suspension of time limitations. 
    When a defendant files a motion to quash or other preliminary plea, the running of the periods of limitation established by section 7-50 shall be suspended until the ruling of the court thereon; but, in no case shall the city have less than one (1) year after the ruling to commence the trial. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Secs. 7-53-7-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TRAFFIC CONTROL 

Sec. 7-60. - Obstruction of highway of commerce. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to obstruct a highway of commerce intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner by the placing of anything or performance of any act on any railway, railroad, navigable waterway, road, street, highway, thoroughfare, or runway of an airport, which will render movement thereon more difficult. 
(b)  Any contractor or builder who fails to erect barricades and blinking yellow or red lights, as required by Article 301 of the Building Code of the City of Kenner; or who places materials or tools on a public street for longer than five (5) working days; or who uses more than five (5) feet of the street, shall be considered in violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:97. 
Sec. 7-61. - Obstruction of walk. 
    It shall be unlawful to obstruct the free, convenient, and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, alley, road or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor, or passage of any public building, structure, watercraft, or ferry, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding, or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-62. - Obstruction of drive. 
    It shall be unlawful to obstruct a private drive of another, without the authorization of the owner, intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-63. - State highway regulatory act adopted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision herein on any street, highway or other public way. Pursuant to authority granted by law, the municipality adopts the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 32 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (Louisiana Highway Regulatory Act) and all regulations of the State Department of Transportation and Development and the Secretary of the Department of Public Safety and Corrections adopted pursuant thereto, except for such provisions and regulations which by their nature can have no application and except as otherwise provided in this code. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-64. - Reckless operation of a vehicle. 
    Reckless operation of a vehicle is the operation of any motor vehicle, aircraft, vessel or other means of conveyance, in a criminally negligent or reckless manner. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:99. 
Sec. 7-65. - Hit-and-run driving. 
(a)  Hit-and-run driving is the intentional failure of the driver of a vehicle involved in or causing any accident, to stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, to give his or her identity, and to render reasonable aid. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section: 
(1)  "To give his or her identity," means that the driver of any vehicle involved in any accident shall give his or her name, address, and the license number of his or her vehicle, or shall report the accident to the police. 
(2)  "Vehicle" includes a watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100. 
Sec. 7-66. - Operation of motor vehicle or boats on public roads, highways or bridges that are flooded or inundated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor vehicle or boat on the public roads, highways or bridges which are flooded or inundated within the city in such a manner as to cause water, waves or wakes to enter property alongside of or adjacent to such public roads, highways or bridges, or to rise higher in such property if it already has water in it. 
(b)  No person shall in any way tamper with, move, damage or destroy any barricades, signs or signals placed upon any public roads, highways or bridges within the city by any appropriate authority from the public works department or police department, or any other governmental agency in connection with any such public road, highway or bridge being flooded or inudated, nor shall any person disobey the instructions, signals, warnings or markings of any warning sign, signal, employee, or barricade so placed on any such public road, highway or bridge which is flooded or inundated, unless at the time expressly directed by a police officer of the state or city. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (a) herein shall not apply to vehicular or boat travel authorized by the police department, public works, or other emergency vehicles when necessary for the preservation and protection of life or property. 
(d)  Anyone who violates any of the provisions of the section shall be fined, or imprisoned, or both as provided in section 1-9 of this Code. Additionally, if the appropriate authorities have reasonable cause to believe that the actions of a person in violation of this section shall continue and shall pose an immediate threat to property or persons, then the violator may be arrested. 
(Ord. No. 7873, § 1, 1-22-98) 
Secs. 7-67-7-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS 

Sec. 7-70. - Battery. 
    Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon the person of another; or the intentional administration of a poison or other noxious liquid or substance to another. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:33. 
Sec. 7-71. - Simple battery. 
    Simple battery is a battery committed without the consent of the victim. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:35. 
Sec. 7-72. - Assault. 
    Assault is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:36. 
Sec. 7-73. - Aggravated assault. 
    Aggravated assault is an assault committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:37. 
Sec. 7-74. - Simple assault. 
    Simple assault is an assault committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:38. 
Sec. 7-75. - Negligent injuring. 
    Negligent injuring is the inflicting of any injury upon the person of another by criminal negligence. The violation of an ordinance shall be considered only as presumptive evidence of such negligence. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:39. 
Sec. 7-76. - False imprisonment. 
    False imprisonment is the intentional confinement or detention of another, without his consent and without proper legal authority. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:46. 
Sec. 7-77. - Battery of a police officer. 
(a)  (1)  Battery of a police officer is a battery committed without the consent of the victim when the offender has reasonable grounds to believe the victim is a police officer acting in the performance of his duty. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, "police officer" shall include commissioned police officers, sheriffs, deputy sheriffs, marshals, deputy marshals, correctional officers, federal law enforcement officers, constables, wildlife enforcement agents, state park wardens, and probation and parole officers. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, "battery of a police officer" includes the use of force or violence upon the person of the police officer by throwing feces, urine, blood, saliva, or any form of human waste by an offender while the offender is incarcerated by a court of law and is being detained in any jail, prison, correctional facility, juvenile institution, temporary holding center, halfway house, or detention facility. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of battery of a police officer shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and imprisoned not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than six (6) months without benefit of suspension of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 10,741, § 2, 5-1-14) 
Secs. 7-78, 7-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

Sec. 7-80. - Simple criminal damage to property. 
(a)  Definitions . 
(1)  Graffiti means any sign, inscription, design, drawing, diagram, etching, sketch, symbol, lettering, name or marking which is scratched, painted or sprayed on any surface, regardless of the material of that structural component, in such a location and in such a manner so as to deface the property. 
(2)  Graffiti or paint stick means a device containing a solid form of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy or other similar substance capable of being applied to a surface by pressure. 
(3)  Gum label means any sheet of paper, fabric, plastic or other substance with an adhesive backing which is not easily removable when placed on a surface. 
(4)  Graffiti instrument means any spray paint containers, paint, graffiti or paint stick, ink, marking pens which contain a nonwater soluble fluid, brushes, applicators, gum labels, etching tool or other materials which may be used for placing graffiti. 
(5)  Minor means any person 17 years of age or younger who has not been emancipated under state law. 
(6)  Custodian means a parent as defined in Louisiana Children's Code, Article 116, or a person with legal custody as defined in Louisiana Children's Code, Article 116, to whom the care or supervision of the child has been temporarily and lawfully delegated or assigned. 
(b)  Offenses . 
(1)  No person shall: 
a.  Intentionally damage any property of another, without the consent of the owner; 
b.  Place graffiti or gum labels upon real or personal property, whether publicly or privately owned, without the consent of the owner; 
c.  Possess, with the intent to use in violation of this section, any graffiti instrument. 
(2)  No custodian shall: 
a.  Permit or by insufficient control allow a minor under the custodian's care or custody to violate this section. 
(c)  Removal . Graffiti must be removed by the owner of the property where the graffiti is located within thirty (30) days of receiving notice to do so from the city. 
(1)  The notice shall consist of the name of the property owner, the address or location of the property and a description of the graffiti to be removed. 
(2)  Notice shall be sent to the record owner of such property via registered or certified mail. If no owner can be located, notice may be posted on the property where the graffiti at issue is located by any inspector employed by the department of inspection and code enforcement. The date of posting shall be considered the day of receipt. 
(3)  If the graffiti described is not removed within thirty (30) days of receiving notice, the city may issue a summons for the owner to appear in mayor's court to give good cause why graffiti was not removed. If good cause is given, the owner may be granted an extension of time to remove graffiti. If no good cause is given, a fine may be levied against the owner of the property for failure to timely remove the graffiti. 
(d)  Penalties . A violation of this section is punishable as follows: 
(1)  Any person who violates subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section shall be punished by each of the following: 
a.  A fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more than five hundred dollars ($500.00); 
b.  Complete financial restitution necessary to cover the costs of restoring any property defaced by the person's actions. 
(2)  The court may, in its discretion, in addition to the above penalties, order the following: 
a.  Community service for the cleansing and restoration of property defaced by graffiti in violation of this section, according to the following schedule: 
1.  For a first offense, not less than seven (7) hours or more than twenty-one (21) hours; 
2.  For subsequent offenses, not less than twenty-one (21) hours or more than forty-nine (49) hours. 
b.  Imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days for any offense of subsection (b)(1) or (b)(2) of this section. 
(3)  Any person who violates subsection (c) shall be punished in accordance with section 7-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 10,967, § 2, 8-20-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:56.1. 
Sec. 7-81. - Criminal damage to coin-operated devices. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit criminal damage to a coin-operated device. Criminal damage to a coin-operated device is the intentional damaging of any coin-operated device belonging to another. Coin-operated device means any parking meter, pay telephone, vending machine, money-changing machine, or any other coin-activated device designed to accept money for a privilege, service or product. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:56.1. 
Sec. 7-82. - Criminal mischief. 
    Criminal mischief is the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Tampering with any property of another, without the consent of the owner, with the intent to interfere with the free enjoyment of any rights of anyone thereto, or with the intent to deprive anyone entitled thereto of the full use of the property; or 
(2)  Giving of any false alarm of fire or of need for police or ambulance assistance; or 
(3)  Driving of any tack, nail, spike or metal over one and one-half (11/2) inches in length into any tree located on lands belonging to another, without the consent of the owner, or without the later removal of the object from the tree; or 
(4)  The felling, topping or pruning of trees or shrubs within the right-of-way of a state highway, without prior written approval of the Assistant Secretary of the Department of Transportation and Development, or his representative, provided prior written approval is not required for agents or employees of public utility companies in situations of emergency where the person or property of others is endangered; or 
(5)  Giving of any false report or complaint to a sheriff, or his deputies, or to any officer of the law relative to the commission of, or an attempt to commit, a crime; or 
(6)  Taking temporary possession of any part or parts of a place of business, or remaining in a place of business after the person in charge of such business or portion of such business has ordered such person to leave the premises and to desist from the temporary possession of any part or parts of such business; or 
(7)  Throwing any stone or any other missile in any street, avenue, alley, road or highway, or open space or public square, or enclosure, or throwing any stone or other missile from any place into any street, avenue, road or highway, alley, open space, public square, enclosure, or at any train, railway car, or locomotive; or 
(8)  The communication to any person for the purpose of disrupting any public utility water service, when the communication causes any officer, employee, or agent of the service reasonably to be placed in sustained fear for his or another person's safety, or causes the evacuation of a water service building, or causes any discontinuance of any water services; or 
(9)  The discharging of any firearm at a train, locomotive, or railway car. 
(10)  The unauthorized use, interference with, and/or tampering with public property, without the consent of the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7673, § 1, 4-3-97; Ord. No. 10,967, § 1, 8-20-15) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:59. 
Sec. 7-83. - Institutional vandalism. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit institutional vandalism. A person commits institutional vandalism by knowingly vandalizing, defacing, or otherwise damaging the following, when the damage is valued at less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). In determining the amount of damage to, or loss of, property, damage includes the cost of repair and/or replacement of the property that was damaged or lost: 
(1)  Any church, synagogue, or other building, structure, or place used for religious worship or other religious purpose; or 
(2)  Any cemetery, mortuary, or other facility used for the purpose of burial or memorializing the dead; or 
(3)  Any school, educational facility, or community center; or 
(4)  The grounds adjacent to and owned or rented by any institution, facility, building, structure, or place described in subsections (1), (2), or (3) above; or 
(5)  Any personal property contained in any institution, facility, building, structure, or place described in subsections (1), (2), or (3) above; or 
(6)  Any building owned by the United States, the state, the municipality, or another political subdivision of this state. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:225 
Sec. 7-84. - Defacing of buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit defacing of buildings. Defacing of buildings is the intentional making of signs or figures, or writing of word, words, or sentences, on any public or private building, room, hall, closet, wall, or fence of another, without the consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-85. - Spitting in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit in or upon any public building or conveyance. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-86. - Open burning. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to start or set any fire to any grass, brush or debris unless the fire is contained within a proper furnace or incinerator and a certificate of compliance is first obtained from the city fire department chief. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 10,051, §§ 9, 10, 1-21-10) 
Sec. 7-87. - Fire-raising on lands of another. 
    The burning over or causing burning over to be done on any land within the City of Kenner is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 10,051, §§ 11, 12, 1-21-10) 
Sec. 7-88. - Fire-raising on lands of another with malice. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit fire-raising on lands of another with malice. Fire-raising on lands of another with malice is the malicious setting fire to any grass, leaves, brush, or debris on lands of another, or the procuring [of] same to be done. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-89. - Fire prevention interference. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit fire prevention interference. Fire prevention interference is the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Defacing or destroying fire warning notices or posters; or 
(2)  Injuring, destroying, removing, or in any manner interfering with the use of any tools, equipment, towers, buildings, or telephone lines used in the detection, reporting, or suppression of fire. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-90. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  No person shall, without authorization, intentionally enter any structure, watercraft, or movable, or enter immovable property owned by another when the person knows entry is unauthorized, or under circumstances where the person reasonably should know entry is unauthorized. 
(b)  In order for forest land to be adequately posted, the owner, lessee, or person having the written permission of the owner or lessee shall post the property by any one of the following methods: 
(1)  Placing identifying paint marks on trees or posts around the area to be posted. Each paint mark shall be a vertical line of at least eight (8) inches in length, and the bottom of the mark shall be no less than three (3) feet nor more than five (5) feet high. Such paint marks shall be placed no more than one hundred (100) feet apart and shall be readily visible to any person approaching the property; or 
(2)  Placing signs around the area to be posted at no more than one hundred (100) feet apart and at normal points of ingress and egress. The signs shall bear the words "Posted," "No Trespassing," or "No" in letters at least three and one-half (31/2) inches high and shall be so placed as to be readily visible to any person approaching the property; or 
(3)  Constructing a fence around the area to be posted of not less than three-strand wire, or its equivalent, and placing signs that bear the words "Posted," "No Trespassing," or "No" in letters at least three and one-half (31/2) inches high at normal points [of] ingress and egress. 
(c)  In order for any immovable property other than forest land to be adequately posted, including cultivated land, orchards, pasture lands, impoundments, or other immovable property, the owner, lessee, or person having the written permission of the owner or lessee shall post the property by any one of the following methods: 
(1)  Placing identifying paint marks on posts around the area to be posted. Each paint mark shall be a vertical line of at least eight (8) inches in length, and the bottom of the mark shall be no less than three (3) feet nor more than five (5) feet high. Such paint marks shall be placed no more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart and at normal points of ingress and egress and shall be readily visible to any person approaching the property; or 
(2)  Placing signs around the area to be posted at points no more than one thousand (1,000) feet apart and at each normal point of ingress and egress. The signs shall bear the words "Posted," "No Trespassing," or "No" in letters at least three and one-half (31/2) inches high and shall be so placed as to be readily visible to any person approaching the property; or 
(3)  Constructing a fence around the area to be posted of not less than three-strand wire, or its equivalent, and placing signs that bear the words "Posted," "No Trespassing," or "No" in letters at least three and one-half (31/2) inches high at normal points [of] ingress and egress. 
(d)  The type of color of the paint to be used for posting shall be prescribed by regulation by the Louisiana Forestry Commission. The color of paint prescribed shall not be used on trees or posts for any other purpose. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to marshlands. 
(f)  Affirmative defenses to a prosecution shall be: 
(1)  That the person was unarmed and entered immovable property for the sole purpose of retrieving a dog or livestock; or 
(2)  That the property was not adequately posted in accordance with subsections (b) or (c) and (d) of this section; or 
(3)  That the entry was by a registered land surveyor, and his personnel, engaged in the "practice of land surveying," as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 37:682, or a person employed by a public utility acting in the course and scope of his employment relating to operation, repair, or maintenance of a public utility facility; or 
(4)  That the entry was by an employee or agent of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry and was for the purpose of locating and suppressing wildfire in accordance with the rules and regulations of the department. 
(g)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(h)  Upon a second or subsequent conviction, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(i)  No person shall knowingly paint such color prescribed by the Louisiana Forestry Commission for posting immovable property on any tree or post for any purpose other than posting immovable property pursuant to subsection (b)(1) or subsection (c)(i) of this section. Any person who violates these subsections shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-91. - Entry on or remaining in places after being forbidden. 
(a)  No person shall, without authority by law, go into or upon or remain in or upon or attempt to go into or upon or remain in or upon any structure, watercraft, or any other movable or immovable property which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, streets, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, or by any other authorized person. 
(b)  The above-mentioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft, or any other movable or immovable, including public streets, buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or part, portion, or area thereof, at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer investigating a complaint that the provisions of this section are being or have been violated or any such officer making any arrest for violation of the provisions of this section, is hereby vested with authority to require any person involved in such investigation or arrest to identify himself to such officer. Upon demand of such officer, the person involved shall inform the officer of his true name and address. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.3. 
Sec. 7-92. - Aiding and abetting others to enter or remain on premises where forbidden. 
(a)  No person shall incite, solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate, or procure any other person to go into or upon or to remain in or upon any structure, watercraft, or any other movable or immovable which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, streets, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion, or area thereof, knowing that such other person has been forbidden to go or remain there, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by the owner, lessee, or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. 
(b)  The above-mentioned sign means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft, or any other movable or immovable, including public streets, buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion, or area thereof, at a place or places where such sign or signs may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(c)  Any law enforcement officer investigating a complaint that the provisions of this section are being or have been violated or any such officer making any arrest for violation of the provisions of this section, is hereby vested with authority to require any person involved in such investigation or arrest to identify himself to such officer. Upon demand of such officer, the person involved shall inform the officer of his true name and address. 
(d)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be penalized as provided in section 7-3. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 3, 9-3-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.4. 
Sec. 7-93. - Illegal posting. 
    Illegal posting is the posting or the placing and/or maintenance of posted signs on property by anyone other than the owner or his duly authorized agent or representative; the lessee or his duly authorized agent or representative; or a person having written permission of the owner or lessee. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.1. 
Sec. 7-94. - Destruction, defacing, or removal of posted signs. 
    No person shall intentionally and without authority destroy, deface, or remove posted signs or signs designating or purporting to designate the boundary lines of immovable property. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.2. 
Sec. 7-95. - Theft. 
    Theft is the misappropriation or taking of anything of value which belongs to another, either without the consent of the other to the misappropriation or taking, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices, or representations. An intent to deprive the other permanently of whatever may be the subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section, having a value of less than the value established in R.S. 14:67(B)(4) as presently existing or hereinafter amended, shall be penalized as provided in R.S. 14:67(B)(4) as presently existing or hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 4, 9-3-98; Ord. No. 8175, § I, 9-16-99; Ord. No. 10,741, § 3, 5-1-14; Ord. No. 11,452, § 1, 8-9-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67. 
Sec. 7-96. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,452, § 2, adopted Aug. 9, 2018, repealed § 7-96, which pertained to theft of goods and derived from Ord. No. 7297, § 2, adopted Sept. 21, 1995; and Ord. No. 10,741, § 4, adopted May 1, 2014. 
Sec. 7-97. - Theft of recyclables. 
    Theft of recyclables is the misappropriation or taking of recycling bins or the contents therein, other than by the original owner, which have been placed curbside for collection as part of the city's recycling program. This section does not apply to those persons authorized by the city to collect such materials. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-98. - Unauthorized use of movables. 
    Unauthorized use of movables is the intentional taking or use of any movable which belongs to another, either without the other's consent, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations, but without any intention to deprive the other of the movable permanently. The fact that the movable so taken or used may be classified as an immovable, according to the law pertaining to civil matters, is immaterial. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section, having a value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less, shall be penalized as provided in section 7-3. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 5, 9-3-98; Ord. No. 10,741, § 5, 5-1-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68. 
Sec. 7-99. - Illegal possession of stolen things. 
    Illegal possession of stolen things is the intentional possessing, procuring, receiving, or concealing of anything of value which has been the subject of any robbery or theft, under circumstances which indicate that the offender knew or had good reason to believe that the things were the subject of one (1) of these offenses. 
    It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this section committed by means of possessing, that the accused, within seventy-two (72) hours of his acquiring knowledge or good reason to believe that a thing was the subject of robbery or theft, reports that fact or belief in writing to the City of Kenner Police Department. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section, having a value of less than the value established in R.S. 14:69(B)(4) as presently existing or hereinafter amended, and shall be penalized as provided in R.S. 14:69(B)(4) as presently existing or hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 8175, § II, 9-16-99; Ord. No. 10,741, § 6, 5-1-14; Ord. No. 11,452, § 3, 8-9-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:69. 
Sec. 7-100. - Issuing worthless checks. 
(a)  Issuing worthless checks is the issuing, in exchange for anything of the value, whether the exchange is contemporaneous or not, with the intent to defraud, of any check, draft, or order for the payment of money upon any bank or other depository, when the offender knows at the time of the issuing that the account designated on the check, draft, or order has been closed, or is nonexistent or fictitious, or is one (1) in which the offender has no interest or on which he has no authority to issue such check, draft, or order. 
(b)  The offender's failure to pay a check, draft, or order, issued for value, within ten (10) days after notice of its nonpayment upon presentation has been deposited by certified mail in the United States mail system addressed to the issuer thereof either at the address shown on the instrument or the last known address for such person shown on the records of the bank upon which such instrument is drawn or within ten (10) days after delivery or personal tender of the written notice to said issuer by the payee or his agent, shall be presumptive evidence of his intent to defraud. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section, having a value of less than the value established in R.S. 14:71(C)(4) as presently existing or hereinafter amended, and shall be penalized as provided in R.S. 14:71(C)(4) as presently existing or hereinafter amended. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 6, 9-3-98; Ord. No. 10,741, § 7, 5-1-14; Ord. No. 11,452, § 4, 8-9-18) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:71(B). 
Secs. 7-101-7-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 7-110. - Letting premises for obscenity. 
    Letting premises for obscenity is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any premises knowing that they are to be used for the practice of obscenity as defined in R.S. 14:106 of the Criminal Code of Louisiana, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:85.1. 
Sec. 7-111. - Obscene live conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly engage or participate in, manage, produce, sponsor, present, or exhibit obscene live conduct, which production, performance, or exhibition, when taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, theatrical or artistic value, to or before an audience consisting of at least one person or spectator on any street, sidewalk, park, or other public place, or in any place exposed to public view, or in any place open to the public or to a segment thereof, whether or not an admission fee is charged, or whether or not attendance is conditioned upon the presentation of a membership card. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Obscene live conduct means the actual or simulated performance of acts of human sexual intercourse, masturbation, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, or excretory functions; or the actual or simulated touching, caressing, or fondling of the anus, genitals, or female breast or vulva; or the actual or simulated displaying of the pubic hairs, anus, vulva, genitals, or nipples of the female breast. 
    Knowingly means having general knowledge of or having reason to know or a belief or reasonable grounds for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry, or both, of the character of any conduct described herein. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-112. - Public displays of explicit sexual material. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to publicly display explicit sexual material, in order to protect persons from involuntary exposure to such materials. A person is guilty of a misdemeanor if that person knowingly fails to take prompt action to remove the public display of explicit sexual material from property in said person's possession. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Explicit sexual material means any picture, drawing, photograph, motion picture, or other pictorial representation, which depicts actual or simulated acts of human sexual intercourse, sodomy, bestiality, oral copulation, masturbation, excretory functions, torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or exhibition of the genitals. 
    Public display means material that is visible on a billboard, viewing screen, theater marquee, newsstand, display rack, window, showcase, display case, or other similar display area that is visible from a public street, sidewalk, park, or other public place, or from the property of others. 
    Knowingly means having general knowledge of or having reason to know or a belief or reasonable grounds for belief which warrants further inspection or inquiry, or both, of the character and content of any material described herein which is reasonably susceptible to examination by the defendant. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-113. - Urinating in public. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in or upon any public building, private building, conveyance, or other form of property in public. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-114. - Gambling. 
(a)  Gambling, as hereinafter defined as one of the following acts, is prohibited within the corporate limits of the municipality: 
(1)  The intentional conducting or directly assisting in conducting, as a business, of any game, contest, lottery, or contrivance whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit; or 
(2)  The intentional betting, wagering, or risking the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit at any table, bank, alley, lottery, or contrivance; or 
(3)  The intentional betting, wagering, or risking the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit at any game conducted with cards, dice, dominoes, or other contrivance. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to gambling, as hereinabove defined, conducted within a bona fide private residence. "Bona fide private residence" means a structure actually used and occupied as a dwelling or place of abode, provided such structure is not a hotel, motel, rooming house, or place of transient residence, and provided further that such structure is not used for or attached to any other structure used for the wholesale or retail of any material, substance, or commodity of whatsoever kind or description. 
(c)  Any owner, proprietor, lessee, or tenant of a building who knowingly permits gambling as elsewhere prohibited in the above sections in such building may be charged as a principal under the above sections. 
(d)  Any gambling paraphernalia or apparatus seized upon premises wherein any gambling herein prohibited is subsequently determined to have occurred, such determination to be the conviction of any person for gambling on such premises, may be destroyed and any monies seized thereat will be forfeited to the city and paid into the general fund upon order of the court adjudging such conviction. 
(e)  The conducting or assisting in the conducting of authorized activities or operations in accordance with the provisions of La. Rev. Stat. 4:501, et seq., Louisiana Riverboat Economic Development and Gaming Control Act, shall not be considered gambling for purposes of this section. 
(f)  The conducting or assisting in the conducting of authorized lottery activities or operations in accordance with provisions of La. Rev. Stat. 47:9000 through 9081 shall not be considered gambling for purposes of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Cross reference- License for raffles, bingo or keno for charitable purposes, 10-29 et seq. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90. 
Sec. 7-115. - Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles. 
    Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles is the intentional enticing, aiding, or permitting [of] any of the following acts, by anyone over the age of seventeen (17) of any child under the age of seventeen (17). No exception shall be made for a child who may be emancipated by marriage or otherwise. The lack of knowledge of the juvenile's age shall not be a defense: 
(1)  Beg, sing, sell any article, or play any musical instrument in any public place for the purpose of receiving alms; or 
(2)  Associate with any vicious or disreputable persons, or frequent places where the same may be found; or 
(3)  Visit any place where beverages of either high or low alcoholic content are the principal commodity sold or given away; or 
(4)  Visit any place where any gambling device is found, with the exception of "video draw poker devices," as defined by La. Rev. Stat. 33:4862.1(B), as amended, or where gambling habitually occurs; or 
(5)  Habitually trespass where it is recognized he has no right to be; or 
(6)  Use any vile, obscene, or indecent language; or 
(7)  Absent himself or remain away, without authority of his parents or tutor, from his home or place of abode; or 
(8)  Violate any law of the state or ordinance of any parish or village, town, or city of the state; or 
(9)  Visit any place where sexually indecent and obscene material, of any nature, is offered for sale, displayed, or exhibited. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92. 
Sec. 7-116. - Tattooing minors. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to tattoo any other person under the age of eighteen (18) without the consent of the parents of such person. 
(b)  Whoever is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 93.2. 
Sec. 7-117. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of sections 7-117 through 7-121 of this article, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Purchase means acquisition by the payment of money or other consideration. 
(2)  Public possession means the possession of any alcoholic beverage for any reason, including consumption, or any street or highway or in any public place or any place open to the public, including a club which is de facto open to the public. "Public possession" does not include the following: 
a.  The possession of consumption of any alcoholic beverage: 
1.  For an established religious purpose. 
2.  At a function sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit organization under 26 U.S.C. 501(c) where an individual had received or purchased a ticket for admittance. 
3.  When a person under twenty-one (21) years of age is accompanied by a parent or legal custodian twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
4.  For medical purposes when prescribed or administered by a licensed physician, pharmacist, dentist, nurse, hospital, or medical institution. 
5.  In private residences. 
b.  The sale, handling, transport, or service in dispensing of any alcoholic beverage pursuant to lawful employment of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age by a duly licensed manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer of beverage alcohol. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverage means beer, distilled spirits and wine containing one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume. Beer includes but is not limited to ale, lager, porter, stout, sake, and other similar fermented beverages brewed or produced from malt wholly or in part or from any substitute therefor. Distilled spirits include alcohol, ethanol, or spirits or wine in any form, including all dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever process produced. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-118. - Unlawful sales to persons under twenty-one. 
(a)  Unlawful sales to persons under twenty-one (21) is the selling or otherwise delivering for value of any alcoholic beverage to any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. Lack of knowledge of the person's age shall not be a defense. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 7, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-119. - Purchase and public possession of alcoholic beverages; exceptions; penalties. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person under twenty-one (21) years of age to purchase or have public possession of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  (1) 
Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(2)  Any person apprehended while violating the provisions of this section shall be issued a citation by the apprehending law enforcement officer, which shall be paid in the same manner as provided for the offenders of local traffic violations. 
Sec. 7-120. - Unlawful purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons on behalf of persons under twenty-one. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any persons, other than a parent or legal custodian as specified in section 7-117(2)a.3., to purchase on behalf of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-121. - Responsibilities for retail dealers not relieved. 
    Nothing in section 7-117 through section 7-120 shall be construed as relieving any licensed retail dealer in alcoholic beverages any responsibilities imposed under the provisions of Title 26 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 and of Chapter 3 of the Kenner Code of Ordinances, as amended. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-122. - Unlawful distribution of sample tobacco products to persons under eighteen (18) years of age. 
(a)  No person shall distribute, or cause to be distributed, to persons under eighteen (18) years of age, a promotional sample of any tobacco product. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Tobacco product means any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco, or smoking tobacco. 
    Cigar means any roll of tobacco for smoking, irrespective of size or shape, and irrespective of the tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredients, where such roll has a wrapper made chiefly of tobacco. 
    Cigarette means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of size or shape and irrespective of the tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper, or any other material, except where such wrapper is wholly or in greater part made of tobacco. 
    Smokeless tobacco means any finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the oral or nasal cavity. 
    Smoking tobacco means granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, or any other kind and form of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for smoking in a pipe or cigarette. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined, upon conviction, not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-123. - Unlawful sale of tobacco to, or purchase of tobacco by, or possession of tobacco by, unemancipated person under age eighteen; signs required on vending machines. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person knowingly to sell any tobacco product (as defined in section 7-118) to a person under eighteen (18) years of age. At the point of purchase, a sign in type not less than 30-point type shall be displayed that reads, "Louisiana Law Prohibits Sale Of Tobacco To Persons Under Age 18," or words of similar meaning. 
(b)  It is unlawful for a vending machine operator to place in use a vending machine to vend any tobacco product automatically, unless the machine displays a sign or sticker in not less than 22-point type on the front of the machine stating, "Louisiana Law Prohibits Sales Of Tobacco To Persons Under Age 18," or words of similar meaning. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person under age eighteen (18) to buy any tobacco product. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) possess any tobacco product. However, it shall not be unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess a tobacco product under any of the following circumstances: 
(1)  When a person under eighteen (18) years of age is accompanied by a parent, spouse, or legal guardian twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
(2)  In private residences. 
(3)  When the tobacco product is handled during the course and scope of his employment and required in the performance of such person's duties. 
(e)  (1)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section by selling or buying tobacco products shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation. The penalties for subsequent violations shall be a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation, a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the third violation, and a fine of not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for any violation thereafter. 
(2)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section by possessing tobacco products shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. 
(3)  A violation of the signage requirement of subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed a violation by the owner of the establishment where the violation occurred. A violation of the signage requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall be deemed to be a violation by the owner of the vending machine. For each such violation, the owner shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). The penalties for subsequent violations shall be a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation, a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the third violation, and a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any violation thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 10,741, § 8, 5-1-14) 
Editor's note- Section 8 of Ord. No. 10,741, adopted May 1, 2014, changed the title of § 7-123 from "Unlawful sale of tobacco to, or purchase of tobacco by, unemancipated person under age eighteen; signs required on vending machines" to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.8. 
Sec. 7-124. - Illegal carrying of weapons. 
(a)  Illegal carrying of weapons is: 
(1)  The intentional concealment of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon, on one's person; or 
(2)  The ownership, possession, custody, or use of any tools, dynamite or nitroglycerine, or explosives, or other instrumentality customarily used by thieves or burglars at any time by any person with the intent to commit a crime; or 
(3)  The manufacture, ownership, possession, custody, or use of any switchblade knife, spring knife, or other knife, or similar instrument having a blade which may be automatically unfolded or extended from a handle by the manipulation of a button, switch, latch, or similar contrivance; or 
(4)  The intentional possession or use by any person of a dangerous weapon on a school campus during regular school hours or in a school bus. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    School means any elementary, secondary, high school, or vo-tech school in this state. 
    Campus means all facilities and property within the boundary of the school property. 
    School bus means any motor bus being used to transport children to and from school or in connection with school activities. 
(c)  The provisions of this section, except subsection (a)(3), shall not apply to sheriffs and their deputies, state and city police, constables and town marshals, or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-125. - Unlawful sales of weapons to minors. 
(a)  Unlawful sales of weapons to minors is the selling or otherwise delivering for value of any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, to any person under the age of eighteen (18). Lack of knowledge of the minor's age shall not be a defense. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of unlawful sales of weapons to minors shall be fined not more than three hundred dollars ($300.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 8, 9-3-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91. 
Sec. 7-126. - Possession of handguns by juveniles and minors. 
(a)  (1) 
Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly have any handgun in such a person's possession. 
(2)  Any person possessing any handgun in violation of subsection (1) of this subsection (a) commits the offense of illegal possession of a handgun by a juvenile or minor. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) who is: 
a.  In attendance at a hunter's safety course or a firearms safety course; or 
b.  Practicing in the use of a firearm or shooting targets at an established range authorized by the governing body of the jurisdiction in which such range is located or any other area where the discharge of a firearm is not prohibited; or 
c.  Hunting or trapping pursuant to a valid license issued to such person for said purpose; or 
d.  Traveling with any unloaded handgun in such person's possession to or from any activity described in subsections a., b., or c. of this subsection (b)(1). 
(2)  Any person under the age of eighteen (18) years who is on real property under the control of such person's parent, legal guardian, or grandparent, and who has the permission of such person's parent, legal guardian, or grandparent, to possess a handgun. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, a handgun is loaded if: 
(1)  There is a cartridge in the chamber of the handgun; or 
(2)  There is a cartridge in the cylinder of the handgun, if the handgun is a revolver; or 
(3)  The handgun, and the ammunition for such handgun, are carried on the person of a person under the age of eighteen (18), or are in such close proximity to such a person that such person could readily gain access to the handgun and the ammunition and load the handgun. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-127. - Disturbing the peace and disorderly conduct. 
    Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such manner as would foreseeably disturb or alarm the public: 
(1)  Engaging in a fistic encounter; or 
(2)  Addressing any offensive, derisive, or annoying words to any other person who is lawfully in any street, or other public place; or call him or her by any offensive or derisive name, or make any noise or exclamation in his presence and hearing with the intent to deride, offend, or annoy him or her, or to prevent him or her from pursuing his or her lawful business, occupation, or duty; or 
(3)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; or 
(4)  Engaging in any act in a violent and tumultuous manner by any three or more persons; or 
(5)  Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street, road, highway, or right-of-way; or to, from, within, or upon public or private property to an act, which serves no lawful and reasonable purpose, so as to interfere with the lawful rights of others; or 
(6)  Holding of an unlawful assembly; or 
(7)  Interruption of any lawful assembly of people. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 9, 9-3-98; Ord. No. 10,741, § 9, 5-1-14) 
Sec. 7-128. - Peeping Tom. 
    No person shall perform such acts as will make him or her a "peeping Tom" on or about the premises of another, or go upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a "peeping Tom". 
    "Peeping Tom" as used in this section means one who peeps through windows or doors or other like places situated on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of persons spied upon without the consent of the persons spied upon. It is not a necessary element of this offense that the "peeping Tom" be upon the premises of the person being spied upon. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 10, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-129. - Keeping a disorderly place. 
    Keeping a disorderly place is the intentional maintaining of a place to be used habitually for any illegal purpose. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:104. 
Sec. 7-130. - Letting a disorderly place. 
    Letting a disorderly place is the granting of the right to use any premises knowing that they are to be used as a disorderly place, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:105. 
Sec. 7-131. - Drug-traffic loitering. 
(a)  A person is guilty of drug-traffic loitering if the person remains in a public place and intentionally solicits, induces, entices, or procures another to engage in unlawful conduct contrary to La. Rev. Stat. 40:966-971.1 et seq., or the equivalent federal statute, state statute, or ordinance of any political subdivision of the state. 
(b)  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether the person intends such prohibited conduct are: 
(1)  Is seen by an officer to be in possession of drug paraphernalia; or 
(2)  Is a known drug trafficker; or 
(3)  Repeatedly beckons to, stops or attempts to stop, passersby or engages passersby in conversation; or 
(4)  Repeatedly stops, or attempts to stop, motor vehicle operators by hailing, waving of arms, or any other bodily gesture; or 
(5)  Circles an area in a motor vehicle and repeatedly beckons to, contacts or attempts to stop pedestrians; or 
(6)  Is the subject of any court order, which directs the person to stay out of any specified area as a condition of release from custody, a condition of probation or parole, or other supervision or any court order, in a criminal or civil case involving illegal drug activity; or 
(7)  Has been evicted as the result of the person's illegal drug activity and ordered to stay out of a specified area affected by drug-related activity. 
(c)  A person is not guilty of drug-traffic loitering if the person merely remains in a public place without also intentionally soliciting, inducing, enticing, or procuring another to engage in unlawful conduct contrary to La. Rev. Stat. 40:966-97.1 et seq., or the equivalent federal statute, state statute or ordinance of any political subdivision of the state. 
(d)  Definitions. 
    Conviction means an adjudication of guilt pursuant to Code Cr. Proc. Article 934, or the equivalent provisions of any federal statute, state statute, or ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, and includes a verdict of guilty, a finding of guilty, and an acceptance of a plea of guilty. 
    Drug paraphernalia means drug paraphernalia as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 40:1031A. 
    Illegal drug activity means unlawful conduct contrary to any provision of La. R.S. 40:966-971.1 et seq., or the equivalent federal statute, state statue, or ordinance of any political subdivision of the state. 
    Known drug trafficker means a person who, within the knowledge of the arresting officer, has been convicted within the last two (2) years in any court for any illegal drug activity. 
    Public place means an area generally visible to public view and includes, but [is] not limited to, streets, sidewalks, bridges, alleys, plazas, parks, driveways, parking lots, transit stations, shelters and tunnels, automobiles (whether moving or not), and buildings, including those which serve food or drink, or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-132. - Minors under seventeen not permitted in pool or billiard halls. 
    No person, whether as proprietor, agent, manager, employee, lessee, or otherwise, conducting, overseeing, or managing any place where pool or billiard games of any sort are operated as the principal business designated by fifty (50) percent or more of the area devoted to pool or billiards shall allow or permit minors under the age of seventeen (17) years within the place or to be employed therein, or engage or take part in any game of pool or billiards, or to use or play upon any pool or billiard table. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-133. - Amusement places. 
    Any business, place, or establishment where three (3) or more coin-operated or manually activated by lever, or otherwise, amusement games such as, but not limited to, flipper-type machines, target machines, foos ball machines, and the like, are available for the use and enjoyment of the public and the operation of which: 
(1)  Constitutes the primary or principal business of any said place, business, or establishment; or 
(2)  Utilizes more than ten (10) percent of the gross floor area within the premises. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-134. - Permissible hours of operation of amusement places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as proprietor, agent, manager, employee, lessee, or otherwise, conducting or carrying on any place, business, or establishment of amusement place for pay or otherwise, to permit or allow said business to be carried on after the hour of 10:00 p.m. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any place, business, or establishment where minors are by law prohibited from entering or frequenting, or any place, business, or establishment contained and located within a publicly owned and regulated building. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-135. - Adult supervision of amusement places required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as proprietor, agent, manager, employee, lessee, or otherwise, conducting or carrying on any place, business, or establishment or amusement place, as defined herein, for pay, or otherwise, to permit said establishment to be open without adult supervision present on the premises at all times. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-136. - Parental neglect. 
(a)  Whenever a minor shall be arrested or detained for the commission of any criminal act within the City of Kenner, the parent of such minor shall be immediately notified by the police department advising the parent of such arrest or detention, the reason therefor, and their responsibility under this section; and a record of such notification shall be kept by the Kenner Police Department. 
(b)  The parent of a habitual offender may be deemed guilty of parental neglect and shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), sentenced to a term of not more than thirty (30) days in jail, or placed upon probation of any one or any combination of same with the discretion of the court. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Parental neglect means it shall be unlawful for the parent of any minor to fail to exercise reasonable parental control which results in the minor committing any criminal act or to allow or encourage any minor to commit any criminal act or become delinquent in accordance with the Laws of Louisiana as they pertain to juveniles. 
    Parent means mother, father, legal guardian, and any other person having the care or custody of a minor or such other adult with whom a minor may be found residing. 
    Minor means any juvenile under the age of seventeen (17) residing with the parent as defined in this section. 
    Criminal act means those acts which violate the statutes of the State of Louisiana or the ordinances of the City of Kenner and shall include moving traffic violations. 
    Habitual offender means one who commits criminal acts in any one of the following combinations of criminal acts within a twelve-month period: two (2) or more criminal acts other than moving traffic violations; or one (1) criminal act other than moving traffic violations and two (2) moving traffic violations; or four (4) moving traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-137. - Prohibited library computer use. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to use a library computer, via the internet or otherwise to: 
(1)  Access, obtain, receive, view, exhibit, or display any image or visual depiction which is obscene or constitutes child pornography; 
(2)  Print, copy, manufacture, publish, distribute, sell, rent, lend, produce or reproduce any image or visual depiction, either in person or electronically, which is obscene or constitutes child pornography. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, library computer means any computer available for public use in any Jefferson Parish library in the City of Kenner. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a library computer and accompanying software shall not be considered to be a purchase, distribution, exhibition or loan by any library, with respect to any materials that a patron may personally access or acquire via the internet. 
(d)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment, within the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 8556, § 2, 10-18-01) 
Sec. 7-138. - Hourly rental of hotel and motel rooms prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper, owner operator or employee of any hotel, motel or inn to rent, let, lease or charge an hourly rate for a room or for any of the amenities thereto, or to otherwise rent, let, lease or charge for any room for less than a twenty-hour-period. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper, owner operator or employee of any hotel, motel or inn to rent, let, lease or charge a separate fee or rate for any bed linens or amenities for a room rented at a daily rate. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any innkeeper, owner operator or employee of any hotel, motel or inn to offer a discount or rebate for early checkout of a room within a twenty-hour-period. 
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  The rental of rooms for the holding of conventions or meetings for the conduct of lawful business; 
(2)  The rental of hospitality suites for the conduct of lawful business; or 
(3)  The rental of rooms at any hotel or motel within a radius of one-quarter (1/4) of a mile of any medical facility licensed by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals. 
(e)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment not less than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day that any provision of this section is violated shall constitute and be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 9650, § 1, 3-13-08) 
Secs. 7-139-7-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES AFFECTING THE PUBLIC GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-150. - Resisting an officer and arrest. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit [the offense of] resisting an officer. Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in his or her official capacity and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, seizing property, or serving process is acting in his or her official capacity. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Officer means police, deputy, code enforcement, or wildlife agent. 
    Obstruction of phrase, in addition to its common meaning, signification, and connotation, means: 
a.  Flight of one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest; or 
b.  Any violence towards or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is incarcerated in jail; or 
c.  Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting officer. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108. 
Sec. 7-151. - Refusal or failure to obey lawful orders prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or fail to obey any lawful order, command, or instruction of any officer, or member of the police department of the city, issued or given while in the performance of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-152. - Obstruction of court orders. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person by threats or force, or to willfully prevent, obstruct, impede, or interfere with, or to willfully attempt to prevent, obstruct, impede, or interfere with, the due exercise of rights or the performance of duties under any order, judgment, or decree of the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-153. - Obstruction of police. 
    It shall be unlawful and shall be considered a breach of the peace for any person wilfully to obstruct, hinder, or unlawfully interfere with any member of the city police while in the performance of his or her duty. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-154. - Flight from an officer. 
    No driver of a motor vehicle shall intentionally refuse to bring a vehicle to a stop knowing that he has been given a visual and audible signal to stop by a police officer, when the officer has reasonable ground to believe that the driver has committed an offense. The signal shall be given by an emergency light or siren on a vehicle marked as a police vehicle. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-155. - Breaking of a police seal. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the breaking of a police seal. The breaking of a police seal is the intentional damaging or breaking of a police seal, warning, or barricade placed on a crime scene without the consent of a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, 11, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-156. - Obstruction of fire fighter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to, in any way, interfere, meddle with, or obstruct a fire fighter in the discharge of his or her duties at a fire or on the way to a fire. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-157. - False personation. 
    False personation is the performance of any of the following acts with the intent to injure or defraud, or to obtain or secure any special privilege or advantage: 
(1)  Impersonating any public officer, or private individual having special authority by law to perform an act affecting the rights or interests of another, or the assuming, without authority, of any uniform or badge by which such officer or person is lawfully distinguished; or 
(2)  Performing any act purporting to be official in such assumed character. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:112. 
Sec. 7-158. - Misrepresentation during booking. 
    Misrepresentation during booking is the misrepresentation of or refusal by a person being booked to provide his name, age, sex, residence, or social security number to any law enforcement officer or official who is booking him pursuant to a lawful arrest, or the refusal of such person to submit to fingerprinting or photographing. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, provided that any such sentence shall be made to run concurrently with any other sentence. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-159. - False testimony. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to give false testimony or evidence in proceedings before the municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-160. - Contempt of court. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be in contempt of court. Contempt of court means an act or omission tending to obstruct or interfere with the orderly administration of justice, or to impair the dignity of the court or respect for its authority. Contempt of court are of two (2) kinds-Direct and constructive. 
(b)  A "direct contempt of court" is one committed in the immediate view and presence of the court and of which it has personal knowledge. A direct contempt of court includes, but is not limited to, any of the following acts: 
(1)  Contumacious failure, after notice, to appear for arraignment or trial on the day fixed therefor; 
(2)  Contumacious failure to comply with a subpoena or summons to appear in court, proof of service of which appears of record; 
(3)  Refusal to take the oath or affirmation as a witness, or refusal of a witness to answer a nonincriminating question when ordered to do so by the court; 
(4)  Contumacious, insolent, or disorderly behavior toward the judge or an attorney or other officer of the court, tending to interrupt or interfere with the business of the court or to impair its dignity or respect for its authority; 
(5)  Breach of the peace, boisterous conduct, or violent disturbance tending to interrupt or interfere with the business of the court or to impair its dignity or respect for its authority; 
(6)  Use of insulting, abusive, or discourteous language by an attorney or other person in open court, or in a document filed with the court in irrelevant criticism of another attorney, of a judge, or officer of the court; 
(7)  Violation of a rule of the court adopted to maintain order and decorum in the courtroom. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section by committing a "direct contempt" may be found guilty and punished therefor by the court without any trial, after affording him an opportunity to be heard orally by way of defense or mitigation. The court shall render an order reciting the facts constituting the contempt, adjudging the person guilty thereof, and specifying the punishment imposed. 
(d)  A "constructive contempt of court" is any contempt other than a direct one. A constructive contempt includes, but is not limited to, any of the following acts: 
(1)  Willful neglect or violation of duty by the clerk, marshal, or other person elected, appointed, or employed to assist the court in the administration of justice; 
(2)  Willful disobedience of any lawful judgment, order, mandate, writ, or process of court; 
(3)  Removal or attempted removal of any person or of property in the custody of an officer acting under the authority of a judgment, order, mandate, writ, or process of the court; 
(4)  Unlawful detention of a witness, the defendant or his attorney, or the prosecutor, while going to, remaining at, or returning from the court; 
(5)  Assuming to act as an attorney or other officer of the court, without lawful authority. 
(e)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section by committing a "constructive contempt" shall be tried by the judge on a rule to show cause alleging the facts constituting the contempt. The rule may be issued by the court on its own motion, or on motion of the prosecutor. 
(1)  A certified copy of the motion and of the rule shall be served on the person charged, in the manner of a subpoena, not less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the time assigned for trial of the rule; 
(2)  If the person charged with contempt is found guilty, the court shall render an order reciting the facts constituting the contempt, adjudging the person charged with the contempt guilty thereof, and specifying the punishment imposed. 
(f)  Penalties for contempt. 
(1)  A person adjudged guilty of contempt of court shall be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(2)  When an attorney is adjudged guilty of a direct contempt of court, the punishment shall be limited to a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for not more than twenty-four (24) hours, or both; and, for any subsequent direct contempt of the same court by the same offender, a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days, or both. 
(3)  When a contempt of court consists of the omission to perform an act which is yet in the power of the person charged with contempt to perform, he may be imprisoned until he performs it, and, in such a case, this shall be specified in the court's order. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-161. - Telephone alarm system; prohibition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use, or cause to be used, install, operate, adjust, program, or otherwise maintain a telephonic alarm system which automatically or mechanically transmits a signal, message, or warning to any City of Kenner Department of Fire telephone line. Telephonic alarm system shall mean any mechanism, equipment, or device which is designed to operate automatically through the use of public telephone facilities to transmit a signal, message, or warning to another location. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-162. - Telephone communications, improper language, harassment. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in or institute a telephone call, telephone conversation, or telephone conference with another person, anonymously or otherwise, and therein use obscene, profane, vulgar, lewd, lascivious or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate, or harass another person; 
(2)  Make repeated telephone communications anonymously or otherwise in a manner reasonably expected to annoy, abuse, torment, harass, embarrass or offend another, whether or not conversation ensues; or 
(3)  Make a telephone call and intentionally fail to hang up or disengage the connection; or 
(b)  Any offense committed by use of a telephone as set forth in this section shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place where the telephone call or calls originated or at the place where the telephone call or calls were received. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 12, 9-3-98) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:285. 
Sec. 7-163. - Fireworks. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, keep, store, use, manufacture, offer to sell, handle, or transport any pyrotechnics within the corporate limits except as herein provided, it being the intention of this section to prohibit the sale of, distribution of, or discharge of pyrotechnics of any kind or description whatsoever within the corporate limits. 
(b)  Pyrotechnics means any sparkler, squib, rocket, firecracker, Roman candle, signal lights, fireworks, or other devices or composition used to obtain visible or audible pyrotechnic display. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be held to apply: 
(1)  To the possession or use of signaling devices for current daily consumption by railroads, trucks, or vessels requiring them; 
(2)  To pyrotechnic display of fireworks in public parks or other open places. Where a permit for such display has been issued by the city, with the approval of the chief of police and the chief of the fire department, and they shall have determined that provisions have been made for the proper safeguarding of life and property, and they shall further provide proper police and fire protection in connection with any authorized display; 
(3)  To the possession, sale, or use of normal stacks of flashlight compositions by photographers or dealers in photographic supplies. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 51:650 et seq. 
Sec. 7-164. - Air guns. 
    The use, firing, shooting, and explosion of "air guns" or "air rifles" or "blow guns" within the corporate limits of the municipality is hereby declared to be a nuisance and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot, or explode "air guns" or "air rifles" or "blow guns" within the municipality limits. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-165. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, either in the daytime or nighttime, any firearm within the corporate limits of the municipality; except law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties, and except other persons acting in the necessary defense of life or property. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Cross reference- Hunting or pursuing animals and fowl within city prohibited, § 4-2. 
Sec. 7-166. - Regulation of unnecessary noise. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, streetcar, or other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device or any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time. The use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used, or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet, and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine, or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which, by causing frequent or long continued noise, shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistles attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded, or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling, or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud or excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building inspector, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three (3) days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three (3) days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration, or repair of any building or the excavation of streets or highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. upon application being made at the time the permit for work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church, or court, while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device in public, whether on private or public property, for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(14)  Metal rails, pillars and columns; transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars, or columns of iron, steel, or other material, over and along streets and other public places, upon carts, drays, cars, trucks, or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(15)  Pile drivers, hammers, tractors, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoise [hoist], or other similar equipment, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. No highway construction equipment shall be used during these hours within two hundred fifty (250) feet of a residence. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(17)  Vocal or instrumental music. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to sing or play a musical instrument individually or as a member or participant in any singing or musical instrument group or band with or without a phonograph, tape recording, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other instrument, machine or device, between 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. to make or continue with any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise, including the singing or playing of music which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others within the City of Kenner. If the sound or noise is plainly audible at a distance of fifty (50) feet of the building, structure, or vehicle in which it is located, it shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of subsection (17). 
b.  It shall further be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any source of musical sound between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. within the City of Kenner nor between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. on property owned by the City of Kenner (except where a public gathering permit has been issued) in such a manner as to create a sound level, measured in decibels (dBA), which exceed the maximum sound level (Lmax) set forth for the receiving land use as outlined in the following table to wit: 
Receiving Land Use Category
Lmax dBA
Single-family residential or public property ..... 60 
Two-family or multiple-family dwelling (intra-dwelling) ..... 55 
Commercial and business ..... 65 
Industrial ..... 85 
1.  Prima facie proof of violation of subsection b. shall be made by sound level measurement made with a properly calibrated sound level meter, Type 2 or better, using the weighted network in accordance and conforming with the noise measurement standards, based on the reference sound pressure, promulgated by the American National Standards Institute and Testing Procedures (ANSI). 
2.  Sound level meter readings to be taken in the enforcement of this section shall be made at or beyond the closest property boundary line which separates the source of the offending sounds from the next adjacent immovable property owned or inhabited by another person. 
3.  In the case of two-family or multiple-family dwellings, the sound level shall be measured within an adjacent intra-building dwelling. When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one land use category, the limits of the more restrictive use shall apply at the boundary and within the most restricted land use category. When a sound source has multiple land uses, the standards set forth hereinabove for the most restrictive use category shall apply. 
c.  It shall further be unlawful for any person, for purposes of subsection (17), to include, but not limited to, any person, owner, lessor, lessee, manager, promoter, partner, or corporate officer or any employee or agent thereof, of any such building, structure, or vehicle, to authorize, allow, or permit any person or persons to sing or play musical instruments in violation of subsections a. or b. above. 
d.  In addition to penalty provisions provided in section 7-3 of this Code, as an additional remedy to the City of Kenner, the operation of maintenance of any business, device, or instrument in violation of any provision of subsection (17) may be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
e.  If any section, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, word, or phrase of subsection (17) is, for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of subsection (17). 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 10,957, § 1, 8-6-15) 
Sec. 7-167. - Loud sound amplification systems. 
(a)  As used herein, a motor vehicle is defined as every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails, but excluding a motorized bicycle. 
(b)  No operator or passenger of a motor vehicle shall operate, or permit the operation of, any sound amplification system which can be heard outside of the vehicle from twelve (12) or more feet when the vehicle is being operated upon a street or highway. 
(c)  "Sound amplification system" shall include any radio, tape player, compact disc player, loudspeaker or other electrical device used for amplification of the human voice, music, or any other noise or sound. 
(d)  This section shall not apply where the operator of the vehicle was not otherwise prohibited by law from operating the sound amplification system and that any of the following apply: 
(1)  The system was being operated to request medical or vehicular assistance or to warn of a hazardous road condition; 
(2)  The system was an emergency or public safety vehicle; 
(3)  The vehicle was owned and operated by the City of Kenner or a gas, electric, communications, refuge, or water utility company; 
(4)  The vehicle was being used in a parade as defined by the City of Kenner Code of Ordinances, and the person or organization conducting the parade had obtained a parade permit from the appropriate city agency. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 13, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-168. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of Ord. No. 7425, adopted April 18, 1996, repealed § 7-168 in its entirety. Former § 7-168 provided for soliciting upon private residence and derived from Ord. No. 7297, § 2, adopted Sept. 21, 1995. Section 1 of Ord. No. 7425 provided for similar subject matter, which can be found in § 10-170 et seq. 
Sec. 7-169. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. In this section: 
(1)  Curfew hours means: 
a.  10:00 p.m. on any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday until 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
b.  11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday, Saturday or Sunday. 
(2)  Emergency means an unforseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life. 
(3)  Establishment means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including but not limited to any place of amusement or entertainment. 
(4)  Guardian and/or tutor/tutrix means: 
a.  A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or 
b.  A public or private agency within whom a minor has been placed by a court. 
(5)  Minor means any persons under seventeen (17) years of age. 
(6)  Operator means any individual, firm, association, partnership, or corporation operating, managing, or conducting any establishment. The term includes the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of a corporation. 
(7)  Parent means a person who is: 
a.  A natural parent, adoptive parent, or step-parent of another person; or 
b.  At least seventeen (17) years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor. 
(8)  Public place means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but not limited to, streets, highways, roads, alleys, common areas of schools, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities, shops, or other unsupervised places in the city. 
(9)  Remain means to: 
a.  Linger, loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or stay; or 
b.  Fail to leave the premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the owner, operator or other person in control of the premises. 
(10)  Serious bodily injury means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement, or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. 
(b)  Offenses. 
(1)  A minor commits an offense if he/she remains in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(2)  A parent or guardian and/or tutor/tutrix of a minor commits an offense if he/she knowingly permits, or by insufficient control, allows the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours. 
(3)  The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an offense if he/she knowingly allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. 
(c)  Defenses. 
(1)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b) that the minor was: 
a.  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or tutor/tutrix: 
b.  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian and/or tutor/tutrix without any detour or stop; 
c.  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
d.  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
e.  Involved in an emergency; 
f.  On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police department about the minor's presence; 
g.  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or other similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, and official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
h.  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
i.  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with Louisiana law. 
j.  Is seventeen (17) and lawfully operating a motor vehicle under the provisions of La. Rev. Stat. 32:416.1. 
(2)  It is a defense to prosecution under subsection (b)(3) that the owner, operator, or employee of an establishment promptly notified the police department that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours and refused to leave. 
(d)  Enforcement. Before taking any enforcement action under this section, a police officer shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no defense in subsection (c) is present. 
(e)  Penalties. A person who violates a provision of this chapter is guilty of a separate offense for each violation of the above provisions and is guilty of a separate offense for each day or part of the day during which the violation is committed, continued, or permitted. Each offense, upon conviction, is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or sixty (60) days in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7682, § 1, 4-17-97) 
Sec. 7-170. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  Any person who intentionally, or with criminal negligence, commits any of the following shall be guilty of cruelty to animals: 
(1)  Overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded, or overworks a living animal; 
(2)  Tortures, torments, cruelly beats or unjustifiably injures, maims, mutilates, or kills any living animal, whether belonging to himself/herself or another; 
(3)  Having charge, custody, or possession of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, unjustifiably fails to provide it with proper food, proper drink, proper shelter, or proper veterinary care; 
(4)  Abandons any animal; 
(5)  Impounds or confines, or causes to be impounded or confined in a pound or other place, a living animal and fails to supply it during such confinement with proper food, proper drink, and proper shelter; 
(6)  Carries, or causes to be carried, a living animal in or upon a vehicle or otherwise, in a cruel or inhumane manner; 
(7)  Unjustifiably administers any poisonous or noxious drug or substance to any domestic animal or unjustifiably exposes any such drug or substance, with intent that the same shall be taken or swallowed by any domestic animal; 
(8)  Kills or injures any animal belonging to another person without legal privilege or consent of the owner; 
(9)  Mistreats any living animal by any act or omission whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death is caused to or permitted upon the animal; 
(10)  Causes or procures to be done by any person any act enumerated in this section. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, fowl shall not be defined as animals. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to the lawful hunting or trapping of wildlife as provided by law, herding of domestic animals, accepted veterinary practices, and activities carried on for scientific or medical research governed by accepted standards. 
(d)  Definitions. 
    Cruel means every act or failure to act whereby unjustifiable physical pain or suffering is caused or permitted. 
    Abandons means to completely forsake and desert an animal previously under the custody or possession of a person without making reasonable arrangements for its proper care, sustenance, and shelter. 
    Proper food means providing each animal with daily food of sufficient quality and quantity to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Proper drink or water means providing each animal with daily water of sufficient quality and quantity to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Proper shelter means providing each animal with adequate shelter from the elements as required to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable suffering by the animal. 
    Proper veterinary care means providing each animal with veterinary care sufficient to prevent unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering by the animal. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 14, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-171. - Littering; special provisions for abandoned vehicles on private property. 
(a)  Littering is the dumping, throwing, storing, or scattering of trash, used or scrap building materials, or any objects such as washing machines, shopping baskets or carts, abandoned refrigerators, parts of machinery, including automobiles. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, discard, or otherwise dispose of litter upon any public place, upon private property not owned by him, or in or on the waters, whether from a vehicle or otherwise, including, but not limited to, any public highway, public park, beach, campground, recreational area, trailer park, highway, road, street, or alley, except: 
(1)  When such property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions or by the municipality for the disposal of garbage and refuse and such person is authorized to use such property for such purpose; 
(2)  When litter is placed into a litter receptacle in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried away or deposited by the elements upon any parts of said private or public property or waters. 
(c)  If the throwing, dumping, or depositing of litter was done from a motor vehicle, except a bus or large passenger vehicle or a school bus, all as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 32:1, it shall be prima facie evidence that the throwing, dumping, or depositing was done by the driver of the motor vehicle. Likewise, once it is established that thrown, dumped, or deposited litter was possessed by a specific person, firm, or corporation, immediately before the act of dumping, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that the possessor committed the act of throwing, dumping, or depositing. 
(d)  The offender may be cited for the offense by means of a ticket, summons, or other means provided by law or ordinance. 
(e)  A person may be found guilty and fined under this section although the commission of the offense did not occur in the presence of a law enforcement officer if the preponderance of the evidence presented to the court indicates that the defendant has committed the offense. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful to litter any public street, alley, thoroughfare, or other public property or private property within the city. For purposes of this section, the depositing of garbage and/or trash for collection upon the street right-of-way or in the required front yard, or side yard of corner lots, outside of the collection times specified in this subsection, shall be considered littering. 
(1)  Hours of placement of garbage and/or trash for collection. 
a.  Containers for garbage and/or trash shall be placed at the collection point in accordance with the following: 
1.  All containers shall be placed at the collection point no earlier than 3:00 p.m. on the day preceding the day upon which garbage and/or trash collection is customarily made. 
2.  All containers shall be removed from the collection point no later than 10:00 p.m. on the same day the garbage and/or trash collection is customarily made. 
3.  Properties where containers for garbage and/or trash are confined to a collection area and are secured from accidental dislodging or disturbance are exempt from the provisions of this subsection. 
(g)  Likewise, it shall be unlawful for any property owner, his lessee, agent, or employee to knowingly permit the scattering or dumping of refuse, garbage, trash, or litter on any property over which he has ownership or control. The provisions of this section shall not apply to permissible fill materials dumped or scattered on private property pursuant to a fill permit validly issued by the Department of Regulatory (Inspections). 
(h)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section, upon first conviction, shall be fined not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned not more than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day of violation shall constitute a separate offense. Upon second conviction, an offender shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00); and upon third or subsequent conviction, shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or be imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(1)  The judge in his discretion may require an individual convicted of a violation of this section to remove litter from highways, public playgrounds, public parks, or other appropriate locations within the municipality for any prescribed period of time in lieu of, or in addition to, the penalties prescribed in this section; 
(2)  In addition, any person who throws or deposits litter from a water vessel shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(i)  Any shopping basket or cart that is found to have been discarded as litter as defined above may be collected by agents of the City of Kenner and stored by the City of Kenner. The owner of any shopping basket or cart that is collected and stored by the City of Kenner may contact the inspection and code enforcement department and make arrangements to retrieve said item; however, said owner shall pay a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per basket or cart. Any shopping basket or cart which remains in the possession of the City of Kenner for a period of not less than ninety (90) days may be disposed of in any manner the director and code enforcement department deems necessary to cover the cost of retrieval program. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7616, § 1, 1-9-97; Ord. No. 9939, § 1, 6-18-09; Ord. No. 10,430, § 1, 7-19-12; Ord. No. 10,695, § 1, 12-5-13) 
Cross reference- Accumulation, collection of refuse, § 91/2-4; impoundment of vehicles for violation of no parking regulations, § 15-51; maximum time period for parking, § 15-54. 
State Law reference- Abandoned automobiles; sale by municipalities; procedure, R.S. 32:476; regulation of abandoned automobiles, major appliances and other junk by municipalities, R.S. 33:4876, littering of highways and adjacent land prohibited, R.S. 32:289. 
Sec. 7-171.1. - Prohibition of abandoned motor vehicles on private property; findings and declarations. 
    Pursuant to the authority granted to the City of Kenner under R.S. 32:471 et seq., the council hereby finds and declares that the accumulation and storage of abandoned motor vehicles on private property is found to create a condition tending to diminish the value and enjoyment of property; to promote blight and deterioration; to invite plundering; to create fire hazards; to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors; to create a harborage for rodents and insects; and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Except as expressly provided hereinafter, the maintenance or allowing the maintenance of abandoned motor vehicles on private property shall be unlawful and prohibited within the municipal limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.2. - Provisions not exclusive regulation. 
    This section is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore and hereafter enacted by the city, the state, or other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.3. - Definitions. 
    Abandoned motor vehicle. Any junked or nuisance motor vehicle or parts thereof that is mechanically inoperable and/or is left on private property for more than fifteen (15) consecutive days. 
    Antique vehicle. Any motor vehicle twenty-five (25) years or older, which is operable and substantially in its original condition. 
    Enforcing agency. The city police department or the department of inspection and code enforcement for the city. 
    Officer. An employee of the enforcing agency. 
    Junked motor vehicle . A motor vehicle which is partially dismantled or wrecked; cannot be self-propelled or moved in the manner in which it was originally intended to move; is more than five (5) years old and appears to be worth less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) as evidenced by independent sources; or has become illegal to operate on the public streets because it is missing one (1) or more parts required by law or does not display a current and/or valid registration, or inspection sticker, or license plate. Lack of current and/or valid registration, or inspection sticker, or license plate shall not alone constitute a junked motor vehicle. 
    Motor vehicle. As used herein is hereby defined to include any machine designed or intended to travel over land or water by self-propulsion or while attached to self-propelled vehicle, including but not limited to an automobile, truck, van, sports utility vehicles, motorcycle, truck trailer, semi trailer, tractor, bus, recreational vehicle, camper, watercraft, boat, canoe, jet skis, ATV's, motorized bicycle, or any other legal type vehicle licensed or that should be licensed by the department of motor vehicles. 
    Nuisance vehicle. A motor vehicle that is in such condition, determined by the officer, based on standards set forth in Ordinance No. 9939, as to create a blighted or deteriorating effect on the public landscape, or nearby private property or is otherwise a public nuisance or a safety hazard, including, but not limited to, a vehicle found to be: 
a.  A breeding ground or harbor for mosquitoes or other insects or a breeding ground or harbor for rats, animals or other pests; 
b.  A point of heavy growth of weeds or other noxious vegetation over eight (8) inches in height surrounding the abandoned vehicle; 
c.  A point of collection of pools or ponds of stagnant water; 
d.  A point of concentration of combustible items such as gasoline, oil, other flammable or explosive materials including, but not limited to, boxes, paper, old clothes, rags, refuse, or any other combustible materials or objects of a like nature within or surrounding the vehicle; 
e.  One which has parts thereof which may fall and injure members of the public or one which has parts which may fall or be closed and become an area of confinement, such as a truck lid or door, which may not be released for opening from the inside; 
f.  One which is so situated and located that there is a danger of the vehicle falling, rolling, turning over, or creating an unsafe movement such as unattended, blocked or jacked vehicles; 
g.  A point of collection of garbage, food waste, animal waste, or any other rotten or putrescent matter of any kind within or surrounding the abandoned vehicle; 
h.  One which has parts thereof which are jagged or contain sharp edges of metal or glass; or 
i.  One which because of its defective deteriorated or obsolete condition in any other way constitutes a nuisance or a threat to the public's health or safety. 
    Owner. Owner of the motor vehicle or owner of the premises. 
    Owner of the motor vehicle. The last registered owner of the abandoned vehicle. 
    Owner of the premises. The owner or the occupant of the land on which the abandoned vehicle is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
    Private property. Any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09; Ord. No. 10,012, § 1, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 10,261, § 1, 7-21-11; Ord. No. 11,202, § 1, 11-17-16) 
Sec. 7-171.4. - Exceptions and affirmative defenses. 
(a)  The following described vehicles are exceptions to the definitions of junked, abandoned or nuisance vehicles and therefore are not junked, abandoned or nuisance vehicles: 
(1)  A motor vehicle which is completely enclosed within a building in a manner such that it is not visible from the street or other public or private property. 
(2)  Any motor vehicle in an appropriate storage place or depository maintained at a location where such business is authorized under the unified development code and other regulatory ordinances of the city. 
(3)  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or constructed for racing or operation on privately owned drag strips or raceways. 
(4)  Any antique vehicle retained by the owner for collection purposes, as defined herein, rather than for salvage or for transportation. 
(5)  Any motor vehicle in operable condition and used daily that is advertised for private sale and located on private property with the consent of the owner of the premises for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days, provided that if displayed in a front yard, its location must not result in a sight line traffic hazard; the vehicle and area must not be unsightly or become a safety issue and a "For Sale" sign must be affixed to the windshield. The motor vehicle shall be registered to the private property in which it is located for sale. 
(b)  The fact that a motor vehicle is the property of a member of the armed forces of the United States who is on active duty assignment shall constitute an affirmative defense to the claim that a motor vehicle is an abandoned motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09; Ord. No. 10,012, § 2, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 11,062, § 6, 3-17-16; Ord. No. 11,143, § 1, 8-4-16; Ord. No. 11,202, § 2, 11-17-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,202, § 2, adopted Nov. 17, 2016, changed the title of § 7-171.4 from "Exceptions" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 7-171.5. - Determination of violation. 
(a)  Upon observation of an abandoned motor vehicle by the officer and/or upon receiving a complaint of a possible violation, the officer shall inspect any such vehicle. 
(b)  Upon the determination that a violation exists: 
(1)  The officer shall record the location, the type, make, color, and license registration, of the vehicle, if any, and shall tag, mark, number and photograph such vehicles. 
(2)  An abandoned motor vehicle that is visible and accessible to the officer shall be tagged on the motor vehicle or parts thereof which said violation exists. 
(3)  If an abandoned motor vehicle is visible but not accessible to the officer for tagging, the notice may be (i) mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, or served by a deputy to the last known address of the owner and (ii) a tag placed on closest window to the front door of the property. 
a.  Notice by certified mail. 
1.  For the purposes of this chapter, when the owner has been served by certified mail, and such mail is signed, the owner is deemed to have received notice in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
2.  For the purposes of this chapter, when the owner has been served by certified mail, such mail is refused or is not signed, and an additional notice has been served by first class mail, with a certificate of mailing, the owner is deemed to have received notice in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.6. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  The tagging and notice, if any, shall inform the owner(s) cited: 
(1)  Of the date and time of tagging; 
(2)  Of the violations and conditions evidencing such violation and require the owner(s) to whom it is delivered to remedy such violations within fifteen (15) days of the date of such notice; 
(3)  Of the right to request a hearing or an extension of time to repair the abandoned motor vehicle within seven (7) days of the date of the tagging. Such request must be made in writing and must be delivered or postmarked within seven (7) days of the tagging to the department of inspection and code enforcement for the city. If a hearing is requested, it shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of section 7-171.8 and shall be heard by the magistrate judge; 
(4)  That a judgment may issue that the abandoned motor vehicle will be removed if not abated or if no hearing request is made in a timely manner; and 
(5)  That the owner may be held responsible for all costs incidental to the removal of the abandoned motor vehicle. 
This form of tagging and notice, if any, shall be sufficient notice to the owner to abate the abandoned motor vehicle or request a hearing or extension of time to repair the abandoned motor vehicle. 
(b)  The tagging shall be clearly visible to drivers of passing vehicles and/or pedestrians and the tagging or notice posted shall not be placed in a location that would damage, harm or otherwise alter the appearance of the vehicle or the property. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.7. - Compliance period; failure or refusal to comply. 
(a)  Within the fifteen-day period after tagging of the abandoned motor vehicle, the owner shall abate the nuisance by; i. Moving the motor vehicle such that it is completely enclosed within a building in a manner such that it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; ii. Moving the abandoned vehicle to an appropriate storage or depository maintained at a location where such a business is authorized under the comprehensive zoning ordinance and other regulatory ordinance of the City; iii. Commencing repairs to the abandoned motor vehicle which shall be completed within fifteen (15) days to make the vehicle operative; or iv. Repairing within fifteen (15) days any and all conditions which cause the vehicle to be deemed an abandoned junked or nuisance vehicle under the provisions of this section. 
(1)  Upon a written request to the department of inspection and code enforcement for the city within the seven-day period, an extension may be granted to repair the abandoned motor vehicle to make the vehicle operative. 
(2)  However, the extension may not to exceed three (3) months, unless good cause shown. 
(3)  Once the abandoned motor vehicle has been tagged, the tagging shall be deemed as a continuing notice regarding the violation until the abandoned motor vehicle has been abated in accordance with this paragraph, regardless of whether or not the enforcing agency has granted an extension. No further notice by the enforcing agency to the owner is necessary to abate the abandoned motor vehicle. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility of the owner to notify the enforcing agency as soon as the abandoned vehicle has been abated. Upon notification, the enforcing agency will set up an appointment in order to verify that compliance has taken place. 
(c)  Once the abandoned motor vehicle is tagged, regardless of whether or not the abandoned motor vehicle in question is setting on public/private property or a different location, the enforcing agency may proceed with the action against the owner as long as the abandoned motor vehicle is still in violation of Ordinance No. 9939. 
(d)  If the owner fails to abate the abandoned motor vehicle within the fifteen-day period of tagging or fails to timely request a hearing or an extension of time to repair the abandoned motor vehicle, the owner may be subject to the issuance of a misdemeanor summons. 
(e)  In the case of abandoned motor vehicles found on commercial or multifamily housing properties, all notices and summon authorized in this section shall be directed to the owners of such premises whenever the owner of the vehicle cannot be ascertained or located as provided in this section. 
(f)  If the owner of the premises has not acquiesced to the presence of or allowed the maintenance of the abandoned motor vehicle on the premises, the owner of the premises may request within seven (7) days of the tagging, removal of the abandoned motor vehicle, subject to the execution of an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the enforcing agency and/or the city from liability regarding the removal of the abandoned motor vehicle. The owner of the premises shall not be liable for the costs of removal. 
(g)  The misdemeanor summons shall command that the owner appear before the magistrate of mayor's court regarding the violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09; Ord. No. 10,012, § 3, 10-1-09; Ord. No. 11,143, § 2, 8-4-16) 
Sec. 7-171.8. - Hearing procedure; prima facie evidence. 
(a)  If the owner has timely requested a hearing, the clerk of mayor's court shall cause to issue a notice of the time, date, and place of hearing by either certified mail or service by deputy. The notice shall be issued no later than five (5) days prior to the hearing. 
(b)  All hearings under this section shall be held before a magistrate judge who shall hear all facts and testimony he/she deems pertinent. Facts and testimony may include testimony on the conditions of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private or public property. If the owner of the premises has not requested removal of the abandoned motor vehicle pursuant to the provisions of section 7-171.7(g), the owner of the premises may appear in person at the hearing and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his/her reasons for such denial. 
(c)  In any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint, summons or citation was parked in violation of any of the offenses aforementioned and/or any unoccupied vehicle found abandoned or parked for a period of time in excess of fifteen (15) days, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint, summons or citation was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall be prima facie evidence that the defendant was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point and location and for the time during which the vehicle was parked in violation of the aforementioned provisions. 
(d)  In the case of the owner of the premises, in any prosecution charging a violation of this section, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint, summons or citation was parked in violation of any of the offenses aforementioned and/or any unoccupied vehicle found abandoned or parked for a period of time in excess of fifteen (15) days, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint, summons or citation was at the time of such parking the owner of the premises where such vehicle was located, shall be prima facie evidence that the defendant acquiesced or allowed the maintenance of such vehicle at the point and location and for the time during which the vehicle was parked in violation of the aforementioned provisions. 
(e)  The burden of proof of mitigating circumstances shall be on the owner to demonstrate that the abatement would be unreasonable or would impose an undue financial burden. 
(f)  If a review hearing is timely requested and scheduled, an order will be rendered whether the owner or his representative is present or not. In addition, if a review hearing is timely requested and scheduled, all abandoned motor vehicles subject to a hearing by the magistrate judge shall remain on the premises pending an order of the magistrate judge. 
(g)  The magistrate judge may impose such conditions and take such other action as he/she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The magistrate judge may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his/her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the hearing, the magistrate judge may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private property, order the same removed from the property as an abandoned motor vehicle as hereinafter provided, and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available. 
(h)  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the premises and that he/she has not acquiesced to its presence or allowed the maintenance of the abandoned motor vehicle, the magistrate judge shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the premises. 
(1)  The magistrate judge shall allow the owner of the premises the opportunity to request the removal of the abandoned motor vehicle and execute an agreement to indemnify and hold harmless the enforcing agency and/or the city against any liability regarding the removal of the abandoned motor vehicle. 
(i)  Any person adjudicated as violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment; and/or community service work as deemed appropriate by the magistrate court for the city not to exceed thirty-two (32) hours. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.9. - Order of municipal abatement. 
(a)  Exclusive of the penalties provided in section 7-171.8, if the owner fails to correct the violations within the time limits prescribed herein above, the city may also proceed with action necessary to abate the abandoned motor vehicle and violation. 
(b)  Once the abandoned motor vehicle is tagged and there has not been a hearing or extension of time requested or the violation abated within the time frames as established in section 7-171.7(a), the enforcing agency, by a written ex-parte motion, together with a written certification from the enforcing agency that the vehicle in question has been [properly] tagged, a notice, if required pursuant to section 7-171.5(b)(3), has been issued to the owner, and that a hearing or extension of time has not been requested within the time period established by this section, the magistrate judge shall declare the motor vehicle or parts thereof to be an abandoned motor vehicle and may order that the vehicle in question be removed in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09; Ord. No. 10,012, § 4, 10-1-09) 
Sec. 7-171.10. - Procedure-Removal of vehicle. 
(a)  Five (5) days after an order has been issued by the magistrate judge declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be an abandoned motor vehicle, the vehicle or parts thereof may be removed by a tow truck operator acting on behalf of the city. 
(b)  The enforcing agency is authorized to use whatever means and methods it has available at its disposal for vehicle removals, and it may proceed to have this accomplished either by its own employees or by an independent contractor acting on behalf of the city. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, hinder, or refuse to allow an officer of the enforcing agency and/or any person acting in concert with or at the direction of the enforcing agency to enter upon private property for the purpose of removing a vehicle under the provisions of Ordinance No. 9939. Any person interfering with or refusing entry to property to any officer or contracted independent contractor performing duties under this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon arrest and conviction, shall be punished by a fine not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment; and/or community service work as deemed appropriate by the magistrate court for the city not to exceed thirty-two (32) hours. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. This includes all attempts to retrieve, remove or relocate vehicles at the onset of or during the abatement and removal process by the officer(s) of the enforcing agency and/or its contractors. 
(d)  The vehicle may be removed by a tow truck operator acting on behalf of the city who will comply with the state towing and storage act, R.S. 16:1711 et seq., for purposes of notice and due process requirements. 
(e)  No other action by the city shall be required and the procedures provided in this section shall constitute a request of the city to the tow truck operator to remove the vehicle. 
(f)  The tow truck operator shall store and may dispose of the vehicle pursuant to the state towing and storage act. The city shall have no civil or criminal liability for the acts or omissions committed by the tow truck operator, salvage yard and/or independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.11. - City to enter into contracts. 
    The mayor, on behalf of the city, is hereby authorized to enter into contracts for the removal and disposal of vehicles and/or vehicle parts which are ordered removed by the magistrate judge. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.12. - Independent contractors. 
    When the city has contracted with an independent contractor, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be an abandoned motor vehicle in this section. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.13. - Procedure-Payment or assessment of costs. 
    If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of premises pursuant to section 7-171.8 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal there from, such costs may be assessed against the premises and shall be transmitted to the finance director for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other taxes. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.14. - Liability for towing and storage expenses. 
(a)  In the event that the city should be or become liable for all or any portion of the expenses incurred in the removal and storage of such vehicle, the city may: 
(1)  Recover same from the owner of the vehicle and/or the owner of the premises from which it was removed in an action for debt; or 
(2)  Add that amount to the tax bill of the owner of the premises from which the vehicle was removed or both provided, however, that whenever the private property from which such vehicle has been removed is occupied by a person other than the owner of the premises, the occupant shall be primarily responsible and the city shall not seek to recover from the owner of the premises (either in an action at law or by tax collection proceedings) before it exhausts reasonable efforts to recover from the occupant; but this shall not prohibit the city from joining both the property owner and occupant in one (1) action for debt. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-171.15. - General. 
    If any section subsection, paragraph, or other provision of Ordinance No. 9939 or its application to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid or unconstitutional, such holding shall not affect the validity of any other section, subsection, paragraph, or other provision of its application to other persons or circumstances. The council hereby expresses the intent that it would have enacted the other provisions of Ordinance No. 9939 as if the invalid or unconstitutional provision was not contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 9939, § 2, 6-18-09) 
Sec. 7-172. - Distributing or placing handbills and advertising matter. 
(a)  Dropping handbills and advertising matter. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw, drop, distribute, dispense, circulate, give, deposit, place, discard or otherwise dispose of any handbill, flyer, notice, sign, advertising matter, or other unsubscribed printed material of any kind on the public rights-of-way or on any vehicles on public rights-of-way. 
(b)  Attachment to poles and other objects prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to paste, post, nail, or attach in any other manner any handbill, dodger, sign, card, placard, or advertisement of any kind, business or political, to any pole, post, or object on any public street, alley, sidewalk, or other public way. It shall further be unlawful to suspend or erect any banner, placard, or advertisement of any kind over or across any public street, alley, sidewalk or other public way. 
(c)  Agents, employees, or servants. Whenever the provisions of this section shall be violated by any person through an agent, employee, or servant, both the employer and the agent, employee, or servant shall be guilty of the offense. 
(d)  This section shall not apply to any signs placed on the public rights-of-way designed to direct individuals to specific addresses for open-houses and/or real estate sales, provided, however, these signs are placed one (1) hour before the open-house and taken down one (1) hour after the open-house. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 15, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-172.1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the protection and promotion of the public health, safety, and welfare by regulating the distribution of unsolicited printed matter, which when unchecked negatively impacts the quality of life, safety, and health of neighborhoods, disturbs the peaceful possession of property, facilitates the accumulation of filth, sewerage, garbage, refuse, & debris, and contributes to damaging property, including but not limited to sewerage and/or drainage backups. 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-172.2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this section, the following terms and phrases when used in this article shall have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless a definite meaning clearly appears from the context: 
    Distributed printed matter shall mean solicited printed matter and unsolicited printed matter that is delivered to any person or residential property. 
    Front door shall mean a door to any residential structure on residential property that faces a street or private street or, if no door faces a street or private street, then the door to the structure that is nearest to a street or private street. 
    Code shall mean the City of Kenner Department of Inspection and Code Enforcement. 
    Director shall mean the Director of the Department of Inspection and Code Enforcement. 
    "Do not toss" list shall mean the list of address of residential property where the owner, tenant, or any person occupying the residence has request that unsolicited printed matter no be delivered to that address. 
    PMZ shall mean the Jefferson Parish Department of Property Maintenance Zoning/Quality of Life. 
    Residential property shall mean any property used wholly or in part for residential purposes whether inhabited or vacant. 
    Solicited printed matter shall mean any printed matter that is delivered to any person or residential property with the express invitation or express permission in writing (or otherwise) of the owner, tenant, or any person occupying the residence. 
    Unsolicited printed matter shall mean any printed matter that is delivered to any person or residential property without the express invitation or express permission in writing (or otherwise) of the owner, tenant, or any person occupying the residence. 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-172.3. - Solicited printed matter. 
    This article shall not in any way provide for the regulation of solicited printed matter. 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-172.4. - Unsolicited printed matter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to cause unsolicited printed matter to be deposited at or upon any residential property included on the "do not toss" list maintained by Code, as referenced in section 7-172.5, except by: 
(1)  Placing and securing it at the entryway nearest the front door; 
(2)  Attaching it securely to the front door; 
(3)  Putting it between the exterior front door and the interior front door; or 
(4)  Handing it directly to a person. 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-172.5. - "Do not toss" list. 
(a)  PMZ shall maintain a "do not toss" list of addresses which: 
(1)  Have requested that the distribution of unsolicited printed matter be prohibited except by those methods delineated in section 7-172.4. 
(2)  When the Code deems a property to be abandoned, vacant, or blighted (as respectively defined in this chapter), Code may include the address of said property on the "do not toss" list. 
(b)  PMZ shall regularly update the parish website to make readily available to the public an accurate and current list of addresses associated with the "do not toss" list; and, upon request, PMZ shall distribute the then current copy of the "do not toss" list to any publisher or distributor of printed matter, all as required by Jefferson Parish Code of Ordinances section 19-66(B). 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-172.6. - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
    The director is authorized and directed to make such additional rules and regulations, not in conflict with the provisions of these sections, to regulate the delivery and distribution of solicited printed matter and/or unsolicited printed matter; provided that no regulation shall be made or enforced in conflict with these sections or any other city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-172.7. - United States Mail exempted. 
    The provisions of these sections shall not apply with regard to the distribution of mail by the United States Post Office. 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-172.8. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Code is authorized to enforce the provisions of these sections. 
(b)  In addition to all other remedies provided by law, any violation of this article may be brought by summons to mayor's court. 
(c)  For the purposes of these sections, each occurrence of a violation shall constitute a separate violation. 
(d)  Any person who is found guilty of violating the provisions of these sections shall be penalized as provided in section 7-3 or section 1-9. 
(e)  Any publisher or distributor of printed matter who is found guilty of violating the provisions of these sections shall be penalized as provided in section 7-3 or section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 11,478, § 1, 11-1-18) 
Sec. 7-173. - Abandoning or discarding iceboxes or other airtight containers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to leave outside of any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door or doors which may not be released for opening from the inside of said icebox, refrigerator, or container. It shall further be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to leave outside of any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended, or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or any other container of any kind which is airtight and has a snap lock, closure, or securing device thereon without first removing said snap lock, closure, or securing device, or door or doors, from said ice box, refrigerator, or container. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provision, R.S. 14:324. 
Sec. 7-174. - Sale of alcoholic beverages from drive-up windows. 
    The sale of any alcoholic beverages, both of low and high alcoholic content, from a drive-up or drive-through window, shall be a violation of this code. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Cross reference- Similar provisions regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages from drive-up windows, §§ 3-3, 3-52 and 3-92. 
Sec. 7-175. - Alcoholic beverages in motor vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, operate, occupy, or ride in or upon a motor vehicle upon a public street, highway, alley, or driveway while in the possession of any open container or other receptacle containing an alcoholic beverage as defined in this section, when the container has been opened or the seal broken or contents of which have been partially removed. 
(b)  Definitions. 
    Alcoholic beverages includes any spirits, wine, beer, ale, or other liquid, or a solid capable of being converted into a liquid, containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume, which is fit or intended for beverage purposes; notwithstanding the definition of "alcoholic beverages" contained in section 3-18, Chapter 3, Article II of the Code. 
    Open container means any drinking or pouring vessel, including any open or unsealed bottle, jar, can, cup or container without lids, or with lids, or with only partial lids, but with straws protruding therefrom. 
    Motor vehicle means every vehicle which is self-propelled, including, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, vans and motorcycles. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons driving, operating or occupying a motor vehicle and who, as a condition of their employment and while acting in the course and scope of such employment, are required to carry open alcoholic beverage containers; or occupants, other than the driver, of a hired bus, limousine or other for-hire vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-176. - Smoking regulations-Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall govern these and interpretation of section 7-176 through section 7-177, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Smoking or smoke: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted smoking equipment for tobacco or any other weed or plant. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 16, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-177. - Prohibition on smoking in city-owned buildings; mutilation of signs. 
(a)  Smoking is prohibited in the following city-owned building locations: city council chambers; work areas; gymnasiums; fire stations; police complex; meeting rooms; elevators; stairwells; facilities owned, operated or managed by the city; and public assembly wherein public, civil or governmental business is being conducted and which is open to members of the general public either as participants or as spectators. where signs are posted to indicate that the same is a "No Smoking" area. 
(b)  The mutilation or destruction of any signs required by the article is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-178. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 17, of Ord. No. 7978, adopted Sept. 3, 1998, deleted § 7-178, penalty, which had derived from Ord. No. 7297, adopted Sept. 21, 1995. 
Sec. 7-179. - Political activities prohibited at city meetings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to display or distribute political literature, solicit money or support for political purposes or make any comments in support or opposition of the candidacy of any individual, for a local, parish-wide, state, or federal office, at or during any duly constituted city meeting. A duly constituted city meeting is any meeting duly called by the city council either as the governing authority of the city or as a council committee, any meeting duly called by the board of commissioners of the consolidated sewerage district of the city. and any meeting duly called by any of the boards or commissions of the city. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor; and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisonment for a term not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-180. - Obstructing public drainage. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be obstructed any public drainage within the limits of the city. Failure to remove any obstruction by the person, within ten (10) days of notice to remove by certified mail, shall constitute prima facie evidence of willful intent to violate this section. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-181. - Docking of watercraft so as to interfere with free and proper use of boat launch facilities prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall dock or anchor any watercraft in a manner or for any period of time which shall unreasonably or unnecessarily interfere with other watercraft or with the free and proper use of any watercraft launch facility. Docking at a launch facility or anchoring within three hundred (300) feet of a launch facility for more than four (4) consecutive hours shall constitute such interference if unreasonable under the prevailing circumstances. 
(b)  The owner of any watercraft which is in violation of this section shall remove the watercraft within twelve (12) hours from receipt of written notice to remove the watercraft by the governing authority. If the watercraft is not removed as provided herein, the governing authority may have the watercraft removed and stored at owner's expense. Such notice may be attached to the watercraft and shall contain the date and time of its attachment. If not claimed, all watercraft removed and stored shall be held for a period of not less than sixty (60) days. Thereafter, the watercraft may be disposed of according to the procedure for disposing of unclaimed motor vehicles. 
(c)  Definitions. 
    Watercraft means any contrivance used or designated for navigation on water. 
    Launch facility means any improvements under the jurisdiction of the local authority which facilitate the launching, mooring, docking, or anchoring of watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-182. - Strip-mining, dredging or excavating for shells, gravel or sand in waterbottoms of city prohibited; sale or use of extracted materials. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person or entity, within the boundaries of the City of Kenner, to do or assist in the doing of any of the following acts or activities: 
(1)  To strip-mine, dredge, or make excavations in any water bottom for the purpose of extracting shells, sand, or gravel; or 
(2)  To sell or use, knowingly and/or intentionally, after the effective date of Ordinance No. 6462 [adopted July 26, 1990], any shells, sand, or gravel that has been extracted from any water bottom located within the city; or building or other material made up in whole or part of such shells, sand, gravel; or 
(3)  To operate, maintain, or employ another to operate or maintain any storage area, dump, landing, or facility, or similar facility or business, for the storage or maintenance of shells, sand, or gravel excavated from any water bottom within the City of Kenner after the effective date of Ordinance No. 6462, or for the storage or maintenance of any equipment, machinery, or supplies used in the business of strip-mining, dredging, or excavating in any water bottom for the purpose of extracting shells, sand, or gravel within the City of Kenner. 
(b)  The prohibition set forth in subsection (a) shall not apply to any person or entity, nor to the officers and employees of any person or entity, who shall be in possession of a certificate of exemption granted by a resolution of the Kenner City Council. The Kenner City Council shall grant such a certificate of exemption if, and only if, the following conditions are met: 
(1)  A sworn application has been made therefor by filing the same with the clerk at least twenty-eight (28) days prior to the regular council meeting at which the matter is to be considered; and 
(2)  The said application has been advertised in the official journal; and 
(3)  A public hearing has been held thereon, at which the applicant has demonstrated, by clear and convincing evidence: 
a.  That the activity for which the exemption is sought is lawful and duly licensed under all parish, state, and federal applicable laws and/or regulations; and that the said activity will be conducted in accordance with all applicable ordinances and regulations of the City of Kenner; and 
b.  That such evidence can be clearly overcome by evidence showing that the activity proposed for exemption will have no real substantial adverse effect on the said recreational opportunities or on public health; provided, however, that the applicant shall be required to make this showing only if any evidence is produced by any interested party that tends to show that (1) the said activity will substantially reduce, diminish, eliminate, or adversely affect the quality of water, fishing, swimming, boating, diving, skiing, or other recreational activities available in, on, or near waters within the City of Kenner, or (2) will adversely affect the health of the people of the City of Kenner. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than three hundred dollars ($300.00), or imprisonment not less than thirty (30) days, nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. Each day that any provision of this section is violated shall constitute and be a separate offense and shall be punishable as such. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7978, § 18, 9-3-98) 
Sec. 7-183. - Watering requirements for excavating, loading, and hauling dirt or soil. 
(a)  No person shall dig, excavate, and/or load any dirt or soil until said dirt or soil has been thoroughly watered, to an extent sufficient to prevent the creation of any unusual or excessive amount of dirt or dust particles in the air. 
(b)  All privately owned streets, roads, or passageways used by any vehicle to transport or convey said dirt shall be thoroughly wetted down so as to prevent any unusual or excessive amount of dirt or dust particles in the air. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to haul, transport, or convey any dirt, excavated or loaded, by any person who has not complied with the requirements of this section, both as to the excavation as well as the wetting down of the private roadbeds, passageways or streets. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-184. - Discarding by-catch into calm water basin of Williams Boulevard Recreational Boat Launch prohibited. 
(a)  The dumping, discarding and/or cleaning of any fish, shrimp, crabs and/or other related by-catch is prohibited within the designated calm water basin area of the Williams Boulevard Recreational Boat Launch. Calm water basin means the entire area consisting of and enclosed by the rock jetties and out two hundred (200) feet in all directions from any portion of the rock jetties consisting of what is known as the Williams Boulevard Recreational Boat Launch. 
(b)  Enforcement shall be the responsibility of the Kenner Police Department, code enforcement department, or any parish or state agency having powers to effect arrests or issue summons within the City of Kenner. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 7297, § 2, 9-21-95) 
Sec. 7-185. - Misrepresentation during traffic citation. 
    Misrepresentation during traffic citation is the misrepresentation of or refusal by a person to provide his or her accurate and true name, age, date of birth, sex, address, physical description, driver's license number or social security number to any law enforcement officer or official who is giving to him or her a traffic citation pursuant to the traffic laws of the City of Kenner and/or State of Louisiana, or the presentation of a license of another with the intent to present himself or herself as that person. 
(Ord. No. 7633, § 1, 2-20-97) 
Sec. 7-186. - Prohibition of gang loitering. 
(a)  Whenever a police officer observes a person whom he reasonably believes to be a member of a criminal street gang, as defined in subsection (c)(2), loitering in any public place with one or more other persons, he shall order all such persons to disperse and remove themselves from the area. Any person who does not promptly obey such an order is in violation of this section. 
(b)  It shall be an affirmative defense to an alleged violation of this section that no person who was observed loitering was in fact a member of a criminal street gang. 
(c)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Loiter means to remain in any one place with no apparent purpose. 
(2)  Criminal street gang means any ongoing organization, association, or group of three (3) or more persons, whether formal or informal, having as one of its activities the commission of one or more of the criminal acts enumerated in subsection (c)(3) or which has a common name or common identifying sign or symbol, whose members individually or collectively engage in or have engaged in a pattern of criminal gang activity. 
(3)  Criminal gang activity means the commission, attempted commission, or solicitation of two (2) or more of the following offenses, provided that the last of those offenses occurred within three (3) years after a prior offense, and that the offenses are committed by two (2) or more persons, or by an individual at the direction of, or in association with, any criminal street gang, with the specific intent to promote, further, or assist in any criminal conduct by gang members: 
a.  Aggravated battery or second degree battery as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 14:34 and La. Rev. Stat. 14:34.1. 
b.  Armed robbery as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 14:64. 
c.  First or second degree murder or manslaughter, as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 14:30, 30.1 and 31. 
d.  The sale, possession for sale, transportation, manufacture, offer for sale, or offer to manufacture controlled substances, as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 40:961 et seq. 
e.  Illegal use of weapons or dangerous instrumentalities, as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 14:94. 
f.  Aggravated arson as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 14:51. 
g.  Intimidating, impeding, or injuring witnesses; or injuring officers, as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 14:129.1. 
h.  Theft, as defined in La. Rev. Stat. 14:67, of any vehicle, trailer, or vessel. 
(4)  Pattern of criminal gang activity means two (2) or more acts of criminal gang activity of which at least two (2) such acts were committed within three (3) years of each other and at least one (1) such act occurred after the effective date of this section. 
(5)  Public place means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned. 
(d)  Any person who violates this section is subject to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense, or imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. In addition to or instead of the above penalties, any person who violates this section may be required to perform up to one hundred twenty (120) hours of community service. 
(Ord. No. 7668, § 1, 3-20-97) 
Sec. 7-187. - Prohibition of persons under the age of twenty-one from entering a designated gaming area. 
(a)  A person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall not play any licensed gaming device or slot machine in or about a designated gaming area as defined by La. Rev. Stat. 27:1 et seq. 
(b)  A person under the age of twenty-one (21) shall not enter into or loiter in or about a designated gaming area as defined by La. Rev. Stat. 27:1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 7892, § 1, 4-2-98) 
Sec. 7-188. - Chemical compounds prohibited for human consumption. 
(a)  Manufacture or distribution. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally produce, manufacture, sell, distribute or dispense gamma butyrolactone (commonly known as GBL but also known by the chemical names 2(3H) furanone dihydro; butyrolactone; 4-butyrolactone; dihydro-2(3H) furanone; 4-butanolide; 2(3H)-furanone; dihydro; tetrahydro-2-furanone; 1.4 Tetramethylene Glycol; 1.4 Butanediol, and butyrolactone gamma or its analog) for human consumption or to possess the aforementioned chemical with intent to produce, manufacture, sell, distribute or dispense for human consumption; included within the prohibition of this paragraph is any material compound, mixture or preparation which contains the aforementioned chemical and is presented, promoted, produced, manufactured, sold, distributed, or dispensed for human consumption. 
(b)  Possession. It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally possess gamma butyrolactone (commonly known as GBL but also known by the chemical names 2(3H) furanone dihydro; butyrolactone; 4-butyrolactone; dihydro-2(3H) furanone; 4-butanolide; 2(3H)-furanone; dihydro; tetrahydro-2-furanone; 1.4 Tetramethylene Glycol; 1.4 Butanediol, and butyrolactone gamma or its analog) for human consumption; included within the prohibition of this paragraph is any material compound, mixture or preparation which contains the aforementioned chemical and is possessed with the intent for human consumption. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished as set forth in section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally combine, produce or manufacture any compound containing angel's trumpet (also known as brugmansia arborea) or to possess any compound containing angel's trumpet (also known as brugmansia arborea) for human consumption or with the intent to sell, distribute or dispense it for human consumption 
(Ord. No. 8167, § I, 9-2-99; Ord. No. 9041, § 1, 7-1-04) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9041, § 1, adopted July 1, 2004, set out provisions intended for use as 7-188(c). Inasmuch as subsection (c) already existed, these provisions have been included as (d) at the editor's discretion. 
Sec. 7-189. - Creating wakes in the calm water basin prohibited. 
(a)  The calm water basin, as defined in section 7-184(a) of this chapter, is hereby declared to be a no-wake zone. 
(b)  All watercraft, as defined in section 7-181(c) of this chapter, shall be operated at idle speed within the calm water basin. 
(c)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and may be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. No. 8328, 8-3-00) 
Sec. 7-190. - Reserved. 
Sec. 7-191. - Possession of marijuana. 
(a)  Definition. Marijuana is hereby defined as follows: 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plants of the Genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person knowingly or intentionally to possess, within the corporate limits of the city, marijuana as hereinabove described. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this section shall upon conviction be subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days. 
(Ord. No. 9988, §§ 1-3, 9-3-09) 
Sec. 7-192. - Drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  Definitions. As used in this section, unless the context clearly otherwise indicates, the term "drug paraphernalia" shall mean and include, but not be limited to: 
(1)  All equipment, products, and materials of any kind which are used, intended for use, or designed for use in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in violation on the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law, as scheduled in LA-R.S. 40:964. 
(2)  Kits used, intended for use, or designated for use in the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting of any species of plant which is a controlled substance or from which a controlled substance can be derived. 
(3)  Kits used, intended for use or designed for use in manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing controlled substances. 
(4)  Isomerization devices used, intended for use, or designed for use in increasing the potency of any species of plant which is a controlled substance. 
(5)  Testing equipment used, intended for use, or designated for use in identifying, or in analyzing the strength, effectiveness, or purity of controlled substances. 
(6)  Diluents and adulterants, such as quinine, hydrochloride, mannitol, mannite, dextrose, and lactose, used, intended for use, or designed for use in cutting controlled substances. 
(7)  Separation gins and sifters used, intended for use, or designated for use in removing twigs and seeds from or in otherwise cleaning or refining marijuana. 
(8)  Blenders, bowls, containers, spoons, and mixing devices used, intended to use, or designated for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(9)  Capsules, balloons, envelopes, and other containers used, intended for use, or designed for use in packaging small quantities of controlled substances. 
(10)  Containers and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in storing or concealing controlled substances. 
(11)  Hypodermic syringes, needles, and other objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled substances into the human body. 
(12)  Objects used, intended for use, designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or hashish oil into the human body as: 
a.  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads, or punctured metal bowls; 
b.  Water pipes; 
c.  Carburetion tubes and devices; 
d.  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
e.  Roach clips, meaning object used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
f.  Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials; 
g.  Chamber pipes; 
h.  Carburetor pipes; 
i.  Electric pipes; 
j.  Air-driven pipes; 
k.  Chiliums; 
l.  Bongs; 
m.  Ice pipes or chillers. 
(b)  Prohibited acts. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use, any drug paraphernalia; to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare test, analyze, pack, repack, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or otherwise introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of this part. 
(c)  Penalties. Anyone who violates the provision of this section shall subject the offender to a fine not in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment of not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 9989, § 1, 9-3-09) 
Chapter 8 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Simple arson, § 7-40; placing combustible materials, § 7-41; trash fires, § 7-68; obstruction of firemen, § 7-69; obstruction of fire prevention, § 7-70; fireworks, § 7-99; fire department vehicles exempted from speed restrictions, § 15-19; parking near fire hydrant restricted, § 15-53. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Bonfires, leaf and rubbish fires. 
(a)  During the construction, renovation, remodeling, or demolition of buildings or structures, or of fencing, no waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning. 
(b)  No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, leaf fire, rubbish fire, trash fire, or waste fire, or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained. 
(c)  Exception to prohibition against burning. Burning of trees, brush, grass, and other vegetation may occur under the following conditions: 
(1)  The trees, brush, grass or other vegetation matter is the result of land that is being cleared. 
(2)  The location of the burning must be at least one thousand (1,000) feet (305 meters) from any dwelling or adjoining property and adequate provision, approved by the City of Kenner fire chief, is made to prevent the fire from spreading to within one hundred fifty (150) feet of any structure or line of adjoining property. 
(3)  Burning is only permitted from 8:00 a.m.-5:00 p.m. 
(4)  The burn is conducted in a container approved by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (DEQ). 
(5)  A certificate of compliance must be obtained from the fire chief, Kenner Fire Department. A fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) per estimated day of burn shall be made payable to the city fire department and delivered to the chief of the city fire department for the issuance of the certificate of compliance. 
(6)  The burn is not prohibited by, and is conducted in accordance with, all other applicable laws and regulations and orders of governmental entitles having jurisdiction. The authority to conduct burning under this Code does not exempt or excuse the person responsible for the consequences of or the damages or injuries resulting from the burning. 
(7)  Attendance to the burning. The burning shall be constantly attended by a competent person until such burn is extinguished. A water source or other fire extinguishing equipment approved by the Chief of the Kenner Fire Department, is required to be at the burn location. 
(8)  The certificate of compliance shall be physically available for inspection by the City of Kenner fire chief or his representative/s at the location of the fire and where the certificate is not available for inspection or where no certificate of compliance was issued, the City of Kenner fire chief or his representatives may, at their discretion, take immediate action to enter upon the premises where the fire is located, put the fire out, and take the necessary action to prevent its rekindling. 
(d)  It shall be a distinct and separate violation subject to the penalties of this section to interfere with or in any way prevent the City of Kenner fire chief or any of his representatives from entering upon the premises and putting out the fire, authorized or unauthorized, or a fire for which the permit cannot be produced. 
(e)  Penalty. Anyone who violates any portion of this section or who interferes with the City of Kenner fire chief or his representatives in putting out a fire where the certificate of compliance has not been produced or has not been issued or where the fire is in prohibition of this section or poses a threat to the safety of others or of property, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and fined no more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 1378, §§ 1-5, 2-14-72; Ord. No. 10,051, §§ 1, 2, 1-21-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1378, §§ 1-5, did not amend this Code, hence inclusion of §§ 1-5 herein as § 8-1 was at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 8-2. - Minimum fire standards for high-rise buildings. 
(A)  Early warning smoke detection devices, alarm systems and automatic sprinkler systems are mandatory requirements of all high-rise structures in the City of Kenner. 
(B)  A "high-rise building" is a building which exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height. This includes roof structures, such as, mechanical equipment rooms and penthouses. The height shall be measured from the first floor slab elevation to the top of the roof slab or deck and does not include elevator or stair or other unoccupied spaces. 
(C)  All buildings above thirty-five (35) feet will provide the following: 
(1)  Automatic sprinkler systems. An approved complete sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the building. The sprinkler system shall be designed using the perimeters set forth in the National Fire Code Protection Association codes, N.F.P.A. 13, and sprinkler alarm systems to be of a supervisory type, N.F.P.A. 72-B, C or D. 
(a)  Shut-off valves and water flow devices shall be provided at the riser connection on each floor. In addition to the actuating alarm on all floors upon which the water flow is detected, such valves shall be supervised by a central station. The sprinkler riser may be combined with the fire department stand-pipe riser. 
(b)  Automatic fire sprinklers may be omitted in the following rooms or areas when such rooms or areas are protected with an approved automatic fire detection system which will respond to visible or invisible particles or combustion: 
1.  Generator and transformer rooms. 
2.  Any room where the application of water, or flame and water, may constitute a serious life or fire hazard. 
3.  Communication equipment areas under the exclusive control of the public utility provided: 
a.  The equipment areas are separated from the remainder of the building by construction equivalent to one-hour fire-resistive wall and two-hour fire-resistive floor-ceiling assemblies. 
b.  Such areas are used exclusively for such equipment. 
c.  When approved by the department of regulatory inspection and fire department, any other area or room where sprinklers are considered undesirable because of the nature of the contents. 
d.  No telephonic recording system or other alarm notifying equipment will be permitted to be directly transmitted to or stored at the City of Kenner Fire Department fire alarm dispatching office. 
(2)  Smoke detection system. An approved complete smoke detection system shall be provided throughout the building. This system shall be designed in the perimeters set forth in the National Fire Protection Association Code 73E, and the detection alarm system is to be of a supervisory type. In addition, if not already specified, at least one approved suitable detector in every mechanical equipment room, electrical transformer, telephone, elevator machinery, or similar room shall be provided. 
In the main return and exhaust air plenum of each air conditioning system serving more than one (1) story, and located in a serviceable area downstream of the last duct outlet. 
In each connection to a vertical duct or riser serving two (2) or more stories from return air duct or plenum of heating ventilators and air conditioning system. 
The actuation of any detector required by this section shall operate and place into operation all equipment necessary to prevent recirculation of smoke. 
Smoke detector alarm systems shall be of a supervisory type. 
Enunciator equipment shall be provided near the first floor entry level of the structure, or when provided with fire control center, shall be located in an area specified by the fire department. 
Fully sprinklered office and retail occupancies are excluded from the requirements of this subsection (smoke detection system.) 
(3)  H.V.A.C. systems shall be installed in any building applicable to this ordinance in accord with N.F.P.A. 90A. 
(a)  All vertical penetration shall be held to a minimum. All vertical penetrations, i.e., stair enclosures, laundry shoots, pipe shafts, telephone shafts, etc., shall be vented by natural gravity smoke relief venting 1/150 minimum opening ratio vent to area. 
(4)  Stairs. All required stairs shall be constructed in accordance with the design known as "smoke-proof enclosure." 
(a)  A smoke-proof enclosure shall consist of a vestibule and continuous stairway enclosed from the highest point to the lowest point by walls of two-hour resistive construction. 
(b)  Stairs in the smoke-proof enclosure shall be of noncombustible construction. 
(c)  A smoke-proof enclosure shall exit into an exit passage leading to a public way. The exit passage shall be without other openings and shall have walls, floors and ceilings of two-hour fire resistance. 
(d)  A stairway in a smoke-proof enclosure shall not continue below the grade level unless an approved barrier is provided at the ground level to prevent persons from accidentally continuing into the basement. 
(e)  Access to the stairway shall be by way of an open, exterior balcony of noncombustible materials. 
(f)  Smoke-proof enclosures by natural ventilation. Doors to the stairways shall be labeled and shall be a minimum of one and one-half-hour fire-resistance rating and have closing devices. The exit doors into the stair shaft shall close automatically when released, by activation of a detector. The door-holding device shall be of an approved type which will release the doors so that they will close in the event of power failure. Enclosures shall be vented by natural ventilation. A gravity smoke relief venting or 1/150 minimum opening ratio to area. 
(g)  All smoke-proof enclosures shall be identified as such and marked as a fire escape. 
(h)  This section shall not apply to any structure which has exterior (i.e. unenclosed) circulation systems used for either the primary of secondary means of ingress and egress. 
(i)  Fully sprinklered office and retail occupancies are excluded from the requirements of this subsection (stairs.) 
(5)  Standby power and light. 
(a)  On-site generated power. A permanently installed standby generation system conforming to N.F.P.A. 70 shall be provided. The system shall be equipped with suitable means for automatically starting the generator set upon failure of the normal electrical service and for automatic transfer and operation of electrical functions. System supervision device with manual start and transfer features shall be provided at the central control station. 
(b)  Standby power loads. The following loads are classified as standby power loads. Transition time from the instant of failure of the normal power source to the generator source shall not exceed sixty (60) seconds. The standby power lead shall be sized to supply the following: 
1.  Elevators. 
2.  Mechanical air handling systems required to be operated during an emergency. 
3.  Fire pumps. 
(c)  Emergency power loads. The transition time from the instant of failure of normal power source to the generating source shall not exceed ten (10) seconds unless otherwise specifically noted. The following loads are classified as emergency power loads: 
1.  Voice alarm system. 
2.  Voice communication systems. 
3.  Fire alarm systems. 
4.  Fire detection systems. 
5.  Elevator car lighting. 
6.  Escape route lighting and exit sign illumination which shall operate within one (1) second. 
(d)  All vertical runs of alarm and communication systems shall be installed in a two-hour fire-resistive shaft, provided for that purpose, with protected openings. These enclosures shall be aligned vertically and be accessible from common or public areas. 
(6)  Elevators. 
(a)  All elevators and elevator lobbies shall comply with the following: 
Note:  A bank of elevators is a group of elevators or a single elevator controlled by a common operating system; that is, all elevators which respond to a single call button constitute a bank of elevators. There is no limit on the number of cars which may be in a bank or group but there may be no more than four (4) bars within a common hallway. 
1.  Except for the main entrance level, all elevators on all floors shall open into elevator lobbies which are separated from the remainder of the building by a vestibule. Doors to the vestibule shall be labeled and listed and shall have a minimum of one-hour fire-resistive rating and shall have closing devices, shall have wire glass, one-half inch thick, not to exceed one hundred (100) square inches, with neither dimension exceeding twelve (12) inches. The door shall be provided with a drop sill or other provision to minimize air leakage. Exit doors into the vestibule shall close automatically when released by activation of the detector. The door-holding device shall be of an approved type, which will release the door so that door will close in the event of power failure. 
2.  Each elevator lobby shall be provided with an approved smoke detector located on the lobby ceiling when any alarm, emergency signal system is activated. When the detector is activated, elevator doors shall not open and all cars serving that lobby are to return to the main floor and be under manual control only. The smoke detector is to operate before the optical density reaches 0.03 per foot. The detector may serve to close the lobby doors. At no time are lobby doors to be wedged or held in an open position. 
3.  A permanent sign shall be installed in each elevator cab adjacent to the floor status indicator and at each elevator call station on each floor reading "IN CASE OF FIRE, DO NOT USE ELEVATOR-USE EXIT STAIR," or similar verbiage approved by the department of regulator inspection/fire department. 
4.  Elevator hoistways shall not be vented through an elevator machine room. Cable slots entering the machine room shall be sleeved beneath the machine room floor and extend to not less than twelve (12) inches below the shaft vent to inhibit the passage of smoke into the machine room. 
5.  At least one (1) elevator car serving all floors shall have a minimum inside car platform of four (4) feet three (3) inches deep by six (6) feet eight (8) inches wide within a minimum clear opening width of forty-two (42) inches; unless otherwise designed and approved to provide equivalent utility to accommodate an ambulance stretcher having a minimum size of twenty-two (22) inches by seventy-eight (78) inches in its horizontal position. This elevator shall be identified. This elevator shall be located in an independent shaft and operate on normal and emergency power. 
6.  Keys are to be provided at each elevator location and in the central fire control room for all elevators in the building. All elevators are to be provided with two-way communication systems connected to an approved emergency service which operates on a twenty-four-hour basis. All elevators are to be equipped with fire department control mechanisms. 
(D)  In addition to the aforementioned requirements, structures which are above seventy-five (75) feet are also required to provide the following: 
(1)  Alarm and communication systems. The alarm and communications system shall be designed and installed such that damage to any terminal unit or speaker will not render more than one (1) zone of the system inoperative. 
The voice alarm and public address system may be a combined system. When approved, the fire department communications system may be combined with the voice alarm system and the public address system. 
Three (3) communication systems shall be provided as follows: 
(a)  Voice alarm system. 
1.  The operation of any smoke detector, required by this section, sprinkler, waterflow device or manual fire alarm system, shall automatically activate a voice alarm system. The voice alarm system shall provide a pre-determined message on a selective basis to the area where the alarm originated. 
2.  The voice alarm shall provide information and give direction to the occupants. 
3.  The central control station shall contain controls for the voice alarm system so that a selective or general voice alarm may be manually initiated. 
4.  The systems shall be continuously electrically supervised against component failure of the audiopath including amplifiers, speaker wiring, switches and electrical contacts and shall detect opens and shorts which might impair the function of the system. 
5.  Activation of the system shall automatically sound an alert signal to the desired areas followed by voice instructions giving appropriate information. 
6.  The alarm shall be designed to be heard clearly by all occupants within the building or designated portions thereof as is required for the public address system. 
(b)  Public address system. A public address communication system designed to be clearly heard by all occupants of the building shall operate from the central control station. It shall be established on a selective or general basis to the following terminal area: 
1.  Elevators. 
2.  Elevator lobbies. 
3.  Corridors. 
4.  Exit stairways. 
5.  Rooms and tenant spaces exceeding one thousand (1,000) square feet in area. 
6.  Dwelling units in apartment houses. 
7.  Hotel guest rooms and suites. 
(c)  Fire department communication system. A two-way fire department communication system shall be provided for fire department use. It shall operate between the central control station and every elevator, elevator lobby, entry to every enclosed exit stairway and in corridors. 
(2)  Central fire control station. 
(a)  A central control station for fire department operations shall be provided in location approved by the fire department, shall contain: 
1.  The voice alarm and public address system panels. 
2.  The fire department communications panel. 
3.  Fire detection and alarm system annunciator panels. 
4.  Status indicators showing location of elevators in the hoistways and switches to selectively turn on or off power to elevators. 
5.  Status indicators and controls for air handling systems. 
6.  Controls for unlocking all stairway doors simultaneously. 
7.  Sprinkler valve and waterflow detector display panels. 
8.  Emergency power, light and emergency system controls and status indicators. 
9.  A telephone for fire department use with controlled access to the public telephone system. 
(E)  The following provisions shall apply to all structures above thirty-five (35) feet: 
(1)  The city shall provide for periodic inspection of the construction to determine that the installation performed is in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the City of Kenner Department of Regulatory Inspections and the Kenner Fire Department. These inspections shall be performed by persons authorized to prepare plans and specifications or persons authorized by the authority to make inspections under applicable state, parish or city ordinance. 
(2)  This section does not restrict or eliminate federal, state, parish or other city requirements. If such are in conflict with all or any part of this section, the more stringent requirement will be applicable. 
(3)  Any person, firm, corporation, etc., who does not comply with the provisions of this section shall be found in violation of this section. A violation shall carry a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day and each day constitutes a separate violation. The provisions of this section shall only apply to those structures which are constructed after the effective date of this section. 
(4)  If any provision or item of this section or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions, items or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provisions, items or applications and to this end the provisions of this section are hereby declared severable. 
(5)  Single-family dwellings are excluded from this section. 
(6)  Any structure which is presently existing shall be required to conform to all provisions of Ordinance 1545; and, nothing herein shall prevent the fire department for the City of Kenner from enforcing same. 
(7)  Unenclosed parking garages separated from a structure incorporating another occupancy are excluded from this section. 
(Ord. No. 1545, 7-23-73; Ord. No. 2878, §§ 1-5, 2-19-81; Ord. No. 3025, §§ 1-5, 8-17-81) 
Sec. 8-3. - Summons; enforcement. 
    The departments of inspections and code enforcement, and fire shall each have the authority to issue the summons or notice of violation herein provided for in articles I, II, and III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10,051, § 3, 1-21-10) 
Secs. 8-4-8-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE 

Sec. 8-16. - Adoption. 
    There is hereby adopted by the council of the City of Kenner that certain code known as the "Fire Prevention Code" recommended by the National Fire Protection Association (N.F.P.A. No. 1) being particularly the 1992 Edition thereof and any future editions, amendments or modifications as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association as fully as if set out herein in extenso. The chief of the fire department for the City of Kenner shall be responsible for filing with the clerk of the City of Kenner any future editions, amendments or modifications as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association. 
(Ord. No. 7012, § 2(Exh. B), 5-5-94) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7012, § 1(Exh. A), adopted May 5, 1994, repealed former § 8-16 pertaining to the 1985 edition of the fire code and derived from Ord. No. 1863, adopted June 28, 1976; Ord. No. 2982, adopted July 2, 1981; and Ord. No. 5596, adopted Dec. 5, 1985. Further, § 2(Exh. B) of Ord. No. 7012 enacted a new § 8-16 to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt codes by reference, R.S. 33:1368. 
Sec. 8-17. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the fire prevention code adopted in this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be penalized as provided in section 1-9. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
Sec. 8-18. - Reserved. 
Sec. 8-19. - Fire inspection fees. 
(a)  Pursuant to R.S. 40:1563 all structures, except one (1), and two (2) family dwellings and movables, shall be inspected annually by the fire prevention division of the fire department for the purpose of reducing or eliminating fire hazards. The fees for commercial uses shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) for first location to be collected with occupational license or billed at the time of inspection for any commercial use without an occupational license. Any additional commercial locations shall be billed at the time of inspection at the rate of thirty dollars ($30.00) per location. Unless subject to an exception under subsection (d), all residential inspections shall be billed at the time of inspection at the rate of thirty dollars ($30.00) per building. 
(b)  For the first two (2) reinspections of premises necessary for the issuance of a certificate of compliance the following charges will be made by the fire prevention division of the fire department, only if outstanding violations have not been corrected: 
More Than (Sq. Ft.) Less Than (Sq. Ft.) Reinspection Fee -0- 50,000 $ 50.00 50,001 100,000 $100.00 Over 100,001 $200.00  
    The reinspection fee shall be paid at the time the reinspection is scheduled. 
(c)  In addition to those fees required by subsection (a), if the entity must file tier two inventory forms, as required by R.S. 30:2361 et seq., then the entity shall remit to the city the same fee required by the state for the filing of tier two inventory forms. 
(d)  Exceptions to fee charges. No fees should be charged to the following: 
(1)  Premises owned and operated by any governmental entity. 
(2)  All private residences consisting of four (4) or less units. 
(3)  Proof of fire marshal inspection or state certified third party inspection within prior twelve (12) months will be accepted in lieu of paying thirty dollars ($30.00). 
(e)  For those entities that are required to have an occupational license, the charges required by this section shall be included in the occupational licenses fees. 
(f)  For all other entities for which this section applies, the charges required by this section shall be due on July 1 of each year beginning with July 1, 2019. 
(g)  The revenues generated by fire inspection fees pursuant to this section are dedicated to the city fire department for fire prevention. 
(Ord. No. 11,493, § 1, 12-6-18) 
Secs. 8-20-8-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LIFE SAFETY CODE 

Sec. 8-26. - Adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by the council of the City of Kenner for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing safety to life from fire in buildings that certain code known as the "Life Safety Code" recommended by the National Fire Protection Association (N.F.P.A. No. 101) being particularly the 1991 Edition thereof and any future editions, amendments or modifications as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association as fully as if set out herein in extenso. The chief of the fire department for the City of Kenner shall be responsible for filing with the clerk of the City of Kenner any future editions, amendments or modifications as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7012, § 3(Exh. C), adopted May 5, 1994, repealed former § 8-26 pertaining to the 1985 edition of the life safety code and derived from Ord. No. 2983, § 1, adopted July 2, 1981, and Ord. No. 5595, § 1, adopted Dec. 5, 1985. Further, § 4(Exh. D) of Ord. No. 7012 enacted a new § 8-26 to read as herein set out. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt codes by reference, R.S. 33:1368, 33:1369. 
Sec. 8-27. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the life safety code adopted in this article or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the chief of the fire department or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall severally, for each and every violation and noncompliance respectively, be penalized as provided in section 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kenner. The imposition of one (1) penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty should not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Ord. No. 2983, §§ 6, 7, 7-2-81) 
ARTICLE IV. - FIRE LANES 

Sec. 8-28. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this article the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:] 
    City shall mean the City of Kenner. 
    Commercial structure shall mean a freestanding single-tenant or multitenant commercial structure containing more than eight thousand (8,000) square feet. 
    Director shall mean the director of the department of inspections and code enforcement of the City of Kenner. 
    Fire lane shall mean any area appurtenant to entrances or exits of a building deemed necessary by the director of inspection and code enforcement, to remain free and clear of parked vehicles for access to such building in case of fire or other emergency and designated by him as such, and may, in the discretion of the director of inspection and code enforcement, include sidewalks, driveways, portions of parking lots, or any other area adjacent to or near the entrances or exits of any building. 
    Multiple-family residential dwelling shall mean an R-3 or lower zoning classification as defined in the city's unified development code. 
    Shopping center shall mean a group of commercial business establishments, planned, developed, owned and managed as a unit, with off-street parking provided on the property, and related in location, size, and types of shops to the trade area that the unit serves. 
(Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93; Ord. No. 11,062, § 7, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 8-29. - Designation, location and maintenance of fire lanes. 
    The director is hereby authorized to designate fire lanes on the property of shopping centers, commercial structures and multiple-family residential dwellings or the entrances or exits to commercial structures, stores, groups of stores or multiple-family residential dwellings, where, in his opinion, such areas must be kept free of parked vehicles and other obstructions to provide ready [access], in case of fire or other emergencies. The designation by the director of such fire lanes shall never be held to make the city responsible for maintenance of such fire lanes on private property, but the owner of such property shall continue to be responsible for the maintenance of such area. The official record of the designation and location of such fire lane shall be kept in the office of the director and under the custody and control of the director. 
(Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93) 
Sec. 8-30. - Approval of fire lanes on plot plan. 
    Plot plans of proposed shopping centers, commercial structures and multiple-family residential construction shall hereafter be submitted to the director for review and approval of the fire lanes provided therefor prior to the issuance of a building permit thereon. 
(Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93) 
Sec. 8-31. - Signs and striping designating fire lanes. 
    Upon the designation of a fire lane pursuant to this article, the director shall give notice of such designation to the owner of such shopping center, commercial structures, or multiple-family residential dwelling, directing the owner to provide at the owner's expense approved, striping, signs or both striping and signs to denote and identify the areas designated as fire lanes and to prohibit the obstruction thereof. Striping and signs shall be maintained in a clean and legible condition at all times and it shall be the responsibility of the owner of such shopping center, commercial structures, or multiple-family residential dwelling to have replaced or repaired the striping and/or signs to provide adequate visibility. 
(1)  Striping. Fire lanes shall be marked by painted lines of red traffic paint six (6) inches in width to show the boundaries of the lane. The words "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" shall appear in four-inch white letters at twenty-five-feet intervals on the red border markings along both sides of the fire lanes. Where a curb is available, the striping will be on the vertical face of the curb. 
(2)  Signs. Will read "NO PARKING FIRE LANE" or "FIRE LANE NO PARKING" and will be twelve (12) inches wide and eighteen (18) inches high. Signs shall be painted on a white background with letters and borders in red, using not less than two-inch lettering. Signs shall be permanently affixed to a stationary post and the bottom of the sign shall be six feet, six inches (6'6") above finished grade. Signs shall be spaced not more than fifty (50) feet apart. Signs may be installed on permanent buildings or walls or as approved by the director. 
(Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93; Ord. No. 9764, § I, 9-11-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9764, § I, adopted Sept. 11, 2208, changed the title of § 8-31 from signs designating fire lanes to signs and striping designating fire lanes. 
Sec. 8-32. - Summons, enforcement. 
(a)  In addition to section 1-9, unauthorized vehicles may be towed and impounded in accordance with the provisions of section 15-51 and/or a summons or notice to appear may be issued for a vehicle parked in violation of this article. 
(b)  The departments of inspections and code enforcement, fire, and police shall each have the authority to issue the summons or notice of violation for herein provided for in article IV of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93; Ord. No. 10,051, §§ 4, 5, 1-21-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,051, adopted Jan. 21, 2010, changed the title of § 8-32 from summons; special commissioned police officers to summons, enforcement. 
Sec. 8-33. - Parking in and obstruction of fire lanes where striping and/or signs are provided deemed unlawful. 
    Fire lanes shall be free of any obstruction. Therefore, it is hereby declared to be unlawful to park, stop, stand or leave obstructions including but not limited to dumpsters, fencing, pallets or any vehicle other than an authorized emergency vehicle in any fire lane as defined in section 8-28 where the striping and/or signs provided for herein have been provided/erected; however, if the striping and/or signs provided for herein are not in proper position and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, it shall be a defense to any alleged violation hereof. 
(Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93; Ord. No. 9764, § II, 9-11-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9764, § II, adopted Sept. 11, 2208, changed the title of § 8-33 from parking in fire lanes where signs are provided deemed unlawful to parking in and obstruction of fire lanes where striping and/or signs are provided deemed unlawful. 
Sec. 8-34. - Alteration, defacing, etc., of striping and/or signs unlawful. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt or to in fact alter, deface, or injure striping designating a fire lane which has been marked under the terms of this article. It shall be unlawful for any person, without lawful authority, to attempt or to in fact alter, deface, injure, knock down, or remove any sign designating a fire lane which has been erected under the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93; Ord. No. 9764, § III, 9-11-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9764, § III, adopted Sept. 11, 2208, changed the title of § 8-34 from alteration, defacing, etc., of signs unlawful to alteration, defacing, etc., of striping and/or signs unlawful. 
Sec. 8-35. - Obstruction or defacement of fire hydrants. 
(a)  Terms defined. For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Fire hydrant means any public utility device installed by, or on behalf of, the Parish of Jefferson on public or private property which provides a water supply for the City of Kenner fire department. 
(2)  Obstacle/s means anything placed or allowed to remain within a five-foot radius of a fire hydrant, as measured from the top center of the hydrant, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, fences, shrubs, trees, flowers, vines, mail boxes, vehicles, water craft, trailers, structures, or other movable or immovable objects. 
(b)  Prohibitions. The following are prohibited with regards to fire hydrants: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to place any obstacle within a five-foot radius of any fire hydrant, as measured from the top center of the hydrant, except as herein provided. 
(2)  It shall further be unlawful for any person who owns or manages property adjoining the berm on which a fire hydrant may be located to knowingly allow any obstacles to remain with a five-foot radius of the fire hydrant. 
(3)  Further, it shall be unlawful for anyone to paint, alter the original appearance of, or deface in any manner any fire hydrant within the City of Kenner, except as provided herein. 
(4)  It shall be further be unlawful for anyone to obstruct any fire hydrant from view, or access from a public street, or from emergency access. 
(c)  Exceptions. The following are exempt from the provisions of this section: 
(1)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the department of public works, or its designees, the water department, or its designees, or the City of Kenner fire department or its designees, from performing normal maintenance or otherwise performing necessary repairs to any fire hydrant. 
(2)  Protective post(s), as deemed necessary by the City of Kenner department of public works, City of Kenner fire department, or Jefferson Parish Department of Water, shall be exempt from the provisions of this section only if express written consent is granted by the City of Kenner fire department which shall approve the design and location of the protective post(s). The City of Kenner fire department or its designee shall inspect the site prior to and immediately after installation to ensure proper compliance with this section. 
(d)  Enforcement. In addition to the penalties and enforcement provided herein, the City of Kenner fire department shall have the authority to require the removal of any obstructions not in compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 10,051, §§ 6, 7, 1-21-10) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,051, §§ 6, 7, adopted Jan. 21, 2010, deleted the former § 8-35, and enacted a new § 8-35 as set out herein. The former § 8-35 pertained to penalty for article violation and derived from Ord. No. 6905, § 1(Exh. A), 7-15-93. 
Sec. 8-36. - Penalty for article violation. 
(a)  Fines issued for violations of this chapter shall be in accordance with section 1-9 of this Code. 
(b)  Fifty (50) percent of the fines collected under this chapter shall be paid to the city fire department. 
(Ord. No. 10,051, § 8, 1-21-10) 
Chapter 9 - FOOD AND FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, § 3-1 et seq.; occupational license for restaurants, § 10-65; exemptions from occupational license for vendors of ice, bread, milk or coffee, § 10-108. 
State Law reference- Food generally, R.S. 40:601 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the term "food service operator", shall mean any person who manufactures, prepares, serves or offers for sale any food or beverage product to the public. "Food service operation", as used in this article, shall mean any building, place or mobile unit used for the purpose of manufacture, preparation, or service of any food product or beverage to the public. 
(Ord. No. 769, § II, 2-9-64; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64) 
Sec. 9-2. - Parish permit for food service operation-Issuance or sale of occupational or alcoholic beverage license prior to issuance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any food service operator to be issued or sold an occupational license or alcoholic beverage license unless and until such food service operator provides the issuing or selling city agency with valid proof of a permit from the Jefferson Parish Health Unit to operate at the same address for which license is being requested. 
(Ord. No. 769, § III, 2-9-64; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64) 
State Law reference- Parish board of health, R.S. 14:31 et seq. 
Sec. 9-3. - Same-Operation without issuance prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any food service establishment to be operated without a valid permit from the Jefferson Parish Health Unit. 
(Ord. No. 769, § IV, 2-9-64; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64) 
Sec. 9-4. - Same-Revocation; posting of notice required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any food service operator to continue the food service operation for which the permit from the Jefferson Parish Health Unit has been revoked. Written notification of permit revocation shall be considered as sufficient notification. Signs will be posted notifying the public that the establishment does not meet health standards. Removal of such signs shall be done only by the direction of the Jefferson Parish Health Unit. 
(Ord. No. 769, § V, 2-9-64; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64) 
Sec. 9-5. - Same-Duty of marshal in case of unlawful operations; separate offenses. 
    It shall be the duty of the marshal of the city to immediately close any food service establishment found to be operating without a permit from the Jefferson Parish Health Unit or who continues to operate after their permit for such food service operation has been revoked by the parish board of health or its authorized representative and to prefer charges against the food operator responsible for such unlawful operation. Each day of such unlawful operation constitutes a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 769, § VI, 2-9-64; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64) 
Sec. 9-6. - Same-Penalty for unlawful operations. 
    Any food service operator violating the provisions of sections 9-2-9-4 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction for such offense before any court of competent jurisdiction of the city shall be penalized as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 769, § VII, 2-9-64; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64) 
Secs. 9-7-9-16. - Reserved. 
Chapter 91/4 - HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 91/4-1-91/4-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSPORTATION, STORAGE AND USE OF HAZARDOUS MATERIAL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 3841, §§ 1-4, adopted Feb. 2, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code and at the discretion of the editor said provisions have been codified as Art. II, §§ 91/4-21-91/4-25 hereof. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 8; health, Ch. 91/2; police, ch. 11; traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 15. 

Sec. 91/4-21. - Purpose. 
    This article [Ordinance Number 3841] was created and adopted to prohibit and/or restrict the transportation, storage, and use of the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation within the city limits of Kenner by roadway, said article to read as follows. 
(Ord. No. 3841, § 1, 2-2-84) 
Sec. 91/4-22. - Definitions-Generally. 
    The following definitions have been abstracted in order to aid and clarify wording used throughout this article: 
    Alley: A narrow street; especially a thoroughfare through the middle of a block giving access to the rear of lots or buildings. 
    Assembly: A building used, in whole or in part, for the gathering together of persons for such purposes as deliberation, worship, entertainment, amusement, or awaiting transportation. 
    Avenue: The principal walk or driveway to a house situated off a main road. A broad passageway bordered by trees. An often broad street or road. 
    Institution: A building in which persons are harbored to receive medical, charitable, or other care or treatment, or in which persons are held or detained by reasons of public or civic duty, or for correctional purposes. 
    Parking lot: An area used for the parking of motor vehicles (public or private parking area). 
    Pressure vessel: When used in connection with liquefied petroleum gases shall mean any tank or vessel in which liquefied petroleum gases are stored or transported or in which liquefied petroleum gases are placed for utilization through a liquefied petroleum gas system. 
    Residential: A detached part of whole of a building occupied exclusively as a family dwelling place and the usual accessory occupancies. 
    Street: A thoroughfare, especially in a city, town, or village that is wider than an alley or lane and that usually includes sidewalks. The part of a street reserved for vehicles. A thoroughfare with abutting property. 
    Tanker, containerized vehicle and container: Any vehicle other than railroad tank cars and boats, with cargo tank mounted thereon or built as an integral part thereof, used for the transportation of hazardous material/flammable liquids. Tank vehicles include self-propelled vehicles, full trailers and semi-trailers without motor power and with wheels carrying either part or all of the load. 
(Ord. No. 3841, § 4, 2-2-84) 
Sec. 91/4-23. - Same-Classes of hazardous material. 
    The following definitions have been abstracted from the Code of Federal Regulations, Title 49-Transportation, and shall apply to the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation mentioned herewith: 
    CLASS I: 
Class A Explosive: Detonating or otherwise of maximum hazard. The nine (9) types of Class A explosives are defined in Section 173.53. 
Class B Explosive: In general, functions by rapid combustion rather than detonation and includes some explosive devices such as special fireworks, flash powders, etc. Flammable hazard. (Section 173.88) 
Class C Explosive: Certain types of manufactured articles containing Class A or Class B Explosives, or both, as components but in restricted quantities, and certain types of fireworks. Minimum hazard. (Section 173.100) 
Blasting Agent: A material designed for blasting which has been tested in accordance with Section 173.114a(b) and found to be so insensitive that there is very little probability of accidental initiation to explosion or of transition from deflagration to detonation. (Section 173.144a(a)) 
    CLASS II: 
Flammable Gas: Any compressed gas meeting the requirements for lower flammability limit, flammability limit range, flame projection, or flame propagation criterial as specified in Section 173.300(b). 
Nonflammable Gas: Any compressed gas other than a flammable compressed gas. 
Poison A: Extremely Dangerous Poisons -Poisonous gases or liquids of such nature that a very small amount of the gas, or vapor of the liquid, mixed with air is dangerous to life. (Section 173.326) 
    CLASS III: 
Combustible Liquid: Any liquid having a flash point above one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit and below two hundred (200) degrees Fahrenheit as determined by tests listed in Section 173.115(d). Exceptions are found in Section 173.115(b). 
Flammable Liquid: Any liquid having a flash point below one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit as determined by tests listed in Section 173.115(d). For exceptions see Section 173.115(a). 
    CLASS IV: 
Flammable Solid: Any solid material, other than an explosive, which is liable to cause fires through friction, retained heat from manufacturing or processing, or which can be ignited readily and when ignited burns so vigorously and persistently as to create a serious transportation hazard. (Section 173.150) 
    CLASS V: 
Organic Peroxide: An organic compound containing the bivalent-O-O structure and which may be considered a derivative of hydrogen peroxide where one or more of the hydrogen atoms have been replaced by organic radicals must be classed as an organic peroxide unless-(See Section 173.151(a) for details). 
Oxidizer: A substance such as chlorate, permanganate, inorganic peroxide, or a nitrate, that yields oxygen readily to stimulate the combustion of organic matter. (See Section 173.151) 
    CLASS VI: 
Poison A; Extremely Dangerous Poisons. Poisonous gases or liquids of such nature that a very small amount of the gas, or vapor of the liquid, mixed with air is dangerous to life. (Section 173.326) 
Poison B: Less Dangerous Poisons. Substances, liquids, or solids (including pastes and semi-solids), other than Class A or irritating materials, which are known to be so toxic to man as to afford a hazard to health during transportation; or which, in the absence of adequate data on human toxicity, are presumed to be toxic to man. (Section 173.343) 
Irritating material: A liquid or solid substance which upon contact with fire or when exposed to air gives off dangerous or intensely irritating fumes, but not including any poisonous material, Class A. 
    CLASS VII: 
Radioactive material: Any material, or combination of materials, that spontaneously emits ionizing radiation, and having a specific activity greater than 0.002 microcuries per gram. (Section 173.389) Note: See Section 173.389(a) through (l) for details. 
    CLASS VIII: 
Corrosive Material: Any liquid or solid that causes visible destruction of human skin tissue or a liquid that has a severe corrosion rate on steel. (See Section 173.240(a) and (b) for details). 
(Ord. No. 3841, § 3, 2-2-84) 
Sec. 91/4-24. - Regulations governing transportation, storage and use of hazardous material. 
    It shall be unlawful for any tank motor vehicle or containerized motor carrier to be left unattended on any street, highway, from necessary absence from a vehicle or the vehicle is in connection with delivery of materials, except during the actual discharge of any liquid, bulk, gas, or those eight (8) hazardous materials as defined by the United States Department of Transportation. A representative or responsible person shall be present with the vehicle. Nor shall it prevent stops for meals during the day or night, provided that streets or parking area is well lighted at the point of parking. 
(1)  No tank motor vehicle, containerized motor carrier or pressure vessel containing any of the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation shall be parked out of doors at any point longer than one (1) hour. 
(2)  No tank motor vehicle, containerized motor carrier or pressure vessel containing any of the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation shall at any time be parked within one hundred (100) feet of any building used for assembly, institutional, or residential occupancy. 
(3)  No tank motor vehicle, containerized motor carrier or pressure vessel containing any of the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation shall be parked or garaged in any area not specifically zoned and approved by the City of Kenner Council, the City of Kenner Department of Public Works, the City of Kenner Fire Department, the City of Kenner Police Department, and hazardous material personnel. 
(4)  All roadway vehicles shall use established and designated routes within the City of Kenner limits. 
(5)  Parking lots as defined by this article shall mean private or public parking areas. 
(6)  Carriers shall adequately maintain vehicles to provide maximum safety and efficiency level for travel. 
(7)  Carriers shall provide notice to the City of Kenner Fire Department and the City of Kenner Police Department whenever a hazardous material is released into the atmosphere, when there is an accident of any kind, or a potential problem which may bring about problems throughout the area. 
(8)  Carriers shall provide prior and advance notice to the City of Kenner Fire Department and the City of Kenner Police Department whenever explosives are transported or stored throughout the city. 
(9)  Carriers will reduce speed in areas of hazardous roadway or congested areas when carrying any of the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation within the corporate limits of the City of Kenner and two thousand (2000) feet beyond in either direction. 
(10)  Carriers containing any of the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation shall be properly marked when traveling through, stored in, or involved within the city limits of Kenner. 
(11)  It shall be specifically understood that the cost of clean-up, restoration, and any cost incurred by the government [relative] to any of the eight (8) classes of hazardous material as defined by the United States Department of Transportation within the City limits of Kenner, and which are brought about by accidents or any other malfunction of the carrier vessel, shall be borne by the applicable carrier. 
(12)  It shall be required that the responsible company which owns or operates any vehicle or container which must be repaired, towed, altered, removed or stored in order to correct a situation which is deemed unsafe or is in violation of this article by City of Kenner Police Department, City of Kenner Fire Department, or the City of Kenner Public Works Department, shall be required to reimburse the City of Kenner for cost of said action. 
(13)  All violators of this article shall be required to appear in person at city court, and shall not be permitted to pay any fines or other penalty before any court appearances are made. 
(Ord. 3841, § 2, 2-2-84) 
Sec. 91/4-25. - Enforcement; penalty. 
    The enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the City of Kenner Department of Public Works, the City of Kenner Fire Department, and the City of Kenner Police Department. The penalty for violation of same shall carry with it a minimum of thirty (30) days confinement and/or a minimum of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day and/or incident. 
(Ord. No. 3841, § 2a, 2-2-84) 
Chapter 91/2 - HEALTH 

Sec. 91/2-1. - State sanitary code adopted. 
    In order to protect and promote the health and sanitation of the city, there is hereby adopted that certain code known as the "Sanitary Code, State of Louisiana", prepared and promulgated by the Louisiana State Board of Health under the provisions of Title 40 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Louisiana, as amended from time to time. The provisions of said code shall be considered as an addition and supplementary to the provisions of this Code of Ordinances and other ordinances relating to health and sanitation. The violation or failure to comply with any provision of said sanitary code shall be punished as provided in section 1-9 of this Code of Ordinances. 
Sec. 91/2-2. - Use of natural limestone rock in mixing, manufacturing, and/or preparation of natural limestone rock asphalt prohibited. 
(a)  The use of natural limestone rock, commonly known as Alabama limestone, in the mixing, manufacturing, and/or preparation of natural limestone rock asphalt within the boundaries of the City of Kenner be and is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  Any person, firm, corporation or concern violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) or be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both for each offense and each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  The mayor and board of aldermen of the City of Kenner or their duly authorized representatives, may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent and enjoin any violations to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1421, §§ 1-3, 7-24-72) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1421, §§ 1-3, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 91/2-2 at the discretion of the editors. 
Sec. 91/2-3. - Filling of property to curb grade; notice; effect of failure to comply with notice. 
(a)  The City of Kenner, or its duly authorized representative shall have the authority to compel property owners to fill their property to curb grade in improved areas upon petition of the owners of fifty (50) per cent of the surface area in such areas. The definition of an "improved area" shall be any area surrounded by improved streets, or a combination of improved streets and natural boundaries such as canals, etc., with fifty (50) per cent of such area developed and used for residential, commercial or industrial purposes. Any piece or portion of ground located in such areas, owned by one or more owners in indivisum and exceeding one acre in area shall be exempt from all the provisions of this section, except subsection (b) (2). For the purposes of this section, all lots which have previously been filled to curb grade shall be considered "developed". 
(b)  The City of Kenner shall give the property owners or their agents (as shown on the latest assessment rolls of the city) due notice by registered or certified mail to fill and bring their property to curb grade to prevent water from accumulating thereon; said notice shall state the estimated cost of the work which must be done to accomplish the filling bringing their property to curb grade, giving the owner or his agent thirty (30) days to perform the necessary work at his own expense. 
    If the required work is not done within thirty (30) days after receipt of such written notice by the property owner or his agent, or within thirty (30) days after the date of said notice if the notice should be returned to the city by the post office department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, the City of Kenner may proceed to have the necessary work done either by its own employees or by an independent contractor, and then may proceed to adopt an ordinance levying a local or special assessment against the immovable property involved, for the actual cost of such work, plus accrued interest at the rate of ten (10) per cent per annum from date of completion of the work, plus all administrative costs. 
(1)  Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the City of Kenner or its duly authorized representative, is hereby authorized to take immediate steps to fill and bring to curb grade in accordance with this section, any property within the City of Kenner where there is presented to the city council or the director of the department responsible for the enforcement of this section, evidence of the presence of the situation causing immediate hazard to adjoining property owners, the public in general, or creating an attractive nuisance to children upon said property. All other provisions contained in this section not contrary to this subsection shall be applicable. 
(2)  For the purpose of this section, any lot or lots which abuts or adjoins a developed lot which is occupied shall be considered an immediate hazard and subject to the provisions contained in this section. 
(c)  The City of Kenner shall assess liens against the property where the property owners have refused, after due notice to fill their property and the City of Kenner has filled the property, such liens to be in an amount equal to the amount necessary to defray the cost of filling the property plus legal interest and twenty-five (25) per cent attorney's fees for the cost of collection thereof. 
(d)  A certified copy of said assessment shall be filed with the clerk of court of Jefferson Parish who shall forthwith record the same in the mortgage records of Jefferson Parish. Such assessment so filed and recorded shall operate as a lien and privilege against the property therein assessed, which lien and privilege shall rank from the date of filing of the ordinance in the mortgage records of said parish and shall prime all other claims, mortgages and liens, except taxes and prior recorded assessment liens. 
(e)  If the owner of the property fails to pay the amount due under the said local or special assessment ordinance within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of such ordinance after its final adoption, this council may authorize an action either in rem against the property or in personam against the owner, or both, for the collection of the total amount due, including interest, plus an additional sum equivalent to twenty-five (25) per cent of the principal and interest due as attorney's fees. 
(f)  No contest, action or proceeding to question the validity or legality of any resolution, ordinance, notice or other proceeding adopted or published in accordance with the foregoing shall be begun in any court by any person for any cause whatsoever after the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date when the resolution, ordinance, notice or proceeding was adopted or published and thereafter, the legality and validity of such resolution, ordinance, notice of proceeding shall be conclusively presumed and no court shall thereafter have authority to inquire into such matter. 
(g)  If any provision or item of this section or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions, items or application of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provisions, items or applications, and to this end the provisions of this section are hereby declared severable. 
(h)  If the owner of the property feels that the proposed action against his property is not proper, he may ask for a hearing before the council for the City of Kenner, wherein he may present any facts or evidence in his behalf. The request for a hearing before the council must be made in writing to the office of regulatory inspections and postmarked or received within thirty (30) days from the date that the notice to fill the lot was received. Failure on the part of the property owner to request such a hearing within the time specified above shall leave the city no alternative but to believe that no hearing is desired, and the proposed action will be taken. 
    Scope of the hearing may include one or more of the following issues: 
(1)  Whether or not the city received a petition from fifty (50) per cent of the owners of the surface area; 
(2)  Whether or not the area is an improved area; 
(3)  Whether or not the property is below curb grade; 
(4)  Whether or not the area is fifty (50) per cent developed; 
(5)  Whether or not immediate hazard exists. 
    At the hearing the property owner may present evidence and bring any witnesses in his behalf who may have knowledge of the issues in this matter. The property owner may be represented by counsel. 
(i)  Any property owner aggrieved by a decision of the city council, may present to the twenty-fourth judicial district court for the Parish of Jefferson, within five (5) days after the property owner receives notice of the decision, a writ of certiorari asking for such relief in view of the decision. 
(j)  Any person or firm or corporation who violates any provisions of this section, by failing or refusing to fill his property to curb grade after due notice or after the hearing as provided for in subsection (h) hereof, shall be deemed to be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof may be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both in the discretion of the court; each day that this condition exists after order to comply shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1739, §§ 1-6, 7-28-75; Ord. No. 2409, §§ 1-3, 10-23-78; Ord. No. 2616, §§ 1-9, 10-22-79; Ord. No. 2897, § 1, 3-12-81; Ord. No. 3287, § 1, 9-2-82) 
Sec. 91/2-4. - Accumulation and collection of refuse. 
(a)  No owner or lessee of any public or private property or premises, nor any agent of such owner or lessee shall permit garbage to accumulate upon the property or premises except in tightly covered containers constructed of such material and in such a manner as to be strong, watertight, not easily corroded, and rodent and insect-proof. When garbage and other types of refuse are collected together, the containers utilized shall be of the type required for the collection of garbage. 
(b)  Refuse shall not be allowed to remain in any house or other building, cellar, or outhouse, or on any premises long enough to cause a nuisance or health hazard. 
(c)  The bodies of vehicles used for the collection and transportation of garbage shall be watertight and easily cleaned. Such bodies shall be covered except when being loaded and unloaded. 
(d)  No person shall throw or deposit or shall allow to fall upon any walkway, thoroughfare, public or private property, any refuse of any kind. 
(e)  All containers utilized for the accumulation of refuse, of any kind whatsoever, shall be emptied at least twice weekly. 
(f)  For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Refuse: "Refuse" includes garbage, rubbish, ashes, animal and vegetable waste from animal quarters, and all other waste matter, except sewage, from any public or private establishment, institution, or residence. 
(2)  Garbage: "Garbage" includes putrescible waste matter except sewerage and recognizable industrial by-products. 
(3)  Dumpster: A refuse collection receptacle of not less than one (1) cubic yard in volume equipped with attachments for lifting into a refuse collection vehicle, primarily used for storage between collection by a nonresidential enterprise. 
(g)  Commercial waste collection companies shall not provide or locate any dumpsters within the city limits of Kenner unless the customer has obtained or can show evidence that application has been made for the building permit and placement of the dumpster has been approved with said building permit. 
(h)  Dumpsters are further subject to the applicable provisions of Article 203 of the City of Kenner Building Code. 
(i)  Dumpsters shall be properly screened from view and shall be properly deodorized and sanitized. 
(j)  Any person obtaining a commercial building permit for new construction or any person obtaining a commercial permit for renovations of existing structures as determined by code enforcement shall be required to have on-site, at a location to be approved by code enforcement, a dumpster of sufficient size to contain all construction debris which is accumulated during the construction project. The dumpster shall be emptied as needed. Any person obtaining a residential building permit for new construction or any person obtaining a residential permit for renovations of existing structures as determined by code enforcement shall be required to have an on-site trash retaining structure with a minimum of eight (8) feet by eight (8) feet and four (4) feet in height to be made of temporary construction fencing supported wood or metal bracing. The trash retaining structure shall be emptied on an as-needed basis. 
(k)  Any owner or lessee of any public or private property or premises, or any agent of such owner or lessee who shall violate the provisions of this section, shall upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day any violation of this section shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 2617, §§ 1, 2, 10-22-79; Ord. No. 6357, § III, 12-7-89; Ord. No. 8081, §§ I, II, 5-20-99; Ord. No. 8214, § I, 12-16-99) 
Cross reference- Littering, § 7-171. 
Sec. 91/2-5. - Changes for the collection and disposal of refuse. 
(a)  The fees for collection and disposal of refuse which is placed between the sidewalk and curb shall be three dollars and five cents ($3.05) per month per dwelling unit in the City of Kenner and six dollars and fifteen cents ($6.15) per month per business location utilizing the City of Kenner's garbage service. 
(b)  The above mentioned service charge will be collected bi-monthly on the same billing of the waterworks of the parish, payable at the offices of the department of water and its authorized collection agencies. 
(c)  All accounts shall be considered delinquent if not paid ten (10) days after receipts of same. If a delinquent account is not paid within thirty (30) days after receipt of the bill, the director of public works shall be authorized to cease all refuse collection for the account. Service shall be resumed thereafter only on payment of the accumulated fees for the period of collection plus ten (10) per cent. In addition the public works director shall be authorized to collect on the delinquency in accordance with L.S.A.R.S. 33:4169.1 (C). 
(d)  The stoppage of services hereinbefore authorized for nonpayment of collection charges shall be in addition to the right of the city to proceed for the collection of such unpaid charges in a manner provided by law for the collection of a city claim. 
(e)  Those apartment complexes at a single location which do not and cannot use the garbage and trash collection services provided by the parish are hereby exempt from the payment of the monthly garbage service charge under the following conditions: 
(1)  An affidavit shall be furnished the director of public works by each owner or operator of apartment complexes qualifying for and requesting the exemption. 
(2)  The director of public works and/or the parish's garbage contractor shall investigate each affidavit requesting the exemption and if all conditions are met shall approve the request. 
(3)  The monthly garbage service charge shall be eliminated from the parish utility bill to the apartment complex after the date of final approval of the exemption request; however, the garbage service charge exemption shall not be made retroactive under any circumstances. 
(f)  Recycling. That the mayor is hereby authorized to amend the current garbage collection fee to include a curbside recycling fee of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per dwelling unit for the purpose of defraying the cost of the city-wide curbside recycling program. This combined fee will be known as the solid waste collection fee. 
(1)  This solid waste collection fee will be subject to an annual adjustment, not to exceed the annual charge, in accordance with the contract Consumer Price Index (CPI) clause. 
(2)  That heads of households 65 years and older only may apply for a fifty (50) percent reduction in the Solid Waste Recycling Fee in accordance with established requirements. 
(g)  Solid waste. 
Unit Type Current Monthly Fee Monthly Fee 
Increase New Monthly Fee Residential $4.87 $4.87 $9.74 Residential with Head of Household 65 years or older $4.07 $2.44 $6.51 Business $6.58 $6.58 $13.16  
(Ord. No. 6067, § 1, 5-19-88; Ord. No. 6753, § 1, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 7082, §§ 1-3, 9-1-94; Ord. No. 8162, § 1, 9-2-99) 
Sec. 91/2-6. - Obstructing public drainage. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct or cause to be obstructed any public drainage within the limits of the city. 
(b)  Whenever any person shall have obstructed or caused to be obstructed the public drainage within the limits for the city, the director of inspections and code enforcement shall serve a notice upon said person to remove said obstruction within five (5) days from the date of said notice. Failure to remove said obstruction by the person shall constitute prima facie evidence of wilful intent to violate this section. 
(c)  Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7412, § 1, 3-21-96) 
Sec. 91/2-7. - Regulations for removal of weeds, grass or other noxious matter. 
(a)  Prohibited. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or his agent, of any property within the corporate limits of the city lying within areas subdivided into squares with streets dedicated and improved, to permit the growth of grass or weeds upon such property or upon the area abutting said property between the front lot line and the street at a height of more than fifteen (15) inches within a minimum radius of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any building and one hundred fifty (150) feet from any improved dedicated public street, or to permit deleterious or unhealthful growth or trash, debris, refuse, discarded or noxious matter within a minimum radius of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any improved dedicated public street. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for the owner, or his agent, of any property within the corporate limits of the city consisting of unsubdivided parcels of property whereon public streets have not been installed to permit the growth of grass or weeds upon such property at a height of more than fifteen (15) inches over a three hundred-foot width around the entire perimeter of said property, or to permit deleterious or unhealthful growth or trash, debris, refuse, discarded or noxious matter on a three hundred-foot strip around the entire perimeter of said property. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a)(1) and (a)(2) of this section, it shall be unlawful for the owner, developer, lessor or lessee of any property within the corporate limits of the city which has improvements (house, slab, or building) thereon, to permit the growth of grass or weeds upon such property or upon the area abutting said property between the front lot line and the street, at a height of more than seven (7) inches within a minimum radius of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from any building and one hundred and fifty (150) feet from any improved dedicated public street, or to permit deleterious or unhealthful growth or trash, debris, refuse, discharge [discarded] or noxious matter within a radius of one hundred fifty (150) feet from any improved dedicated public street. 
(b)  Maintenance of perimeter and fire lanes. 
(1)  On properties as described and provided for in subsection (a)(2) above, the owner thereof shall maintain a three-hundred-foot width around the entire perimeter of said property by cutting and/or otherwise removing all growth thereon, and thereafter maintaining the height of grass not to exceed fifteen (15) inches, by turning over or otherwise cultivating the soil. On such properties described and provided for in subsection(a)(2) above, the owner shall provide one-hundred-foot north/south fire lanes at distances not exceeding one thousand one hundred twenty-five (1,125) feet from each other and one-hundred-foot east/west fire lanes at distances not exceeding two thousand (2,000) feet from each other, said fire lanes to be created by initially cutting or otherwise removing all growth and thereafter maintaining grass height to a maximum of fifteen (15) inches by turning over or otherwise cultivating the soil. 
(2)  On any property within the corporate limits of the city which has improvements (house, slab, or building) thereon, property owners shall weed the subject property by mowing, discing, and performing any necessary handwork along fence lines, sidewalks, parkways, driveways, streets, or structures, 
(3)  On properties as described and provided for in subsection (a)(1) and (2) above, the owner, developer, lessor or lessee of any property and particularly its contractors shall collect all deleterious or unhealthful growth or trash, debris, refuse, discharge [discarded] or noxious matter prior to cutting grass or weeds on private or city property. 
(c)  [Notice to abate.] The department of inspection and code enforcement shall notify the owner or his agent as shown on the latest assessment rolls of the city, of any property on which grass, weeds, trash, debris, refuse or other noxious matter may be located in violation of the foregoing subsection, by registered or certified mail or by U.S. Mail and placing a notice in the official journal of the city to run for two (2) days, to cut, destroy or remove such weeds, grass or deleterious, unhealthy growth, trash, debris, refuse, discarded or noxious matter from the premises involved, within five (5) days of said notice. 
(d)  Compliance deadline. If the required work is not done within five (5) days after receipt of such written notice by the property owner or his agent, or within five (5) days after the date of such notice, if the notice should be returned to the city by the post office department because of its inability to make delivery thereof, the city may proceed to have the necessary work done either by its own employees or by an independent contractor. 
(e)  Abatement by city. If after giving the five (5) days' notice as required by subsection (c) hereof, the owner fails to cut, destroy, or remove the weeds, grass or unhealthful trash, debris, refuse or discarded or noxious matter, the city may undertake the cutting, destruction, or removal of noxious weeds or grass or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious growths on any such property, and continue monthly maintenance for a period of twelve (12) months immediately following said five-day notifications, without giving any additional notification to the owner. However, prior to undertaking such work, the department of inspection and code enforcement shall file and record an affidavit, signed by the mayor, at the office of the chief of inspection and code enforcement department. Such affidavit shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the property sufficient to reasonably identify it. 
(2)  A photograph of the property sufficient to reasonably identify its unsafe or unsanitary condition and to justify the necessity for cutting, destroying, or removing weeds, grass, or other noxious growths. 
(3)  A statement that the property owner liable has within the past twelve (12) months failed to do such work after notification and opportunity to do so pursuant to subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  Mailing of statement and assessment of costs. After the cutting, destruction or removal of such weeds, grass or unhealthful growth of trash, debris, discarded or noxious matter by the city after due notice as hereinabove provided, the director of finance of the city shall furnish the owner by certified or registered mail a written statement showing the costs and expenses incurred for the work including direct costs associated with the removal and abatement by the city and a two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) charge for inspection and administrative costs, and the place or property on which the work was done. If said statement is not paid by the owner within one (1) month thereafter, the amount thereof shall be included in and form part of the taxes due on said property by the owner, and when collected shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(g)  Record of charges. The director of finance shall maintain a record of such charges cross indexed to the tax rolls, which record shall be open to inspection at all times and which shall constitute legal notice to the purchasers of the property or parties lending money thereon of the assessment. 
(h)  Assessment of costs against tax exempt property. If the city accomplishes the cutting, destruction or removal of grass, weeds, trash, debris, refuse or other noxious matter, after due notice as hereinabove provided, upon property which appears on the tax exempt rolls of the city, the council of the city may then proceed to adopt an ordinance levying a local or special assessment against the immovable property involved for the actual costs of such work, including the costs of all notices. A certified copy of said local or special assessment ordinance shall be filed with the clerk of court of Jefferson Parish who shall forthwith record same in the mortgage records of said parish. Such ordinance when so filed and recorded shall operate as a lien and privilege against the immovable property herein assessed, which lien and privilege shall rank from the date of filing of the ordinance in the mortgage records of said parish and shall prime all other claims, mortgages and liens, except taxes and prior recorded special assessment liens. If the owner of the property fails to pay the amount due under said local or special assessment ordinance within thirty (30) days from the date of publication of such ordinance after its final adoption, the council of the city may authorize an action either in rem against the property or in personam against the owner, or both, for the collection of the total amount due, including costs and an additional sum equivalent to twenty-five (25) per cent of the principal due as attorney's fees. 
(i)  Authority to enforce. The director of finance of the city is hereby empowered and authorized to enforce the provisions of this section against the same lot, place, or area within the city, as often as violations may occur during a calendar year, and nothing herein shall be construed so as to prevent the assessment of costs for the removal of said weeds, grass, deleterious, unhealthy growth or other noxious matter, found growing, lying or located on private property for one (1) or more times during any calendar year. 
(j)  Immediate danger or hazard. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary, the city is hereby authorized to take immediate steps to remove any and all grass, weeds, trash, debris, refuse or other noxious matter located on or upon any property within the corporate limits of the city where there is presented to the mayor of the city evidence of the presence of immediate danger or hazard to the health, safety and welfare of adjoining property or to the citizens of the city. All other provisions as contained in this section 91/2-7, not contrary to this subsection, shall be applicable, including assessment of costs in such case. 
(k)  Violations; penalty. If any person, firm or corporation violates any provisions of this section or by any means or actions prevent or attempts to prevent any employee of and/or other person authorized by the city from carrying out the provisions of this section he shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, may be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00), or imprisoned for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days, or both in the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 7412, § 2, 3-21-96; Ord. No. 8679, § 1, 6-20-02; Ord. No. 10,070, § 5, 4-8-10; Ord. No. 10,467, § 1, 10-18-12; Ord. No. 10,958, § 1, 8-6-15) 
Sec. 91/2-8. - Discharge of oil, grease, petroleum, waste by-products or chemicals in any form, or seepage of any nature, into the subsurface or open drainage systems or waterways of the city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, company, firm or corporation residing, or doing business for, or in, the corporate limits of the city or locations abutting its boundaries, to dispose in any manner, or discharge by any means, waste matter or material substances, in any form, regardless of nature, or petroleum oils, greases, chemicals or their by products into the subsurface or storm drainage systems or waterways of the city. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the outdoor washing of motor vehicles and/or household pets in residential neighborhoods. 
(b)  Violations when known, or at occurrence, accidental or otherwise, shall be reported to the following governing agencies: police department, department of public works, fire department, department of inspections and code enforcement, department of wastewater operations, Jefferson Parish Environmental and Development Control Department, and Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. 
    The director of the department of inspections and code enforcement shall be the principal enforcing city agent, coordinating section enforcement with and through the aforesaid agencies, necessary for enforcement, subject to independent governing authorities having jurisdiction and the city council. 
    Further, the aforementioned city, parish and state agencies are herewith requested to enforce the provisions and penalties of this section, as necessary. 
    Aforesaid agencies have and are herewith empowered to stop, seize, impound and prohibit by any means at their disposal, should it become necessary, the entrance or continuance of any operations or discharges into the storm drainage systems and waterways of the city as may be necessary. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of individuals, persons, agents, companies, firms, or corporations involved, or those who caused the discharge of the aforesaid matter, at their cost, to immediately remove aforesaid discharges from the drainage system or waterways by means of rope, mops, pumps, or approved methods regardless of the extent of the operation and shall be responsible for its safe, proper disposal. 
(d)  All expenses incurred by the department of inspections and code enforcement, other agencies, their agents or personnel, for the enforcement of this section, shall be borne by the person or persons, company or corporation owning or handling the unsafe premises, or operation, together with attorney fees and interest at a rate of six (6) per cent annum, from date of completion. 
(e)  No person or persons, company, firm or corporation shall discharge any material, other than rainwater and the washwater allowed by subsection (a), into the storm drainage system or waterways without the approval of the director of the department of inspections and code enforcement, his assignee, and a Louisiana water discharge permit system permit from the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. 
(f)  The penalties for violation are herewith established as follows: Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and subject to a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days, or both. Each day that this section is violated shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 7412, § 3, 3-21-96) 
Sec. 91/2-9. - Regulations governing waste haulers and hauled waste in the City of Kenner. 
(a)  Unlawful discharge. Except as in compliance with this section and the Kenner Wastewater Ordinance, the discharge of any wastewater by waste haulers shall be unlawful. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permits required. No discharge of waste into the City of Kenner Wastewater Collection System shall be made by waste haulers, except pursuant to, and in compliance with, a City of Kenner Wastewater Discharge Permit issued by the director of the wastewater department. 
(c)  Specific provisions for oil and grease haulers. 
1.  Waste hauler permits required. No person or company may remove fats, oil, grease, and/or accompanying solids and wastewater from any source in the City of Kenner without obtaining a City of Kenner Fats, Oil, and/or Grease (FOG) Waste Hauler Permit from the director of the wastewater department. An annual permit fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) will be assessed for any business or company engaged in grease trap cleaning and/or in the transportation of waste fats, oil, grease, and/or any accompanying solids and wastewater in the City of Kenner. 
2.  FOG manifest system. All FOG waste haulers shall comply with the City of Kenner Fats, Oil, and/or Grease (FOG) Manifest System, as provided for in their FOG Waste Hauler Permit. All fats, oil, and/or grease waste haulers shall dispose of these wastes at facilities permitted to receive such wastes. Such waste disposal facilities must have a state type I and type II permit issued by the Solid Waste Division of the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality. 
3.  Inspection reports. Whenever a fats, oil, and/or grease waste hauler observes a problem with a grease trap or a grease holding tank, he shall complete a grease trap inspection report or a grease holding tank inspection report, respectively. These report forms shall be provided by the director. Such problems may consist of, but are not limited to, the following: broken pipes; broken exterior walls; broken baffle walls; broken covers; control device is overloaded with solids, oil, and/or grease; and oil is on the ground surrounding the holding tank. These reports shall be sent to the director, within five (5) days of discovery of the problem, via facsimile, electronic mail, or normal mail services. 
4.  Grease trap cleaning. Grease traps must be cleaned in accordance with the City of Kenner Building Code, as amended. Grease trap cleaning is defined as the complete removal of all solids and liquids from the trap, including any solids attached to the sides, floors, baffle walls, and/or pipes, and disposed off-site. Any material removed from a grease trap and/or a grease holding tank shall neither be reintroduced into the grease trap nor be discharged into the City of Kenner Wastewater Collection System or Storm Drainage System. 
5.  Penalties. Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall result in the following: (1) suspension or forfeiture of the waste hauler permit, and (2) a fine not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, each day of occurrence counted as a separate offense. 
6.  [Exceptions.] This section shall not apply to haulers of petroleum oils and grease that are derived from crude oil. 
(d)  Definitions. 
    Director shall mean the director of the Kenner Wastewater Department or his or her duly authorized representative. 
    Fats, oil, and grease shall mean edible fats, oil, and grease derived from animals and plants, often used in the preparation of foods. 
    FOG manifest system shall mean a system to document the removal and disposal of fats, oil, grease and accompanying wastewater and solids from grease control devices. 
    Grease holding tank inspection report shall mean an inspection report provided to the waste hauler by the director and completed by the hauler when a problem is observed while cleaning a grease holding tank. 
    Grease trap shall mean a gravity separator which is designed and installed to provide for the separation and retention of fats, oil, grease, and/or accompanying solids and wastewater. These devices may be installed above ground or below ground. 
    Grease trap inspection report shall mean an inspection report provided to the waste hauler by the director and completed by the hauler when a problem is observed while cleaning a grease control device. 
    Manifest system shall mean a system of documentation to track the waste from its source to its final disposal site. 
    Waste hauler shall mean any person or business who collects waste from residences, public buildings, commercial and business establishments, industries and any other sources in the City of Kenner, and who transports this waste by road or rail. 
(Ord. No. 8861, § 1, 7-10-03) 
Sec. 91/2-10. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Artificially induced mosquito breeding area is any site at which five (5) or more immature mosquitoes are present in artificial containers, vegetative plants or wastewater facilities at any one time. 
    Artificial containers means any man-made containers, including, but not limited to, tires, swimming pools, ponds, cans, vases, buckets, boats, bird baths, jars, canals, ditches or flower cutting containers. 
    Enforcement officer means the Kenner Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement or his or her designated representative. 
    Immature mosquito means a mosquito larva or pupa. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, organization, business, partnership, municipality, or other legal entity. 
    Structure means a solid roofed and walled building constructed for permanent use. 
    Abate means to take measures to control mosquito breeding. 
    Responsible party means the owner or tenant of the property that is the site of the artificially induced mosquito breeding. 
    Tire means a continuous covering for the wheel of a vehicle usually made of rubber reinforced with cords of nylon, fiberglass or other material. 
(Ord. No. 8872, § 1, 7-17-03) 
Sec. 91/2-11. - Prohibition of nuisance, investigation and abatement procedures. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to allow the existence of, create, keep, or maintain an artificially induced mosquito breeding area. 
(b)  The City of Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement is authorized and empowered as provided herein to investigate and abate conditions capable of breeding mosquitoes throughout the City of Kenner. 
(c)  The enforcement officer is hereby authorized to inspect any lot, tract, or parcel of land, improved or unimproved, for mosquito breeding. Occupied or secured structures may be entered only by consent of the property owner, occupant, or as authorized by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The enforcement officer, in order to abate an artificially induced mosquito breeding area, is authorized to apply pesticides, in accordance with label directions, on any lot, tract, or parcel of land, improved or unimproved. 
(e)  The enforcement officers shall obtain annual training to be able to identify artificially induced mosquito breeding areas and immature mosquitoes. 
(f)  Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, each day of occurrence counted as a separate offense. On conviction for a second or subsequent contempt the offender shall be punished by at least a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 8872, § 1, 7-17-03) 
Sec. 91/2-12. - Order of abatement. 
    The issuance of an injunction or order of abatement pursuant to this chapter may be petitioned by the following: 
(a)  The City of Kenner, or any proper officer thereof or, the duly authorized representative thereof; or 
(b)  Any owner of an adjacent or neighboring property who is especially damaged by such a violation. 
(Ord. No. 8872, § 1, 7-17-03) 
Sec. 91/2-13. - Injunctive relief; judicial order. 
(a)  Application by injunctive relief or judicial order of abatement afforded by the City of Kenner shall be by petition to a parish court of competent jurisdiction or the Twenty-Fourth Judicial District Court. 
(b)  A violation of the provisions of an injunction or judicial order of abatement issued in a cause instituted under the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a contempt of court. A person found guilty of such contempt shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the Kenner City Jail for a period of not less than twenty-four (24) hours nor more than sixty (60) days or both fine and imprisonment. On conviction for a second or subsequent contempt the offender shall be punished by both fine and imprisonment, without benefit of probation or suspension of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 8872, § 1, 7-17-03) 
Sec. 91/2-14. - Abatement by owner or the City of Kenner. 
    Whenever an enforcement officer determines that a site is an artificially induced mosquito breeding area, the enforcement officer is authorized to give, or cause to be given, to the responsible party notice by personal service, posting or certified mail, to take corrective action to abate the mosquito breeding. 
(a)  Abatement by owner or tenant. Upon notification of violation, as provided in this chapter, the proprietary party, the tenant, his or her representative or any person acting in concert with him or her shall jointly or severally abate the artificially induced mosquito breeding area and/or prohibited activity or condition by removing the offending matter or taking corrective action to abate said artificially induced mosquito breeding area and/or prohibitive activity or condition within five (5) calendar days of the receipt of notice. 
(b)  Abatement of artificially induced mosquito breeding area by the City of Kenner. Not withstanding whether any injunctive or other judicial relief is petitioned for in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, if the violation exists and is not abated within five (5) days of receipt of notification, the City of Kenner, through its department of inspections and code enforcement, is hereby authorized to take corrective action to abate the artificially induced mosquito breeding area, at the responsible party's expense. A property owner shall not be responsible for expenses related to his or her tenant's acts or failure to act herein. In such cases, the tenant will be responsible for such expenses. The responsible party shall pay the City of Kenner for the costs of performing such abatement, which includes all expenses, fines, penalties, attorney fees, interest and administrative costs. 
(c)  Payment by responsible party. The responsible party shall make payment to the City of Kenner Finance Department within thirty (30) days of receipt of the payment invoice from the Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(d)  Work to be done by City of Kenner employee or independent contractor. In connection with any work performed pursuant to this chapter, the City of Kenner may proceed to have the necessary work done either by its own employees or by an independent contractor. 
(Ord. No. 8872, § 1, 7-17-03) 
Sec. 91/2-15. - Liens for Kenner cost incurred in drainage. 
    If the responsible party does not make payment in accordance with this chapter, the city shall assess liens against the property, such liens to be in an amount equal to the amount necessary to defray the cost of drainage of the property, plus legal interest, expenses, fines, penalties, interest, administrative costs and fifteen (15) percent attorney's fees for the cost of collection thereof, except an owner's property shall not be assessed due to the failure of his or her tenant to pay expenses incurred herein. 
(Ord. No. 8872, § 1, 7-17-03) 
Sec. 91/2-16. - Tire storage. 
(a)  All persons who engage in the manufacture, distribution, sale, repair or storage of new, used or waste tires, including, but not limited to, automobile, truck, trailer, tractor, motorcycle or airplane tires, shall be stored in a weatherproof container, structure, or building and treated in a manner which will prevent an artificially induced mosquito breeding area. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both, each day of occurrence counted as a separate offense. On conviction for a second or subsequent contempt, the offender shall be punished by at least a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 8872, § 1, 7-17-03) 
Sec. 91/2-17. - Prohibition of smoking in city vehicles. 
(a)  No person shall smoke any tobacco product and no person shall smoke any other substance in any vehicle owned or operated by the city or of its departments. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-9 of the Kenner Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 9479, § 1, 5-3-07) 
Sec. 91/2-18. - Prohibited uses of leaf-blowing or similar type machines. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person within the city limits to operate or use any portable machine to blow leaves, dirt, grass cuttings, and other debris into the public streets and/or public drainage systems or off sidewalks, driveways, lawns or other surfaces onto property belonging to another. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00). On conviction for a second or subsequent contempt, the offender shall be punished by at least a minimum fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 9491, § 1, 5-17-07) 
Chapter 10 - LICENSES AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Duties of tax collector generally, § 2-8; tax on beverages of low alcoholic content, § 3-2; permit for sale of beverages of high alcoholic content, § 3-18 et seq.; permit for sale of beverages of low alcoholic content, § 3-62 et seq.; commercial establishments with regard to animals, § 4-6(G); permit for moving buildings, § 5-130 et seq.; parade permits, § 13-18 et seq.; certificate of public necessity and convenience for taxicab, § 16-59 et seq.; taxicab driver's permit, § 16-88 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - INSURANCE LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 10-16. - Tax levied. 
    Pursuant to Section 8 of Article X of the Constitution of 1921, and Section 1076 of Title 22 of the Revised Statutes of Louisiana of 1950, there is hereby levied an annual license tax for each year on each company, society, association, corporation or firm or individual engaged in the business of issuing any form of insurance policy or contract, which may now or hereafter be subject to the payment of any license tax for state purposes, as herein provided and particularly on the following: 
(a)  Life, accident and health companies. On any company society, association, corporation, firm or individual engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies, or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for insurance of such policies, contracts, or obligations, whether such insurance company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual be domiciled in this state, or operating here through an agent or other representative, ten dollars ($10.00) on gross annual premiums up to and including two thousand dollars ($2,000.00); and additional licenses thereafter of seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50) on each twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or fraction thereof, of the gross annual premiums in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), provided that the maximum license on such business, payable to the city by any one (1) company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual shall not exceed twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000.00). 
(b)  Fire and marine company, etc. On any company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts, or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire or marine or river insurance or surety or fidelity or indemnity or guaranty or workmen's compensation or employer's liability or property damage or livestock or tornado or automobile or automatic sprinkler or burglary or insurance business of any kind whatsoever in the city, whether such insurance company, society association, corporation, firm or individual be domiciled in the city or operating here through agents or other representatives, the following license tax: 
    1ST. Class. When gross receipts are not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), the license shall be ten dollars ($10.00); 
    2ND. Class. When gross receipts are more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), but not more than twelve hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00), the license shall be twenty dollars ($20.00); 
    3RD. Class. When gross receipts are more than twelve hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00) but not more than seventeen hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00), the license shall be thirty dollars ($30.00); 
    4TH. Class. When gross receipts are more than seventeen hundred fifty dollars ($1,750.00) but not more than twenty-two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00), the license shall be forty dollars ($40.00); 
    5TH. Class. When the gross receipts are more than twenty-two hundred fifty dollars ($2,250.00) but not more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00), the license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00); 
    6TH. Class. When the gross receipts are more than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) but not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license shall be sixty dollars ($60.00); 
    7TH. Class. When gross receipts are more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00) but not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), the license shall be seventy dollars ($70.00); 
    8TH. Class. When gross receipts are more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) but not more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the license shall be eighty dollars ($80.00); 
    9TH. Class. When the gross receipts exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the additional license thereafter shall be seventeen dollars and fifty cents ($17.50), for each twenty-five hundred dollars ($2,500.00), or fraction thereof, in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). 
    The maximum license on such business, payable by any company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual, shall not exceed nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00). Provided, that plate glass and steam boiler inspection companies, societies, associations, corporations, firms and individuals, shall pay only one-third ( 1/3 ) of the above rates provided in subsection (b); and provided, further, that the amount of license payable to the city as fixed in the subsections (a) and (b), shall be one-third ( 1/3 ) of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by R.S. 22:1076 showing that at least one-sixth ( 1/6 ) of the total admitted assets of the payer is invested and maintained in bonds of this state, or of municipal, school, road, or levee district or other political subdivisions, or in mortgages on property located in this state, or in policy loans or other loans to residents of this state, or in corporations organized under the laws of this state and domiciled in this state, or in capital stock of corporations organized under the laws of this state and domiciled in this state, the value of which is entirely represented by real estate owned by said corporation in this state. 
(Ord. No. 469, § I, 11-18-57) 
Sec. 10-17. - Due date; issuance. 
    The full amount of license taxes levied under this article shall be paid to the tax collector of the city, on or before the first day of March each year, and he shall issue to the company, society, association, corporation, firm or individual making the said payments a license certificate showing such payment. 
(Ord. No. 469, § II, 11-18-57) 
Sec. 10-18. - Penalty for delinquent payment. 
    In case of any failure to make payment of license taxes as required by this article ten (10) per cent shall be added to the amount of the tax due unless satisfactory evidence is submitted to the tax collector of the city, to show that such failure was due to some unforeseen or unavoidable reason other than mere delay. If the delinquency be for more than thirty (30) days after the due date for the payment of license taxes hereunder negligence will be presumed and ten (10) per cent will be added without any discretion on the part of said tax collector; all of which shall be collected according to law. 
(Ord. No. 469, § III, 11-18-57) 
Secs. 10-19-10-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LICENSE FOR RAFFLES, BINGO OR KENO FOR CHARITABLE PURPOSES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Gambling, § 7-114. 

Sec. 10-29. - Required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any bona fide veterans', charitable, educational, religious or fraternal organization or civic and service club to hold and operate the specific kind of game of chance commonly known as a raffle, played by drawing for prizes or the allotment of prizes by chance by the selling of shares or tickets or rights to participate in such game and by conducting the game accordingly, and/or the game of chance commonly known as bingo or keno, played for prizes with cards bearing numbers or other designations, five (5) or more in one line, the holder covering numbers as objects, similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers on such a card, by selling shares or tickets or rights to participate in such games and by conducting the games accordingly when the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public-spirited uses, unless the mayor and board of aldermen of the city shall issue a license to any such organization or club above specified as herein prescribed. 
(b)  All applicants shall file with their application proof of nonprofit, tax exempt status recognized by the Internal Revenue Service in compliance with Section 26 USCA 501(c)(3), (4), (7), (8), (19), and Playground Boosters qualified under 26 USCA 501(c)(7). 
(c)  Any applicants must first obtain a license from the Division of Charitable Gaming Control of the Department of Public Safety and Corrections before applying for a Kenner Bingo license. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 1, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 5347, § I, 4-18-85; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-30. - Application. 
(a)  Each applicant for a license required by this article shall file with the office of the department of inspections and code enforcement of the city a written application therefor in the form prescribed by the department of inspections and code enforcement duly executed and verified, in which shall be stated the name and address of the applicant, together with sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and organization to enable the city to determine whether or not it is a bona fide organization or association; the names and addresses of its officers; the specific kind of games of chance intended to be held, operated and conducted by the applicant, and the place where, the date and the time when such games of chance are intended to be conducted by the applicant under the license applied for; the items of expenses intended to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such games of chance and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purpose for which, they are to be paid; the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted and in what manner; that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person for holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operation or conduct of such games of chance except as provided in section 10-38 hereof; and a description of all prizes to be offered and given in all such games of chance to be held, operated and conducted under such license. 
(b)  In each application there shall be designated at least three (3) active members of the applicant under whom the games of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and conducted and to the application a statement shall be appended executed by the applicant and by the member or members so designated that he or they will be responsible for the holding, operation and conduct of such games of chance in accordance with the terms of such license. 
(c)  All monies or other proceeds are to be collected, counted and handled exclusively by active members of the permit holder. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 2, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 2275, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 5347, § II, 4-18-85; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88; Ord. No. 6989, § 1, 3-3-94) 
Sec. 10-31. - Domicile in state required for issuance. 
    Permits shall be granted only to qualified organizations domiciled within the State of Louisiana for one (1) year prior to their application being filed. "Domicile" for purposes of this article shall be the address where the majority of an organization's business was conducted for the past year. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 14, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 5347, § VI, 4-18-85; Ord. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88; Ord. No. 7815, § 1, 10-2-97) 
Sec. 10-32. - Consideration of application. 
    The department of inspections and code enforcement of the city shall make or cause to be made an investigation of the qualifications of each applicant for a license required by this article and the merits of the application, with due expedition after filing of the application. It shall be determined whether the applicant is duly qualified to hold, operate and conduct games of chance under the provisions of this article; that the member or members of the applicant designated in the application to hold, operate or conduct or assist in holding, operating or conducting the games of chance are bona fide active members of the applicant and person of good moral character and have never been convicted of a felony. The findings of the department of inspections and code enforcement shall be submitted to the council for its consideration. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 3, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 2275, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord, No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-33. - Term. 
    No license for the holding, operation or conduct of any game of chance shall be issued under this article which shall be effective for a period of more than one year from the day of issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 4, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-34. - Hearing required prior to refusal. 
    No application for the issuance of a license required by this article shall be refused by the city until after a hearing is held after due notice to the applicant of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 5, 7014-69; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-35. - Contents; display. 
(a)  Each license issued under this article shall contain a description of the kind of games of chance authorized to be held, operated or conducted thereunder, a statement of the name and address of the licensee, of the names and addresses of the member or members of the applicant under whom such games of chance will be held, operated and conducted, of the number of times, or the hours during which such games of chance are authorized to be conducted and the places where and the dates and times when such games of chance are to be conducted and of the specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such games of chance are to be devoted. Each license issued for the conduct of any game of chance shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where any game is to be conducted thereunder at all times during the conduct thereof. 
(b)  All holders of bingo permits shall be required to issue a receipt with each card sold and further require the receipts to be kept in plain view next to the cards during the time the games are conducted. All receipts shall be exhibited prior to any prizes being awarded. 
(c)  On any one day on which a charitable game of chance is staged, the total amount of prizes or possible prizes available to patrons of the games shall not exceed four thousand five hundred dollars ($4,500.00) provided each licensee may conduct one game per year where the total amount of prizes or possible prizes do not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00). The total value of prizes shall not include the value of any door prizes which are given away. 
(d)  No permit holder shall offer free food and drink at the bingo hall to the bingo players. Door prizes may be given away as provided and limited in subsection (c) immediately hereinabove. 
(e)  The payment of rent is an allowable item of expense and the only restrictions that should be placed upon the rentals of premises should be those mutually agreed upon by the lessor of the premises and only in the event of fraud or subterfuge should the city council involve itself in any lessee/lessor arrangement. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 6, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 5347, § III, 4-18-85; Ord. No. 5650, § 4, 3-20-86; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-36. - Control and supervision; suspension and revocation; right of entry. 
    The department of inspections and code enforcement of the city shall have and exercise control and supervision over all games of chance held, operated or conducted under the license issued under this article, to the end that the same are fairly held, operated and conducted in accordance with the provisions of such license and this article. The council of the city shall have power and authority to suspend any license approved by them for issuance and to revoke the same after a hearing for any violation of a provision of said license or this article. The department of inspections and code enforcement shall through their officers and agents have the right of entry at all times onto any premises where any such game of chance is being held, operated and conducted, or where it is intended that any such game of chance shall be held, operated and conducted, or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in the conduct thereof is found, for the purposes of inspecting the same. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 7, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 2275, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-37. - Term. 
    No games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under any license issued under this article more than twelve (12) days in any one calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 8, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-38. - Regulations for licensed games. 
(a)  No person shall hold, operate or conduct or assist in holding, operating or conducting any games of chance under any license issued under this article except an active member of the organization or association to which the license is issued. 
(b)  No such game of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such as shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation therefor by the licensee. 
(c)  No item of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating, or conducting of any game of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any license issued under this article, except such as are bona fide items of expense for goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered, which are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding, operating or conducting of said game, and except as provided in subsection (d). 
(d)  Notwithstanding any provisions of this article to the contrary, any person, association, or corporation licensed to hold, operate, or conduct any games of chance under any license issued pursuant to this article, may compensate for services rendered any ten (10) employees who assist in the holding, operating, or conducting of such games. The rate of compensation shall be no more than five dollars ($5.00) per hour and in no event more than thirty dollars ($30.00) per session. Expenditures made under the provisions hereof shall be subject to the reporting provisions of section 10-39 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 9, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88; Ord. No. 6989, § 2, 3-3-94) 
Sec. 10-39. - Statement required after conducting of games. 
    Within thirty (30) days of the end of any calendar year quarter following the holding, operating and conducting of any game of chance under a license issued under this article, the organization or association which held, operated or conducted the same and its member or members who were in charge thereof shall furnish to the department of inspections and code enforcement of the city a duly verified statement showing the amount of the gross receipts derived from each such game of chance, which shall include receipts from the sale of shares, tickets or rights in any manner connected with participation in said game or the right to participate therein, each item of expense incurred, or paid, and each item of expenditure made or to be made, name and address of each person to whom each such item has been, or is to be paid, with a detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered thereof, the net profit derived from each such game of chance, and the uses to which such net profit has been or is to be applied and a list of prizes offered or given, with the respective values thereof and it shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such report. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 10, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 2275, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88; Ord. No. 7815, § 2, 10-2-97) 
Sec. 10-40. - Right to examine books and records. 
    The department of inspections and code enforcement of the city shall have power to examine or to cause to be examined the books and records of any organization or association to which a license is issued under this article so far as they may relate to any transactions connected with the holding and conducting of any game of chance thereunder and to examine any manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation to the conduct of any such game of chance under any such license, but any information so received shall not be disclosed except so far as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 11, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 2275, 4-3-78; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-41. - Immunity from prosecution for violation of state law. 
    No person, association or corporation 
(1)  Possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of, in the city, any shares, tickets or rights to participate in any game of chance conducted or to be conducted, under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this article, 
(2)  Lawfully conducting or participating in the conduct of any such game of chance, or 
(3)  Permitting the conduct of any such game of chance upon premises owned by him or it of any game of chance conducted or to be conducted under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this article, shall be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision of R.S. 14:90. This immunity shall not extend to any person, association or corporation knowingly conducting or participating in the conduct of any game of chance under any license obtained by any false pretense or statement in any application for such license or otherwise, or possessing, selling or disposing of shares, tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any premises owned by him or it of any game of chance conducted under any license known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false or fraudulent pretense or statement. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 12, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-42. - Forfeiture for violations of article generally. 
    Any person who shall make any false statement in any application for a license under this article, or shall fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding, operating or conducting of games of chance under any such license or shall falsify or make any false entry in any books or records so far as they relate to any transaction connected with the holding, operating or conducting of any game of chance under any such license or shall violate any of the provisions of this article or of any term of such license shall, in addition to suffering any other penalties which may be imposed by law, forfeit such license upon a determination to revoke the same and shall be ineligible to apply for a license under this article for one year after the date of such revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1139, § 13, 7-14-69; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-43. - Commercial lessors. 
(a)  Establishment of commercial lessor licensing . The Kenner City Council shall have the authority to license commercial lessors. No game of chance shall be permitted to operate within the city, except on premises licensed or exempted under these provisions, and the applicable provisions in the unified development code. 
(b)  Commercial lessor defined. For the purpose of those sections regulating nonprofit games of chance, a "commercial lessor" is defined as a person, partnership, corporation or other group or association owning an interest in or being the lessor of premises offered for leasing to an authorized organization for the purposes of conducting charitable games of chance on those premises. 
(c)  Persons or groups with criminal records ineligible. No person, partnership, corporation or other group or association who: (1) Has been convicted of a felony, criminal fraud or a crime of moral turpitude; and/or (2) is the spouse of any person convicted of such crimes within the last five (5) years shall be eligible for a commercial lessor license. 
(d)  Organization leasing premises to have secured permits. Commercial lessor, as defined in the paragraph (b), may lease their licensed premises only to organizations which have secured permits pursuant to the sections of this Code governing the licensing and conducting of charitable games of chance. 
(e)  Commercial lessor license limited to specific location. Each commercial lessor license shall be issued in the name of one (1) person, partnership, corporation or other group or association and additionally must be limited to only one location. 
(f)  Lease of licensed charitable organization's premises. Nothing herein shall require an organization which is permitted to conduct charitable games of chance to obtain a commercial lessor license to lease premises owned or occupied by it to another organization also licensed to conduct charitable games of chance, provided that the proposed lessor organization conducts its permitted games within such premises. 
(g)  Maximum rental or use fee. A lessor of premises for the purpose of conducting charitable games of chance shall not charge a rental or use fee in excess of four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00), which fee shall include all charges for rent and cleanup. 
    Notwithstanding, a commercial lessor with a facility capable of seating a minimum of one thousand five hundred (1,500) persons, may charge, and an operator may pay, such rents as are negotiated in accordance with section 10-35(e) hereof, for those games commonly known as "super bingo," wherein the total amount of prizes or possible prizes do not exceed twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00), in accordance with section 10-35(c) hereof. 
(h)  Lessors prohibited from participation. All commercial lessors, their agents, employees or family members are hereby prohibited from interfering or in anyway assisting, participating or aiding in the conducting of any charitable games of chance on its premises. No commercial lessor shall provide free transportation. 
(i)  Preference to city domiciled organization. That any commercial lessor shall give a preference of date and times of games to any city domiciled nonprofit corporation seeking to hold games, should a conflict arise between the city domiciled organization and another organization domiciled outside the city. 
(j)  Reserved. 
(k)  Financial records. All commercial lessors shall make available all financial records of all funds derived from charitable games of chance on an annual basis for review and/or audit by the department of inspections and code enforcement all at the expense of the commercial lessor. All records shall be presented to the department of inspections and code enforcement by January 31st of the following year. 
(l)  Annual fee. The holder of a commercial lessor's license shall pay an biennial fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00). This fee shall be paid upon application for license. The initial commercial lessor's license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for two (2) years. Prior to the expiration of a commercial lessor's license issued by the city council pursuant to the terms of this section, a commercial lessor may apply for a three-year renewal through the department of inspections and code enforcement. Such renewal may be granted by the department of inspection and code enforcement only upon receipt of a triennial license fee in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) and compliance with all applicable provisions in this Code of Ordinances. 
(m)  Submission of information by applicant. That applicants proposing a bingo hall in accordance with the regulations provided herein shall submit the following information to the department of inspections and code enforcement prior to the issuance of a building permit: 
(1)  Floor plan showing seating layout, number of seats, all entrances and exists, sprinkler system, bathrooms, kitchens and other information deemed necessary by the department of inspections and code enforcement. 
(2)  Site plan showing parking layout. 
(3)  Compliance certificates from the state fire marshal's office and the state board of health. 
(Ord. No. 5347, § IV, 4-18-85; Ord. No. 5650, § 1, 3-20-86; Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5913, §§ III, IV, 8-20-87; Ord. No. 6123, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88; Ord. No. 6164, §§ 1-3, 10-26-88; Ord. No. 6625, § 1, 7-11-91; Ord. No. 7815, § 3, 10-2-97; Ord. No. 11,062, § 8, 3-17-16) 
Sec. 10-44. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted Sept. 1, 1988, deleted § 10-44, relative to the bingo commission, which derived from Ord. No. 5347, § V, adopted April 18, 1985; Ord. No. 5440, § 1, enacted June 20, 1985; and Ord. No. 5835, § 1 (Exh. A), adopted March 5, 1987. 
Sec. 10-45. - Penalties. 
    Whenever this article or any parts of it are violated, the violator shall be punished by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) and by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 5347, § VII, 4-18-85; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-46. - Pull tabs. 
    In accordance with Act 823 of the 1985 Regular Session of the Louisiana Legislature, it shall be lawful to conduct the game of chance known as pull tabs, played for prizes with cards or tickets and as defined in R.S. 33:4861 by selling shares or tickets or rights to participate in such games and conducting the games accordingly when the entire net proceeds of such games are donated to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious or public spirited uses, and when so licensed to hold, operate and conduct such games of chance. 
(Ord. No. 5650, § 2, 3-20-86; Ord. No. 6144, § 1, (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-47. - Bingo fee. 
    Each organization receiving a bingo permit shall pay an annual fee in the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). The fee shall be used by the department of inspections and code enforcement or any other permanent department deemed necessary by the city council to handle the expenses of the supervision of bingo. 
(Ord. No. 5650, § 3, 3-20-86; Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-48. - Inspections department and code enforcement powers. 
    In addition to any and all other powers enumerated in this article, and powers which are inherent to the regulation of charitable gaming, the code enforcement and inspections department [department of inspections and code enforcement] shall have the following enumerated powers: 
(1)  To review all applications for licenses for charitable games of chance; 
(2)  To review all financial reports, which are required to be filed by charitable gaming organizations; 
(3)  To recommend the revocation of licenses for violations of this article; 
(4)  To conduct audits and review all charitable games of chance conducted pursuant to this article. In conducting an audit, the department shall insure the City of Kenner that the licensee is complying with all requirements of this article and that the proceeds received by the licensee are being used exclusively for charitable, patriotic, religious or public spirited purposes. When conducting an audit, the department shall appoint a certified public accountant of its choice, with all costs to be paid for by the licensee. The department, in reviewing applications for licenses, shall have the authority to conduct investigations and/or audits and it shall have the right to conduct hearing and to recommend approval, denial or revocation of licenses; 
(5)  To approve of additional bingo sessions to those organizations which hold annual permits. 
(Ord. No. 6144, § 1 (Exh. A), 9-1-88) 
Sec. 10-49. - Use of electronic or video bingo machines. 
(a)  That electronic or video bingo shall be defined as bingo as defined in section 10-29 of this Code of Ordinances except that video images containing numbers or other designations five (5) or more in one line are used instead of cards, and an electronic random number generator is used in lieu of drawing numbers from a receptacle. 
(1)  Electronic or video bingo means "bingo" as defined in section 10-29 of this Code of Ordinances except that video images containing numbers or other designations five (5) or more in one line are used instead of cards, and an electronic random number generator is used in lieu of drawing numbers from a receptacle. 
(2)  Lessee means the duly licensed nonprofit organizations holding licenses in the City of Kenner to conduct charitable games of chance. 
(3)  Distributor or Lessor means the duly licensed person or business who leases electronic or video bingo machines to a charitable organization. 
(4)  Net win means the remainder obtained by subtracting total coins deposited in an electronic or video bingo machine minus total amount paid out on ticket vouchers tendered for cash money. 
(5)  Payout means the number of credits won by the players, whether used to play additional games or collected on a ticket voucher in proportion to the amount of cash and credit wagered. 
(6)  Distributor's gross profit means the remainder obtained by subtracting the amount paid to the lessee from the net win of the electronic or video bingo machine. 
(b)  Any organization licensed to conduct bingo games may apply to conduct electronic video bingo, as defined, at its bingo games, provided that all requirements in this section are met. 
(c)  Any electronic bingo machine used in the conduct of electronic video bingo shall be subject to the following requirements and restrictions concerning its operation and use: 
(1)  The cost of each game played shall be not less than twenty-five cents ($0.25) nor more than one dollar ($1.00). 
(2)  Payout shall be not less than eighty (80) per cent and not more than ninety (90) per cent of the total amount wagered. 
(3)  The maximum prize awarded shall be not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). 
(4)  The machine shall dispense only tickets verified as valid, indicating the prize amount. No machine shall dispense cash. 
(5)  A machine shall play the game of bingo as described and defined, by LSA-R.S. 33:4861.4 and section 10-29 of this Code except that a random generator in the machine shall replace the drawing of numbered objects from a receptacle, and may play "coverall bingo" is which all numbers of the card must be covered. 
(6)  The machine shall allow the player a choice of cards on which to play and must show a "BINGO" at the end of play. 
(7)  The machine shall allow only a linear based payout in which the amount of the payout follows a straight line progression in direct proportion to the amount wagered. 
(8)  The machine shall provide for an electronic readout giving, at a minimum, a summary of total wagers, total plays, total payout, and the current prize allotment since the last date of summary or the last date of reset of the machine. 
(d)  Only cash prizes may be awarded winners of games on an electronic bingo machine. 
(e)  Bingo licensees may lease electronic video bingo machines provided that no lease agreement shall authorize the lessor to receive a percentage of the receipts from the machine. 
(f)  At least forty-five (45) per cent of the net win from the machine must be paid to the licensee owning or leasing it. "Net win" means the total gross receipts of the machine reduced only by the actual prizes paid. 
(g)  In addition to the requirements of this section, all bingo licensees using electronic video bingo machines and all manufacturers, distributors, suppliers or lessors of electronic video bingo machines are subject to the rules and regulations adopted by the Louisiana Attorney General pursuant to Title 33 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes. 
(h)  Lessors licensed by the state to lease electronic video bingo machines shall submit a sworn affidavit to the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department stating that they are familiar with and shall comply with all of the provisions of this section [Ordinance No. 6318]. 
(i)  (1) Each organization licensed to conduct electronic or video bingo shall submit a quarterly report of all expenditures and receipts from the proceeds of electronic or video bingo to the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department. 
(2)  Likewise, each distributor licensed to and operating in the City of Kenner shall submit a quarterly report of all expenditures and receipts from the proceeds of electronic or video bingo to the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department. The report shall be submitted along with a percentage of the distributor's gross profit to be paid to the general fund for the funding of the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department which shall supervise and examine the operation of all entities licensed under this article. 
These reports and the distributor's fee shall be due on the last of the month following each quarter as follows: 
Quarter Report and Fee Due 1st January-March April 30 2nd April-June July 31 3rd July-September October 31 4th October-December January 31  
(3)  The fee to be submitted with each quarterly report shall be computed as follows: 
If the distributor's gross profit per quarter is: 
As Much As But Less Than Percentage Due Shall Be $0.00 $5,000.00 1 5,000.00 10,000.00 2 10,000.00 15,000.00 3 15,000.00 20,000.00 4 20,000.00 25,000.00 5 25,000.00 30,000.00 6 30,000.00 and over 7  
In addition to any other civil or criminal penalties, organizations and distributors shall be assessed a one hundred dollar ($100.00) late penalty for each game report, quarterly report or distributor's quarterly fee not submitted timely. 
(j)  Lessors licensed by the state to lease electronic video bingo machines shall submit to the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department duplicate copies of all documents and reports submitted to the state on machines leased for play in the city. 
(k)  Licensed distributors shall provide a copy of the monthly report required by Section 15(A) of the Attorney General's rule and regulations governing each electronic video bingo machine to the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department by the fifteenth (15th) day of each month. 
(l)  Organizations licensed to conduct games of chance in Kenner that purchase electronic video bingo machines shall comply with all provisions of this section [Ordinance No. 6318]. 
(m)  Compensation to a commercial or noncommercial bingo hall for allowing video bingo machines to be used on its premises may be paid only by the actual owner of the machines. Any such compensation paid by a licensed charitable organization which owns its own machines may not exceed a reasonable amount. 
(n)  All video bingo machines located in the City of Kenner must have a separate and locked area for the logic board and software. The City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department shall be allowed immediate access simultaneously with the Louisiana Department of Justice to this locked area upon request. The distributor must notify the City of Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement of his intent to make an application for authorization to access that area on forms prescribed by the Department of Justice when access to that area becomes necessary. The seals on any video bingo machine authorized to be operated in the City of Kenner may be broken only in the presence of personnel of the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department and the Justice Department after having made application for and receiving authorization from both the Department of Justice and the City of Kenner Inspections and Code Enforcement Department. 
(Ord. No. 6318, § 1, 9-21-89) 
Secs. 10-50-10-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5877, § I, adopted June 18, 1987, and effective January 1, 1988, provided in part for the repeal of §§ 10-53-10-113 of Art. IV, relative to occupational license taxes. Section II of said Ord. No. 5877 enacted the new occupational license tax law for the City of Kenner as set out in § 10-115 of this article. The provisions of former §§ 10-53-10-113 derived from Ord. No. 1169, §§ 1-8, 10-13, 15-31, 33-38, 40-44, 46-62, adopted Jan. 16, 1970; Ord. No. 1486, §§ 1-3, adopted Feb. 12, 1973; Ord. No. 1640, enacted April 8, 1974; and Ord. No. 2727, § 1, adopted June 23, 1980. 
Cross reference- Issuance or sale of occupational license prior to issuance of parish permit for food service operations prohibited, § 9-2. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to levy occupational license tax, R.S. 47:397. 

Sec. 10-53. - Imposition of tax. 
(a)  In addition to all other license and excise taxes imposed by other laws, there is hereby levied an annual occupational license tax upon each person, association of persons, partnerships, firms and corporations pursuing any trade, profession, vocation, calling or business in the city, subject to license under Section 28, Article 6 of the 1974 Louisiana State Constitution and Louisiana Revised Statutes Chapter 3, Subtitle II of Title 47, R.S. 47:341 through 47:363, as amended, and R.S. 33:4862.14. 
(b)  The director of the department of inspections and code enforcement of the city is hereby designated the collector, whose duty is to receive and collect the taxes and money due the city and who may enforce the collection of any and all taxes due. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6782, § 1, 8-6-92) 
Sec. 10-54. - General definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, unless the context clearly otherwise requires, or unless otherwise defined in specific portions of the article, the following words shall have the respective meanings ascribed to each in this section: 
(1)  Contractor. "Contractor" is synonymous with the term "builder" and means a person, firm, partnership, corporation, association or other organization, or a combination of them, which undertakes to or offers to undertake to, or purports to have the capacity to undertake to, or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structure or works in connection therewith and includes subcontractors and specialty contractors. As such, the word "contractor" shall include oil field service contractors, which shall consist of those contractors performing general oil well servicing, maintenance and construction when conducted as a single company unit. General oil well servicing shall include welding, pipe coating, pipe inspection, wireline service, automation, workover, logging, analysis, seismograph, installing and servicing equipment, packing, platform work, perforating and completion. 
(2)  Separate location. As used in section 10-59 of this article, a separate location exists unless a similar or associated type of business is operated as a unit under a single roof or on the same contiguous tract of land. 
(3)  Contractor's gross receipts. For the purposes of computing the license fee provided for in section 10-75 of this article, a contractor's gross receipts are determined the same for all contractors, whether or not they have a lump sum contract or a cost-plus contract. The gross receipts for a lump sum contract are based on the actual amount of the contract, whereas the gross receipts for a cost-plus contract are based on the actual cost of the contact to the owner including the amount added thereto as a fee. 
(4)  Collector. See section 10-53 (b). 
(5)  Wholesale dealer. For the purpose of this article, except as specifically provided in this article, a "wholesale dealer" means any person who sells to the other dealers who in turn resell. 
(6)  Retail dealers to institutional consumers. For the purpose of this article, a "retail dealer to institutional consumers" includes all businesses selling, at retail from a fixed place of business, merchandise to dairymen, cattlemen, or farmers, to federal, state, parish, or municipal governments or institutions, to hospitals, manufacturers, public utility companies, processors, refiners, fabricators, contractors, severers of natural resources, carriers of freight or passengers pipelines, hotels, and restaurants provided that such sales constitute the major portion of the business. 
(7)  Peddler. For the purpose of this article, a "peddler" means any person who, for himself or any other person, goes from house to house, or place to place, or store to store, exposing and selling the merchandise which he carries with him and delivering the same at the time of or immediately after the sale or without returning to the base of business operation between the taking of the order and the delivery of the goods; however, any person who uses the same vehicle or a combination of one (1) or more vehicles for the purpose of taking orders and delivering merchandise, regardless of the fact that the vehicle returns to the base of operations between the taking of the order and the delivery of the merchandise, shall be deemed as a peddler, unless such person can show that the merchandise delivered is accompanied by an invoice or delivery ticket prepared at the base of operations and which conforms to the original order and that the person delivering the merchandise has permitted no deviation from the original order by allowing the purchaser to reject, cancel, increase or decrease the quantity at the time of delivery or to offset against such quantity any merchandise delivered at a prior time which is being returned. This extension of the meaning of the term "peddler" shall not be interpreted so as to prevent rejection or cancellation of bona fide orders or the return of inferior merchandise, but shall be constructed so as to prevent persons peddling merchandise from escaping their tax liability or subterfuge through means of so-called "standing order" or blanket advance orders, increase and decrease in quantities at the time of delivery, arbitrary rejections and cancellations, and offset of merchandise returned by reason of nonsale rather than obligation of warranty, all of which are hereby declared to be mere devices to prevent normal methods of operations so as to disguise the business of a peddler as an ordinary wholesale business. "Peddler" shall include but is not limited to hawkers, itinerant vendors, and any retail dealers not having a fixed place of business. 
(8)  Real estate broker. For carrying on each business of real estate broker, the license tax shall be based on gross income. "Gross income" for real estate brokers is defined as those fees from any source deposited into the real estate broker's agency's general fund account less escrow deposits, and less fees paid to operating real estate brokers. Notwithstanding any provisions herein to the contrary, the maximum amount paid by a real estate broker shall be twenty-two hundred dollars ($2,200.00). 
(9)  Business. "Business" includes any business, trade, profession, occupation, vocation or calling. 
(10)  Person. "Person" includes an individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other legal entity. 
(11)  Video draw poker licensed establishment. For the purpose of this article, a "video draw poker licensed establishment" means a restaurant, bar, tavern, motel, hotel or club or other premises that has a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption; a truck stop facility whether or not alcoholic beverages are sold on the premises; and/or a licensed off-track betting parlor. Licensed establishment shall not include any premises leased to or utilized by a bona fide nonprofit organization for the conducting of charitable gaming. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6782, § 1, 8-6-92) 
Sec. 10-55. - Payment of tax. 
(a)  Except as otherwise expressly provided, the first license tax herein authorized to be levied shall be due and payable to the tax collector as follows: 
(1)  In the case of any business which is subject to license under this article, commencing on or after the effective date of this article (January 1, 1992), the license tax shall be due and payable on such day of commencement. 
In the case of any business operating video draw poker devices which is subject to license under this article, commencing on or after the effective date of this article (August 1, 1992), the license tax shall be due and payable on such day of commencement. 
(2)  In the case of a business commenced prior to the effective date of this article, the license tax shall be due and payable January 1, 1992. 
In the case of a business operating video draw poker devices for which the State of Louisiana has previously issued a license, that business shall apply for a license and remit the applicable license tax within forty (40) days of the effective date of this article (August 1, 1992). 
(b)  Annually thereafter all license taxes levied hereunder shall be due and payable on January first of each calendar year for which the license is due, except that for a new business commencing after January first of any calendar year, the first license shall be due and payable on the date the business is commenced. All licenses unpaid after the last day of February of the calendar year for which they are due or, in the case of a new business, unpaid on the date such business is commenced shall be deemed delinquent and subject to the payment of delinquent interest and penalty. Delinquent interest and penalty shall be computed from March first of the calendar year for which they are due. 
(c)  For ongoing businesses which cease operation between January first and the last day of February of the current license year, the license for the year shall be based on their gross receipts for the prior year, divided by three hundred sixty-five (365) and multiplied by the number of days in which they are in operation. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6782, § 1, 8-6-92) 
Sec. 10-56. - New business; license required before commencing. 
    No person shall commence any business within the city without first paying a tentative license tax. Within forty (40) days after commencing the business, each person shall compute in the manner provided by section 10-61 the balance of the license tax, if any, owed for the year in which the business is started and pay such tax balance. When the business is begun prior to July first of any year, the tentative tax shall be the minimum annual rate for the particular class of business in cases in which the tax is based on gross receipts, sales, fees, premiums or commissions, or the full annual rate in cases in which the tax is based on a specific amount per unit. When the business is begun on or after July first of any year, the tentative tax shall be one-half (1/2) of the minimum annual rate or the specific amount per unit, as the case may be. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-57. - Change of ownership or lessee. 
(a)  The license is issued in the name of the person making application and paying the initial fee and is not transferable or assignable. If at any time during the license year a change of ownership takes place, the license period is from January first to the date of sale or lessee. A "change of ownership" occurs when a business is sold or leased, and does not include changes in partnership or corporate shares. 
(b)  The new owner or lessee shall obtain another business license, as the license issued to the former owner or lessee is not transferable or assignable. The license period for the new owner or lessee covers the date of transfer or ownership or lease to December thirty-first of the license year. The collector shall be notified within ten (10) days when a change is effected. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-58. - Separate license required for each location, based on primary class of business. 
    Only one (1) license shall be required for each place of business, and the license shall be based upon the classification of business which constitutes the major portion of the taxable annual gross sales and receipts. However, any person operating coin vending or weighing machines shall obtain only one (1) license, regardless of the locations of the machine. However, a separate license shall be required for hotels, motels, rooming houses, and boarding houses. Such license shall be in addition to the license required if other classes of business are operated in conjunction with the hotel, motel, rooming house or boardinghouse. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-59. - Class of business. 
    In order to calculate the license fee for a business location at which business activities are carried on that fall under more than one (1) tax basis schedule, gross receipts, fees, or commissions for each group of activities falling under each schedule must be compared. The rate for the schedule which constitutes the major portion of the gross receipts, fees or commission will be used. However, the total gross receipts, fees or commissions for all business activities carried on at the business location, minus any applicable deductions, are applied to the schedule to compute the fee. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-60. - Period used where gross receipts are the measure of the license. 
(a)  The basis for determining the amount of the annual licenses provided by this article, where the license is measured by gross receipts, shall be as follows: 
(1)  If the business has been conducted previously by the same party, the annual gross receipts, gross fees, or gross commissions earned, whether received or accrued, during the preceding calendar year for which the license is issued shall be the basis for determining the amount of the annual license. 
(2)  If the business is begun during the calendar year for which the license is issued, the license for the year of commencement shall be based on the gross receipts, gross sales, gross premiums, gross fees, or gross commissions earned, regardless of whether received or accrued, during the first thirty (30) days of business, multiplied by the number of months, or major fraction thereof remaining in the calendar year; however, any business which opens after June thirtieth of the year in question whose estimated gross receipts for the remainder of the year are less than one-half (1/2) of the maximum gross revenue allowed in the minimum rate under the classification of the particular business shall pay for the remainder of the year at one-half (1/2) the minimum rate. 
(3)  If the business is begun less than thirty (30) days before the end of the calendar year for which the license is to be issued, the tax shall be based on the gross receipts, gross sales, gross premiums, gross fees or gross commissions earned, regardless of whether received or accrued, during the calendar year; however, one-half (1/2) of the annual rate shall apply to such businesses who gross receipts for the period operated during the calendar year is less than one-half (1/2) of the maximum gross revenue allowed in the minimum rate under the classification of the particular business. 
(4)  The license tax of the business for the calendar year following that of commencement shall be based on the gross receipts, gross sales, gross premiums, gross fees or gross commissions earned, regardless of whether received or accrued, during the previous year, divided by the number of days in operation during the year of commencement, and multiplied by three hundred sixty-five (365). 
(b)  The date of beginning business for the purposes of this article shall depend upon the type of business involved, and shall be governed by regulations promulgated by the collector of revenue according to law. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-61. - Taxpayers required to keep records; confidentiality. 
(a)  Records required. In general each person shall keep a reasonable record of his gross receipts, gross fees or commissions, or loans made. This record shall be kept separately for each place of business, and shall be subject to examination, and inspection by the collector or his duly authorized assistants. 
(b)  Confidentiality. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided by law, the records and files of the collector maintained pursuant to this article, excluding ad valorem property taxes and ad valorem property tax assessment rolls, of this city are confidential and privileged; and no person shall divulge or disclose any information obtained from such records and files except in the administration and enforcement of this article. 
(2)  No person shall divulge or disclose any information obtained from any examination or inspection of the premises or property of any person in connection with administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Neither the collector nor any employee engaged in the administration or charged with the custody of any such records or files shall be required to produce any of them for inspection or use in any action or proceeding, except in an action or proceeding in the administration or enforcement of this article. 
(4)  Any officer, employee or agent, or any former officer, employee or agent of the collector who unlawfully discloses any information obtained from a return of a taxpayer or records and files of the collector, contrary to the provisions of this section, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) or be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(5)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent such persons from disclosing a return of a taxpayer or the records of the secretary as authorized by law in any judicial proceeding in which the state or any political subdivision thereof is a party. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-62. - Application of licenses. 
(a)  Every person subject to a license tax levied by this article shall apply to the collector for a license before the same becomes delinquent, as provided in this article. The application shall state all facts necessary to determine the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(b)  If the collector is not satisfied with the facts set forth in the application or for any reason desires to audit the books and records of the taxpayer, the collector or any of his authorized assistants may audit and inspect all records of the taxpayer that would have any bearing upon the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(c)  If an individual is an applicant for a license required by this article, the applications must be signed by him; if a partnership or association of persons, by a member of the firm, and if a corporation, by the proper officer thereof. 
(d)  Any intentional false statement as to any material facts in the application for a license under this article shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any person convicted thereof shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(e)  Every person or business applying for a video draw poker device occupational license must present a copy of their license issued by the Louisiana State Police, GES, Video Gaming Division. Application for the video draw poker device occupational license must be made within forty (40) days after receiving the license from the Louisiana State Police, GES Video Gaming Section. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6782, § 1, 8-6-92) 
Sec. 10-63. - Failure to pay tax; judgement prohibiting further pursuit of business. 
    Failure to pay the tax levied by this article shall, ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent; and the collector is hereby vested with authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the delinquent taxpayer to show cause in not less than two (2) nor more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, why the delinquent taxpayer should not be ordered to pay the total amount due and owing under this article. This rule may be tried out of term and in chambers and shall always be tried by preference. If the rule is made absolute, the order therein rendered shall be considered a judgement in favor of the parish. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-64. - Collector authorized to make rules and regulations. 
(a)  The collector shall make and enforce all rules and regulations necessary for the proper, complete and equitable collection of the tax levied by this article. He may adopt different rules and regulations and forms for different classes or kinds of businesses, uniform as to each class, if by so doing the collection of the full amount of taxes due under this article may be simplified and made more certain. 
(b)  The collector may make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with law, for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and collection of the revenue hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-65. - Records to be kept by the collector. 
    The collector shall keep an accurate record showing the names of every person paying taxes under this article, together with the business pursued, the amount of the license, the date of the collection, and the payment thereof. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-66. - Disposition of collections. 
    All taxes collected under the provisions of this article and all penalties, interest and costs pertaining thereto shall be paid to the collector and shall be credited to the general fund. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-67. - Procedure to collect delinquent taxes; pleading and practice; effect of collector's affidavit; burden of proof. 
(a)  Procedure. The procedure to collect the delinquent taxes due hereunder shall be by rules, which shall be tried or heard by preference in all courts, original and appellate, whether in or out of term time and either in open court or in chambers, at such time as may be fixed by the court, which shall not be less than two (2) nor more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, after service on the defendant of opposing party. 
(b)  Pleading and practice. All defenses, whether by exception or plea to the merits, made or intended to be made to any such claim shall be presented and filed at one time, in the court of original jurisdiction prior to the hour fixed for the hearing; and no court shall consider any defenses unless presented and filed. This provision shall be construed to deny any court the right to extend the time for pleading defenses; and no continuation shall be granted by any court to any defendant, except for legal grounds set forth in the code of civil procedure. 
(c)  Effect of collector's affidavit and burden of proof. Whenever the pleadings filed on behalf of the collector are accompanied by the collector's affidavit or by that of the counsel or attorney representing him to the effect that the facts alleged are true to the best of the affiant's knowledge and belief, all of the facts shall be accepted as prima facie true and as constituting a prima facie case; and the burden of proof to establish anything to the contrary shall rest wholly on the defendant or opposing party. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-68. - Objection to tax; refunds; legal actions; construction. 
(a)  Objection to tax. A right of action is hereby created to afford a remedy at law for any person aggrieved by the provisions of this article; and in case any such person resists the payment of any amount found due, or the enforcement of any provisions of such laws in relation thereto, such person shall pay the amount found due by the collector and shall give the collector at the time, notice of his intention to file suit for recovery of same; and upon receipt of such notice, the amount so paid shall be segregated and held by the collector for a period of thirty (30) days; and if suit be filed within such time for recovery of such amount, such funds so segregated shall be further held pending the outcome of such suit. If the person prevails, the collector shall refund the amount to the claimant with legal interest covering the period from the date the funds were received by the collector at the date of refund. 
(b)  Legal actions. This section shall afford a legal remedy and right of action in any state or federal court having jurisdiction of the parties and subject matter, for a full and complete adjudication of any and all questions arising in the enforcement of this article as to the legality of any tax accrued or accruing or the method of enforcement thereof. In such actions, service of process upon the collector shall be sufficient service, and he shall be the sole, necessary and proper party defendant in any such suit. 
(c)  Construction. This section shall be construed to provide a legal remedy in the state or federal courts, by action at law, in case such taxes are claimed to be an unlawful burden upon interstate commerce, or the collection thereof, in violation of any act of Congress, of the United States Constitution, or the Constitution of the State of Louisiana, or in any case where jurisdiction is vested in any of the courts of the United States; provided that upon request of a person and upon proper showing by such person that the principal of law involved in additional assessment is already pending before the courts for judicial determination, the person, upon agreement to abide by the decision of the courts, may pay the additional assessment under protest, but need not file an additional suit. In such cases the tax so paid under protest shall be segregated and held by the collector until the question of law involved has been determined by the courts and shall then be disposed of as therein provided. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-69. - Attorneys to aid collector; commission; duties and procedure. 
    The collector of the city is authorized to employ attorneys-at-law to assist in the collection of any delinquent licenses due under the provisions of this article, provided that if any delinquent license is referred to an attorney-at-law for collection, the delinquent tax payer owing the license shall pay a commission to the attorney of ten (10) percent calculated upon the aggregate amount of the license plus any interest and other penalties that might be due thereon. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-70. - Interest on unpaid taxes. 
    When any taxpayer fails to pay any tax, or any portion thereof, due under the provisions of this article on or before the day when it shall be required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount of tax due, interest at the rate of twelve (12) percent per annum from the due date until paid. If the term for which interest is to be charged exceeds four (4) years, the rate of interest for the period beyond four (4) years shall be reduced to six (6) percent per annum. Such interest shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the tax due and can be enforced in a separate action or in the same action for collection of the tax, and shall not be waived or remitted. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-71. - Penalty for failure to make timely return. 
    When any taxpayer fails to make any return required to be made under the provisions of this article at the same time such return becomes due, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided, a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) percent of the tax if the failure is not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) percent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tax in the aggregate. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the tax due, and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-72. - Tax obligation to constitute a lien, privilege and mortgage. 
    Except as is specifically provided in the laws regulating building and loan associations, any tax, penalty, interest or attorney fee due under the provisions of this article shall operate as a lien, privilege and mortgage on all of the property of the tax debtor, both movable and immovable, which said lien, privilege and mortgage shall be enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action of law, or may be enforced as otherwise provided by this article. The collector may cause notice of such lien, privilege and mortgage to be recorded at any time after the tax becomes due, whether assessed or not, and regardless of whether or not then payable, in the mortgage records of any parish wherein the collector has reason to believe the tax debtor owns property. The lien, privilege and mortgage created by this section shall affect third parties only from the date of recordation and shall take their respective ranks by virtue of recordation. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-73. - Retail dealers in merchandise, services and rentals. 
(a)  For every fixed location retail dealer in merchandise, services and rentals, including but not limited to all businesses enumerated in this section, the license shall be based on the total business activity and shall be based on the corresponding table for retail dealers presented below: 
If the Gross Sales Are: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $0.00 $50,000.00 $50.00 50,000.00 75,000.00 60.00 75,000.00 100,000.00 90.00 100,000.00 150,000.00 120.00 150,000.00 200,000.00 180.00 200,000.00 250,000.00 250.00 250,000.00 300,000.00 300.00 300,000.00 400,000.00 360.00 400,000.00 500,000.00 500.00 500,000.00 600,000.00 650.00 600,000.00 750,000.00 800.00 750,000.00 1,000,000.00 900.00 1,000,000.00 1,500,000.00 1,200.00 1,500,000.00 2,000,000.00 1,800.00 2,000,000.00 2,500,000.00 2,400.00 2,500,000.00 3,000,000.00 3,000.00 3,000,000.00 3,500,000.00 3,600.00 3,500,000.00 4,000,000.00 4,200.00 4,000,000.00 4,500,000.00 4,800.00 4,500,000.00 5,000,000.00 5,400.00 5,000,000.00 5,500,000.00 6,000.00 5,500,000.00 and over 6,200.00  
(b)  The schedule includes but is not limited to the following businesses: Abstractors; advertising agencies; ambulance services; amusement parks; appraisers; barbershops; beauty salons; boats or barge carriers of freight or passengers; bonding companies; surety companies or bondsman; business, professional, or instructional schools; cable television businesses; carpet and rug cleaning businesses; cold storage plants or refrigerated lockers; collecting agencies; commercial reporting or rating agencies; credit bureaus; decorators; detective agencies; elevator repair; service; and maintenance businesses; employment agencies; engravers; ferry boats; flea market participants; health or recreational clubs; insurance adjusters; jewelers; businesses engaged in leasing, renting, or licensing the use of movable property medical transportation services; miniature golf links; motor vehicle carriers of freight or passengers; motor vehicle rentals; motor vehicle repair and repainting shops, motor vehicle storage businesses; operators of coin vending and weighing machines; packing houses for meats and fish; parking lots; photographers; railroad carriers of freight or passengers; repair businesses; restaurants, coffee houses, or other eating establishments; retail dealers in boats, retail dealers in merchandise; retail dealers in motor vehicles; service businesses; sign painting; skating rinks; steam cleaning; steam dying, or steam pressing businesses; storage rooms or landings; taxicab service; theaters; tourist camps; towboat or tugboat businesses; trackless trolleys or buses; transportation businesses; trucking businesses; undertakers and funeral directors; warehouses; washaterias or laundromats; watchman agencies; and wreckers and tow truck services. 
(c)  For every dealer in merchandise, service and rentals not otherwise provided for by this article or by special laws, whether conducted as principal, agent or commission, or otherwise, the license tax shall be based on the amount of gross sales and receipts, at the rate set above. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-73.1. - Gasoline service stations. 
    For every fixed location gasoline service station whose sales of gasoline and motor fuels are eighty (80) percent or more of total business activity, the license shall be based on the corresponding table for gasoline service stations presented below: 
If the Gross Receipts Are: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $0.00 $50,000.00 $50.00 50,000.00 75,000.00 60.00 75,000.00 100,000.00 90.00 100,000.00 150,000.00 120.00 150,000.00 200,000.00 180.00 200,000.00 500,000.00 250.00 500,000.00 1,000,000.00 400.00 1,000,000.00 2,000,000.00 600.00 2,000,000.00 3,000,000.00 1,100.00 3,000,000.00 4,000,000.00 2,100.00 4,000,000.00 5,000,000.00 5,100.00 5,000,000.00 and over 6,100.00  
Sec. 10-74. - Wholesale dealers in merchandise, service, and rentals; retail dealers to institutional consumers; shipbuilders; and contractors. 
(a)  For every fixed location wholesale dealers in merchandise, service and rentals, retail dealers to institutional consumers, shipbuilders, and contractors, including but not limited to all businesses enumerated in this section, the license shall be based on the total business activity and the amount of said license shall be as shown in the corresponding table for wholesale dealers presented below: 
If the Gross Sales Are: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $0.00 $100,000.00 $50.00 100,000.00 150,000.00 75.00 150,000.00 250,000.00 100.00 250,000.00 500,000.00 150.00 500,000.00 600,000.00 200.00 600,000.00 800,000.00 250.00 800,000.00 1,000,000.00 300.00 1,000,000.00 1,500,000.00 400.00 1,500,000.00 2,000,000.00 500.00 2,000,000.00 2,500,000.00 700.00 2,500,000.00 3,000,000.00 900.00 3,000,000.00 4,000,000.00 1,000.00 4,000,000.00 5,000,000.00 1,250.00 5,000,000.00 5,500,000.00 1,800.00 5,500,000.00 6,000,000.00 2,400.00 6,000,000.00 6,500,000.00 3,000.00 6,500,000.00 7,000,000.00 3,600.00 7,000,000.00 7,500,000.00 4,200.00 7,500,000.00 8,000,000.00 4,800.00 8,000,000.00 9,000,000.00 5,200.00 9,000,000.00 10,000,000.00 5,600.00 10,000,000.00 11,000,000.00 6,000.00 11,000,000.00 12,000,000.00 6,400.00 12,000,000.00 13,000,000.00 6,800.00 13,000,000.00 14,000,000.00 7,200.00 14,000,000.00 and over 7,500.00  
(b)  The schedule includes but is not limited to the following businesses: Wholesale dealers in merchandise, service or rentals; retail or wholesale dealers in building materials, retail dealers to farmers or institutions; shipbuilders; contractors; both lump sum and cost plus. The maximum license tax paid by a retail dealer of building materials shall not exceed sixty-two hundred dollars ($6,200.00). 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-75. - Business of lending or of dealing of notes secured by chattel mortgages or other liens. 
(a)  For every person, firm, corporation, or association or persons engaged in the business of purchasing, selling, trading in, or lending on unsecured notes or on notes secured by chattel mortgages, or other statutory liens, being commonly known as finance or securities companies, a license based on the amount of loans made by the business shall be required. The license shall be based on the amount of loans made by the business and the amount of said license shall be as shown in the corresponding table for lending businesses presented below: 
If The Amount of Loan Is: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $0.00 $250,000.00 $50.00 250,000.00 500,000.00 100.00 500,000.00 750,000.00 150.00 750,000.00 1,000,000.00 200.00 1,000,000.00 1,250,000.00 250.00 1,250,000.00 1,500,000.00 300.00 1,500,000.00 1,750,000.00 350.00 1,750,000.00 2,000,000.00 400.00 2,000,000.00 2,250,000.00 450.00 2,250,000.00 2,500,000.00 500.00 2,500,000.00 3,000,000.00 550.00 3,000,000.00 3,500,000.00 600.00 3,500,000.00 4,000,000.00 650.00 4,000,000.00 4,500,000.00 700.00 4,500,000.00 5,000,000.00 750.00 5,000,000.00 5,500,000.00 800.00  
If the Gross Receipts Are: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $5,500,000.00 $6,000,000.00 $850.00 6,000,000.00 6,500,000.00 900.00 6,500,000.00 7,000,000.00 950.00 7,000,000.00 7,500,000.00 1,000.00 7,500,000.00 8,000,000.00 1,050.00 8,000,000.00 8,500,000.00 1,100.00 8,500,000.00 9,000,000.00 1,150.00 9,000,000.00 9,500,000.00 1,200.00 9,500,000.00 10,000,000.00 1,250.00 10,000,000.00 11,000,000.00 1,350.00 11,000,000.00 12,000,000.00 1,450.00 12,000,000.00 13,000,000.00 1,550.00 13,000,000.00 14,000,000.00 1,650.00 14,000,000.00 15,000,000.00 1,750.00 15,000,000.00 16,000,000.00 1,850.00 16,000,000.00 17,000,000.00 1,950.00 17,000,000.00 18,000,000.00 2,050.00 18,000,000.00 19,000,000.00 2,150.00 19,000,000.00 20,000,000.00 2,250.00 20,000,000.00 25,000,000.00 2,500.00 25,000,000.00 30,000,000.00 3,000.00 30,000,000.00 35,000,000.00 3,500.00 35,000,000.00 and over 3,700.00  
(b)  The "amount of loans made" for the purposes of this section shall mean the total of all amounts of funds or goods advanced to borrowers and the amounts paid for notes or other similar evidences of indebtedness purchased or otherwise acquired from others. 
(c)  In the case of a new business, the basis for the first year's license shall be provided for in section 10-56 and section 10-60 of this article, except that the "amount of the loans made" shall be substituted for "gross revenue." 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-76. - Brokerage and commission agents. 
(a)  For every factorage, commission or brokerage business; dealers in stocks or bonds as principal; stocks, bonds or cotton factors, commission or brokerage businesses, whether or not the principal or party solicited is within or without the state, including but not limited to all businesses enumerated in this section, the license shall be based on gross annual commissions and brokerages earned on sales and purchased. The amount of the license shall be as shown in the corresponding table below and shall be subject to applicable deductions. 
If The Gross Commissions Are: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $0.00 $15,000.00 $50.00 15,000.00 20,000.00 70.00 20,000.00 25,000.00 90.00 25,000.00 30,000.00 112.00 30,000.00 40,000.00 137.00 40,000.00 50,000.00 180.00 50,000.00 65,000.00 225.00 65,000.00 80,000.00 300.00 80,000.00 100,000.00 360.00 100,000.00 125,000.00 450.00 125,000.00 150,000.00 600.00 150,000.00 175,000.00 675.00 175,000.00 200,000.00 750.00 200,000.00 250,000.00 900.00 250,000.00 300,000.00 1,050.00 300,000.00 350,000.00 1,200.00 350,000.00 400,000.00 1,400.00 400,000.00 450,000.00 1,600.00 450,000.00 500,000.00 1,800.00 500,000.00 550,000.00 2,000.00 550,000.00 600,000.00 2,200.00 600,000.00 650,000.00 2,400.00 650,000.00 700,000.00 2,600.00 700,000.00 750,000.00 2,800.00  
If the Gross Sales Are: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $750,000.00 $800,000.00 $3,000.00 800,000.00 850,000.00 3,200.00 850,000.00 900,000.00 3,400.00 900,000.00 950,000.00 3,600.00 950,000.00 and over 3,700.00  
(b)  The schedule includes, but is not limited to: Brokerages in money, produce or sugar; cotton factor and commission businesses; cotton compress businesses; cotton future brokerages; cotton pickeries; distilleries of alcohol; grain and product commission houses; businesses engaged in leasing, renting or licensing the use of immovable property; livestock auctions; manufacturer's agents; operators of office buildings; owners or lessees of toll bridges or ferries; real estate brokers; slaughterhouses; steamboat or steamship agencies; stock or bonds brokerages; sugar factories. 
(c)  For carrying on each business of dealing in or buying and selling stocks or bonds, as principal, the license shall be based on gross annual profits; however, where no gross annual profit is realized, the minimum tax under the above schedule shall be paid. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-77. - Public utilities. 
    For carrying on each business of gas light, heat or power; electric light, heat or power; waterworks; and for each telephone, telegraph or express business, the license shall be based on gross annual revenue from all business activities as shown in the corresponding table for public utilities presented below: 
If The Gross Receipts Are: 
As Much As But Less Than The Annual License Tax Shall Be $0.00 $20,000.00 $50.00 20,000.00 25,000.00 60.00 25,000.00 37,000.00 75.00 $37,000.00 $50,000.00 $115.00 50,000.00 75,000.00 150.00 75,000.00 100,000.00 200.00 100,000.00 150,000.00 300.00 150,000.00 200,000.00 450.00 200,000.00 250,000.00 650.00 250,000.00 500,000.00 750.00 500,000.00 750,000.00 1,500.00 750,000.00 1,000,000.00 2,250.00 1,000,000.00 1,250,000.00 3,000.00 1,250,000.00 1,500,000.00 3,750.00 1,500,000.00 1,750,000.00 4,500.00 1,750,000.00 2,000,000.00 5,250.00 2,000,000.00 2,250,000.00 6,000.00 2,250,000.00 2,500,000.00 6,900.00 2,500,000.00 and over 7,500.00  
    A person engaged in the business of selling electricity in more than one (1) municipality, locality or community shall be deemed to be carrying on but one (1) business, and to have only one (1) place of business, which place of business shall be the place where the general office of such person is located. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-78. - Businesses where licenses are based on flat fees. 
    The following types of businesses shall obtain an annual license based on the flat fee designed hereafter. For the purposes of this section, the minimum tax noted in for most new businesses for the first year of commencement or fractional part thereof does not apply. 
(a)  Private banking or investment banking businesses. For each business of carrying on a private banking house, business or agency, investment banking house, business or agency, a license based on a flat fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be required. The term "investment banking" means a business that is carried on through the purchase or underwriting of security issues and their subsequent sale to investors. 
(b)  Pawnbrokers and persons lending money on wages or salaries. For each and every pawnbroker, or person keeping a loan office and engaged in lending money, on articles pawned or pledged, and for each and every money broker, money lender, or person lending money on, or purchasing time, wages, or salaries of laborers, clerks, or other wage earners or other persons, whether the business is conducted in an office otherwise, a license based on a flat fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be required. Persons licensed under this category may conduct retail sales, provided that the gross receipts from such sales do not exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). If the gross receipts from retail sales exceed one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), a retail license is required. Such retail license shall be based on the sum of the gross receipts of the retail sales and of one-third of the total amount of the money loaned. The license fee shall be based on the rates listed in the table in section 10-73. 
(c)  Peddlers and itinerant vendors. 
(1)  All peddlers, hawkers, itinerant vendors, and every person who displays samples, models, goods, wares, or merchandise on a temporary basis in any hotel, motel, store, storehouse, house, vehicle, or any other place, for the purpose of securing orders for the retail sale of such goods, wares or the like kind or quality, either for immediate or future delivery, shall obtain a license based on a fee not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(2)  This section does not apply to the following classes: those persons making house-to-house or personal calls displaying samples and taking orders for shipment directly from the manufacturer; those persons making a business call or visit upon the verbal or written invitation of the inhabitant of the premises; those persons, or their representatives, engaged in the business of selling at wholesale, from a fixed place of business in this state, to licensed retail dealers; and vendors, or their agents or representatives, in the sale or delivery of petroleum products when drawn, conveyed and distributed from a stock maintained at a warehouse, distributing station or established place of business. 
(3)  The collector shall require all peddlers to exhibit their occupational license. The license shall indicate thereon the motor vehicle license number. They shall seize the merchandise and any vehicle or other conveyance used by the peddler to peddle the same, if the peddler fails or refuses to exhibit his license. All property seized shall be turned over to a court of competent jurisdiction, to be sold according to law, to satisfy the license due and enforce the privilege therefor. The rights of the holder of a chattel mortgage note or any vehicle seized shall not be affected or prejudiced as a result of the seizure. 
(4)  Whoever shall sell goods, wares and merchandise as a peddler without first obtaining the license herein required shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined not less than five hundred ($500.00) or shall be imprisoned not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(d)  Mechanical or electric amusement machines or devices. 
(1)  Every person engaged in the business of operating or who permits to be operated in his place of business any mechanical or electric amusement machine or device shall pay a license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each such machine or device, except that the license fee for each electronic pinball, flipper machine or video game shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for each such machine or device. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall not apply in cases where the person engaged in the business of operating such mechanical devices are operating same under a written contract with and are solely sponsored by a nonprofit corporation for the purposes of conducting a fair, festival, or trade show which has one of its objectives the promotion of agricultural and agri-products. For the purposes of this subsection, the term "nonprofit corporation" shall be construed to mean only a nonprofit corporation which: 
a.  was organized under the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 12 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 prior to January 1, 1969; and 
b.  holds membership in good standing in an association organized for the purpose of promoting fairs, festivals and trade shows in the State of Louisiana. 
(3)  For the purpose of this subsection, a "coin operated mechanical amusement device" is any machine or device operated by depositing a coin, token, slug or similar object for the placing of the device in readiness of play. This definition includes but is not limited to the following devices: video games, merry-go-rounds, mechanical hobby horses, jukeboxes, pool tables, domino tables, bowling alleys, blood pressure monitors, and pulse rate monitors. 
(4)  All such mechanical amusement devices subject to tax under this subsection and which do not return to the operator or player thereof anything but free additional games or plays or, through the exercise of the skill of the operator or player, a merchandise prize, shall not be deemed to be classed as gambling devices, and neither this section nor any other act shall be construed to prohibit same. Payment of the tax imposed by this subsection shall not be held to legalize the operation of any machine or device defined herein which is prohibited by law. This subsection shall not be held to repeal any provisions of any law prohibiting the operation, possession or use of any such machine or device. 
(5)  Every person licensed to operate video draw poker devices or operates a video draw poker licensed establishment shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per year for each such video draw poker device subject to the rules, regulations and limitations set forth in Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4862.1 et seq. and administered by the Gaming Enforcement Division of the Office of State Police, Department of Public Safety and Corrections. 
(6)  For the purpose of this subsection, a "video draw poker device" is any unit, mechanism, or device authorized pursuant to the provisions of Louisiana R.S. 33:4862 et seq. that, upon insertion of cash, is available to play or simulate the play of the game of draw poker or other card games approved by the Gaming Enforcement Division, utilizing a cathode ray tube or video display screen and microprocessors in which the player may win games or credits that can be redeemed for merchandise or cash. The term does not include a device that directly dispenses coins, cash, tokens or anything else of value, except the ticket voucher required in accordance with the provision of state law. The term does not include any device authorized to be used in the conducting of charitable gaming. 
(e)  Evidence of payment. The payment of the tax levied by this section shall be evidenced by a certificate of tax payment, or a stamp, or similar evidence of tax payment which shall be issued by the collector. The certificate of payment shall be securely affixed or attached to each machine or other device with respect to which a tax has been paid, or if such certificate cannot be affixed, shall be prominently posted in the place in which the machine or device is located and near to such machine or device. If a machine or device is replaced by another, such other machine or device shall not be considered an additional device service. Certificates of tax payment or stamps are not to be transferrable from one taxing jurisdiction to another. 
(f)  Enforcement. The penalties and procedures of this article relating to the enforcement and collection of the occupational license tax provisions shall apply to any person who is in possession, control or custody of any machine or device on which taxes are imposed by subsection (d) of this section and which is being operated or is permitted to be operated without having a certificate of tax payment issued by the collector and affixed or attached thereto, or prominently posted in the place in which the machine or device is located and near to such machine or device. 
(g)  Professional sports. For each person owning or carrying on a business known as "professional sports" a license based on a flat fee of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) shall be required. By way of extension and not of limitation, the business of "professional sports" shall include football, basketball and baseball games, where the individual participants are paid for their services. Sporting events that are provided for by special laws are exempt under this section. 
(h)  Circuses, concerts, carnivals and special events. For each person operating a circus, carnival or other traveling show, and for each person or organization sponsoring a concert or other special event, including but not limited to gun shows, arts and crafts fair, and antique shows, a license based on a flat fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be required. This license shall be issued by the city and shall be good for a period of ten (10) days. Should the person or organization move the circus, concert or other event to another jurisdiction in the state, a new license shall be required by that jurisdiction. 
(i)  Hotels, motels, rooming houses, boarding houses. Any person operating a hotel, motel, rooming house or boarding house shall pay an annual license tax of two dollars ($2.00) for each sleeping room contained by the hotel, motel, rooming house or boarding house. 
(j)  All other businesses. For businesses not otherwise covered by or specifically exempted under this article, including but not limited to printers, lithographers, editors, publishers, attorneys-at-law, accountants, oculists, physicians, osteopaths, dentists, chiropodists, bacteriologists, veterinarians, chemists, architects, and civil, mechanical, chemical, or electrical engineers engaged in the practice of their profession as an individual, or as a firm, partnership, or corporation, the license shall be one-tenth of one (0.10) percent of the annual gross receipts for professional fees for services rendered by the taxpayer, with a minimum tax of fifty dollars ($50.00) and a maximum tax of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The tax levied herein shall be levied only on the business and not separately on any individual who is employed by or is a member of the taxpayer which conducts its business as a firm, partnership, or corporation. A maximum fee of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be established for professional partnerships or corporations of seven (7) or less professional members, and the state-set maximum of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) apply to professional partnerships and corporations with more than seven (7) professional members. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6782, § 1, 8-6-92) 
Sec. 10-79. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Blind persons and their widows or orphans. License taxes levied by this article shall not apply to blind persons, who are exempt from licenses taxes by Louisiana R.S. 46:371 through 46:373. The exemption provided by this subsection shall apply only where the business is conducted by any blind person exclusively for his own support or the support of his family. 
(b)  Artists and craftsmen. Any occupational license tax imposed on retail dealers not having a fixed place of business shall not apply to Louisiana artists and craftsmen who display their own original art and handicraft for sale at functions sponsored by nonprofit organizations. 
(c)  Nonprofit organizations. The occupational license tax required by this article shall not apply to those qualified nonprofit organizations which are exempt for the collection of sales and use taxes under the provisions of R.S. 47:305.14 or from the payment of federal income taxes under the applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(d)  Traveling shows. This section shall not be construed to exempt museums, menageries, circuses, or other traveling shows from the license required by section 10-78 (h) unless all of the proceeds from such shows are used for charitable, educational, or religious purposes of the sponsoring qualified nonprofit organizations. It is the intention of this subsection to exempt such traveling shows where its entire proceeds, except for necessary expenses connected therewith, are used for the charitable, educational and religious purposes of the sponsoring qualified nonprofit organization. 
(e)  Wholesale dealers in certain alcoholic beverages. There shall be no license tax imposed, assessed or collected under the provisions of this article on any person engaged in the business of selling at wholesale malt, vinous, spirituous, alcoholic or intoxicating liquor containing more than six (6) percent of alcohol by volume, and beer, porter, ale, fruit juices and wine containing more than one-half of one (0.5) percent of alcohol by volume. 
(f)  Other exempted businesses. Banks, homestead and building and loan associations, clerks, laborers, ministers of religion, school teachers, graduated trained nurses, those engaged in agricultural or horticultural pursuits, those operating sawmills, and corporations organized and operated for the purpose of lending money to farmers for production purposes, the stock of which is owned by farmer members and employees of such corporations, shall be exempted from any provisions of this chapter. 
(g)  Manufacturers. Manufacturers shall be exempted for many provisions of this chapter; however, manufacturers who sell their manufactured articles at retail shall be subject to the payment of a license tax on such retail sales as fixed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-80. - Deductions. 
(a)  Petroleum taxes. In calculating the gross sales at retail gasoline filling and service stations or at bulk or distributing plants engaged in the storage and sale of petroleum products, the taxpayer shall exclude therefrom the part of the purchase price paid by him for gasoline and motor fuels or lubricating oils as shall equal the manufacturer's or dealer's license, privilege or excise tax levied by federal or state statutes on the manufacturing, handling, storing, or consuming of gasoline, motor fuels or lubricating oils. 
(b)  Undertaking and funeral directing. The term "gross annual receipts," as used in this chapter, shall cover all of the receipts of the person carrying on the business of undertaking and funeral directing; except that deduction shall be allowed for collections made by one undertaker and funeral director for the account of another undertaker and funeral director, as shown by the books of both parties at interest. 
(c)  Stocks and bonds; interstate sales. In determining the amount of gross annual commissions and brokerage to be subject to the tax, each commission business operating on exchanges located outside of the State of Louisiana shall deduct therefrom forty (40) percent in the case of purchases and sale of stocks and bonds consummated on exchanges located outside of the State of Louisiana and fifty-five (55) percent of purchases and sales of commodities consummated on exchanges located outside the State of Louisiana. 
(d)  Retail or wholesale sales of motor vehicles and boats. In determining the amount of gross sales and receipts to be subject to the tax for retail or wholesale dealers in motor vehicles, automobiles, motor trucks, motor buses, motorcycles, motor bicycles, motor scooters, motor tractors, motor-propelled road machinery farm implements, and equipment designed for use with tractors and other motor-propelled equipment, trailers, semitrailers, aircraft, or other motor-propelled land vehicles, and pleasure or commercial boats, the license shall be computed on the total gross sales from all sales, including but not limited to sales of parts and accessories, receipts from repair shops, and sales of motor vehicles; however, the gross sales and receipts from the sale of the above-listed motor vehicles and boats shall not exceed seven hundred thousand dollars ($700,000.00). 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-81. - Special provisions. 
(a)  The tax levied on any person engaged in the business of contractor who holds a license issued by the state licensing board for contractors as defined in Chapter 3 of Subtitle II of Title 47 of Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, either upon a cost-plus basis or other than a cost-plus basis, except where the principal phase of business of such contractor is located within the parish, as designated by the contractor, shall not exceed seven hundred dollars ($700.00). 
(b)  The tax shall be computed on the basis of the schedules contained in this article according to the physical location of each place of business without regard to the location where the actual sale takes place or where a product or service is delivered or performed. 
(c)  For lessors with a place of business in this state, the tax shall be computed on the basis of the schedule contained in this article according to the physical location of such business without regard to the location where the leased property is situated within the state. 
(d)  A person engaged in the business of operating a railroad for the transportation of freight or passengers shall be deemed to be carrying on but one (1) business, and to have only one (1) place of business which shall be the place where the general office within the state as designated by such person is located. 
(e)  Nothing in this article is intended to levy a tax on those receipts subject to the tax for insurance companies under the provisions of R.S. 22:1076. 
(f)  Under the provisions of this article, no occupational license tax totaling more than fifty dollars ($50.00) levied against a small business will increase more than twenty-five (25) percent in the first year over the occupational license tax it paid under the schedules or classifications used in 1987. "Small business" shall be defined as any person who employs fifteen (15) or less full-time persons per business establishment and which has two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) or less in gross annual sales or receipts. Any person not paying an occupational license tax in 1987 shall pay according to the appropriate schedule in this article. All small businesses as defined herein who pay the tax shall be charged the lowest fee in their respective categories, the categories, the category for each small business to be chosen from either the new schedule or the old schedule, whichever is lower. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Sec. 10-82. - Effective date. 
    The provisions of this article shall become effective and apply to taxable years beginning January 1, 1992, except for establishments operating video draw poker devices for which the effective date shall be August 1, 1992. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6782, § 1, 8-6-92) 
Sec. 10-83. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase of this article or the application thereof should be held invalid for any reason, the remaining sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases of this article shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 6679, § 2, 10-17-91) 
Secs. 10-84-10-113. - Reserved. 
Sec. 10-114. - Chain store tax. 
(a)  Imposition of tax. Because of the advantages accruing from the operation of multiple stores wherever situated and because of the basic difference inherent in such character of operations, there is hereby levied an annual license tax for the year 1980 and for each subsequent year thereafter upon each person engaged in the business of operating or maintaining, as part of a group or chain, any store or stores within the City of Kenner, excluding those located outside the boundaries of the City of Kenner, where goods, wares, merchandise or commodities of every description whatsoever are sold or offered for sale at retail under the same general management, supervision, ownership and control, and which are commonly recognized as a member of a chain and as a branch store. 
    The license herein authorized shall be in addition to ad valorem taxes and Jefferson Parish ordinances. 
(b)  Amount of tax. The license tax for the business described in this section levied upon the store or stores operated within this city is based on the number of stores or merchandise establishments included under the same general management, supervision, ownership and control, whether within this city or not and whether within the state or not; the maximum license for each store or establishment shall be as follows: 
Number of Stores in Group At Least But No More Than License Fee 2 10 $10.00 11 35 15.00 36 50 20.00 51 75 25.00 76 100 30.00 101 125 50.00 126 150 100.00 151 175 150.00 176 200 200.00 201 225 250.00 226 250 300.00 251 275 350.00 276 300 400.00 301 400 450.00 401 500 500.00 501 and over 550.00  
The tax for any store opened after June 30th of any year shall not exceed one-half (1/2) of the annual amount. 
(c)  Report. Every person engaged in business in this city, shall on or before the first day of February of each year render to the Parish of Jefferson a report containing a true and complete statement showing the number of stores or establishments operated or maintained in the corporate limits of the City of Kenner, and the name, location and street address of each store, the total number of such stores, whether in this state or not, as of the report date. Whenever a new store is opened which was not included in the above-mentioned report, a supplemental report setting forth the required information shall be filed prior to the expiration of thirty (30) days after the date of opening. 
(d)  Designation of sheriff as tax collector; payment of tax to accompany report. The collection of the taxes imposed hereunder shall be made in the name of the Parish of Jefferson, by the sheriff, who is the collector of the City of Kenner taxes under the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:1435. All sums collected under the provisions of this section, less the sheriff's commission, shall be paid by the sheriff to the treasurer of Jefferson Parish on or before the tenth day of the month following the collection of the tax. 
    The initial payment of license taxes authorized and levied under this section shall accompany the report required by subsection (c) and shall be due three (3) weeks subsequent to the adoption of this section. All subsequent license taxes levied hereunder shall be due and payable as provided for by subsection (c) hereof. 
(e)  Procedure to collect delinquent taxes; pleading and practice; effect of collector's affidavit; burden of proof. 
(1)  Procedure. The procedure to collect the delinquent taxes due hereunder shall be tried or heard by preference in all courts, original and appellate, whether in or out of term time and either in open court or in chambers, at such time as may be fixed by the court, which, shall be not less than two (2) nor more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, after service on the defendant of opposing party. 
(2)  Pleading and practice. All defenses, whether by exception or plea to the merits, made or intended to be made to any such claim, shall be presented and filed at one time, in the court of original jurisdiction prior to the hour fixed for the hearing, and no court shall consider any defenses, unless presented and filed. This provision shall be construed to deny any court the right to extend the time for pleading defenses; and no continuation shall be granted by any court to any defendant, except for legal grounds set forth in the Code of Practice. 
(3)  Effect of collector's affidavit and burden of proof. Whenever the pleadings filed on behalf of the sheriff and ex officio tax collector are accompanied by the sheriff and ex officio tax collector's affidavit or by that of the counsel or attorney representing him to the effect that the facts alleged are true to the best of the affiant's knowledge and belief, all of the said facts shall be accepted as prima facie true and as constituting a prima facie case, and the burden of proof to establish anything to the contrary shall rest wholly on the defendant or opposing party. 
(f)  Objection to tax; payment; refunds; legal actions; construction. 
(1)  Objection to tax. A right of action is hereby created to afford a remedy at law for any person aggrieved by the provisions for this section, and in case any such person resisting the payment of any amount found due, or the enforcement of any provisions of such laws in relation thereto, such person shall pay the amount found due by the sheriff and ex officio tax collector and shall give the said sheriff and ex officio tax collector, at the time, notice of his intention to file suit for the recovery of same, and upon receipt of such notice, the amount so paid shall be segregated and held by the sheriff and ex officio tax collector for a period of thirty (30) days, and if suit be filed within such time for recovery of such amount, such funds so segregated shall be further held pending the outcome of such suit. If the person prevails, the sheriff and ex officio tax collector shall refund the amount to the claimant with legal interest covering the period from the date such funds were received by the said sheriff and ex officio tax collector to the date of refund. 
(2)  Legal actions. This section shall afford a legal remedy and right of action in any state or federal court having jurisdiction of the parties and subject matter, for a full and complete adjudication of any and all questions arising in the enforcement of this section as to the legality of any tax accrued or accruing or the method of enforcement thereof. In such actions, service of process upon the sheriff and ex officio tax collector shall be sufficient service and he shall be the sole, necessary and proper party defendant in any such suit. 
(3)  Construction. This section shall be construed to provide a legal remedy in the state or federal courts, by action at law, in case such taxes are claimed to be an unlawful burden upon interstate commerce, or the collection thereof, in violation of any act of Congress or the United States Constitution, or the Constitution of the State of Louisiana, or in any case where jurisdiction is vested and upon proper showing by such person that the principle of law involved in addition assessment is already pending before the courts for judicial determination, the said person, upon agreement to abide by the decision of the courts, may pay the additional assessment under protest, but need not file an additional suit. In such cases the tax so paid under protest shall be segregated and held by the sheriff and ex officio tax collector until the question of law involved has been determined by the courts and shall then be disposed of as therein provided. 
(g)  Attorneys to aid sheriff and ex officio tax collector; commission; duties and procedure. The Jefferson Parish sheriff and ex officio tax collector of the Parish of Jefferson is authorized to employ attorneys at law to assist in the collection of any delinquent licenses due under the provisions of this section; provided that if any delinquent licenses are referred to any attorney at law for collection, the delinquent taxpayer owing the license shall pay a commission to the attorney of ten (10) per cent calculated upon the aggregate amount of the license plus any interest and other penalties that might be due thereon. 
(h)  Interest on unpaid taxes. When any taxpayer fails to pay any tax, or any portion thereof, due under the provisions of this section on or before the day when it shall be required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount of tax due, interest at the rate of six (6) per centum per annum from the due date until paid. If the term for which interest is to be charged exceeds four (4) years, the rate of interest for the period beyond four (4) years shall be reduced to three (3) per centum per annum. Such interest shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the tax due and can be enforced in a separate action or in the same action for collection of the tax, and shall not be waived or remitted. 
(i)  Penalty for failure to make timely return. When any taxpayer fails to make any return required to be made under the provisions of this section at the time such return becomes due, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided, a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five (5) per centum of the tax if the failure is not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) per centum for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues, not to exceed twenty-five (25) per centum of the tax in the aggregate. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were part of the tax due, and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(j)  Tax obligation to constitute a lien, privilege and mortgage. Except as is specifically provided in the laws regulating building and loan associations, any tax, penalty, interest or attorney's fee due under the provisions of this section, shall operate as a lien, privilege and mortgage on all of the property of the tax debtor, both movable and immovable, which said lien, privilege and mortgage shall be enforceable in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action at law, or may be enforced as otherwise provided by this section. The sheriff and ex officio tax collector may cause notice of such lien, privilege and mortgage to be recorded at any time after the tax becomes due, whether assessed or not, and regardless of whether or not then payable, in the mortgage records of any parish wherein the collector has reason to believe the tax debtor owns property. 
    The lien, privilege and mortgage created by this section shall affect third parties only from the date of recordation and shall take their respective ranks by virtue of recordation. 
(k)  Severability provisions. If any provision or item of this section or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions, items or applications of this section which can be given effect without the invalid provision, item or application and to this end the provisions of this section are hereby declared severable. 
(Ord. No. 2863, § 1, 1-8-81) 
Sec. 10-115. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section I of Ord. No. 6679 adopted Oct. 17, 1991, repealed section 10-115 in its entirety. Formerly, section 10-115 pertained to occupational license taxes and derived from Section II Ord. No. 5877, adopted June 18, 1987. For provisions regarding occupational license taxes, see sections 10-53-10-83. 
Secs. 10-116-10-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, adopted Aug. 4, 2011, repealed the former Art. V, §§ 10-121-10-143, and enacted a new Art. V as set out herein. The former Art. V pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 9995, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2009; Ord. No. 9912, §§ 2-25, adopted May 21, 2009; Ord. No. 60-81, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 2, 1988; and Ord. No. 1747, §§ 1-14, adopted July 28, 1975. 

Sec. 10-121. - Purpose; findings and rationale. 
(a)  Purpose. It is the purpose of this article to regulate sexually oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this article have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this article to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this article to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(b)  Findings and rationale. Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses presented in hearings and in reports made available to the city council, and on findings, interpretations, and narrowing constructions incorporated in the cases of City of Littleton v. Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. , 541 U.S. 774 (2004); City of Los Angeles v. Alameda Books, Inc. , 535 U.S. 425 (2002); City of Erie v. Pap's A.M. , 529 U.S. 277 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc. , 475 U.S. 41 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres , 427 U.S. 50 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc. , 501 U.S. 560 (1991); California v. LaRue , 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N.Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca , 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and 
H&A Land Corp. v. City of Kennedale , 480 F.3d 336 (5th Cir. 2007); Fantasy Ranch Inc. v. City of Arlington , 459 F.3d 546 (5th Cir. 2006); N.W. Enters. v. City of Houston , 352 F.3d 162 (5th Cir. 2003); Baby Dolls Topless Saloons, Inc. v. City of Dallas , 295 F.3d 471 (5th Cir. 2002); BGHA, LLC v. City of Universal City , 210 F. Supp. 2d (W.D. Tex. 2002), aff'd 340 F.3d 295 (5th Cir. 2003); LLEH, Inc. v. Wichita County , 289 F.3d 358 (5th Cir. 2002); Hang On. Inc. v. City of Arlington , 65 F.3d 1248 (5th Cir. 1995); Woodall v. City of El Paso , 49 F.3d 1120 (5th Cir. 1995); J & B Entertainment, Inc. v. City of Jackson , 152 F.3d 362 (5th Cir. 1998); SDJ, Inc. v. City of Houston , 837 F.2d 1268 (5th Cir. 1988); TK's Video, Inc. v. Denton County , 24 F.3d 705 (5th Cir. 1994); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City , 342 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir. 2003); Lady J. Lingerie, Inc. v. City of Jacksonville , 973 F. Supp. 1428 (M.D. Fla. 1997), aff'd 176 F.3d 1358 (11th Cir. 1999); Ctr. for Fair Public Policy v. Maricopa County , 336 F.3d 1152 (9th Cir. 2003); Sensations, Inc. v. City of Grand Rapids , 526 F.3d 291 (6th Cir. 2008); World Wide Video of Washington, Inc. v. City of Spokane , 368 F.3d 1186 (9th Cir. 2004); Ben's Bar, Inc. v. Village of Somerset , 316 F.3d 702 (7th Cir. 2003); Flanigan's Enters., Inc. v. Fulton County , 596 F.3d 1265 (11th Cir. 2010); Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach , 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); Williams v. Morgan , 478 F.3d 1316 (11th Cir. 2007); Illinois One News, Inc. v. City of Marshall , 477 F.3d 461 (7th Cir. 2007); Imaginary Images, Inc. v. Evans , 612 F.3d 736 (4th Cir. 2010); G.M. Enterprises, Inc. v. Town of St. Joseph , 350 F.3d 631 (7th Cir. 2003); East Brooks Books, Inc. v. Shelby County , 588 F.3d 360 (6th Cir. 2009); Entm't Prods., Inc. v. Shelby County , 588 F.3d 372 (6th Cir. 2009); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Knox County , 555 F.3d 512 (6th Cir. 2009); Richland Bookmart, Inc. v. Nichols , 137 F.3d 435 (6th Cir. 1998); Spokane Arcade, Inc. v. City of Spokane , 75 F.3d 663 (9th Cir. 1996); City of New York v. Hommes , 724 N.E.2d 368 (N.Y. 1999); For the People Theatres of N.Y., Inc. v. City of New York , 793 N.Y.S.2d 356 (N.Y. App. Div. 2005); Taylor v. State , No. 01-01-00505-CR, 2002 WL 1722154 (Tex. App. July 25, 2002); Gammoh v. City of La Habra , 395 F.3d 1114 (9th Cir. 2005); Z.J. Gifts D-4, L.L.C. v. City of Littleton , Civil Action No. 99-N-1696, Memorandum Decision and Order (D. Colo. March 31, 2001); People ex rel. Deters v. The Lion's Den, Inc. , Case No. 04-CH-26, Modified Permanent Injunction Order (Ill. Fourth Judicial Circuit, Effingham County, July 13, 2005); Reliable Consultants, Inc. v. City of Kennedale , No. 4:05-CV-166-A, Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law (N.D. Tex. May 26, 2005); and based upon reports concerning secondary effects occurring in and around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Austin, Texas - 1986; Indianapolis, Indiana - 1984; Garden Grove, California - 1991; Houston, Texas - 1983, 1997; Phoenix, Arizona - 1979, 1995-98; Chattanooga, Tennessee - 1999-2003; Los Angeles, California - 1977; Whittier, California - 1978; Spokane, Washington - 2001; St. Cloud, Minnesota - 1994; Littleton, Colorado - 2004; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma - 1986; Dallas, Texas - 1997; Ft. Worth, Texas - 2004; Kennedale, Texas - 2005; Greensboro, North Carolina - 2003; Amarillo, Texas - 1977; Jackson County, Missouri-2008; Louisville, Kentucky-2004; New York, New York Times Square - 1994; the Report of the Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota); Dallas, Texas-2007; and "Rural Hotspots; The Case of Adult Businesses," 19 Criminal Justice Policy Review 153 (2008). 
    The city council finds: 
(1)  Sexually oriented businesses, as a category of commercial uses, are associated with a wide variety of adverse secondary effects including, but not limited to, personal and property crimes, prostitution, potential spread of disease, lewdness, public indecency, obscenity, illicit drug use and drug trafficking, negative impacts on surrounding properties, urban blight, litter, and sexual assault and exploitation. Alcohol consumption impairs judgment and lowers inhibitions, thereby increasing the risk of adverse secondary effects. 
(2)  Each of the foregoing negative secondary effects constitutes a harm which the city has a substantial government interest in preventing and/or abating. This substantial government interest in preventing secondary effects, which is the city's rationale for this article, exists independent of any comparative analysis between sexually oriented and nonsexually oriented businesses. Additionally, the city's interest in regulating sexually oriented businesses extends to preventing future secondary effects of either current or future sexually oriented businesses that may locate in the city. The city finds that the cases and documentation relied on in this article are reasonable believed to be relevant to said secondary effects. 
The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein its stated findings and legislative record related to the adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, including the judicial opinions and reports related to such secondary effects. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-122. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context. 
    Adult bookstore or adult video store means a commercial establishment which, as one of its principal business activities, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one (1) or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." A "principal business activity" exists where the commercial establishment meets any one (1) or more of the following criteria: 
(1)  At least thirty-five (35) percent of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; or 
(2)  At least thirty-five (35) percent of the wholesale value of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; or 
(3)  At least thirty-five (35) percent of the retail value (defined as the price charged to customers) of the establishment's displayed merchandise consists of said items; or 
(4)  At least thirty-five (35) percent of the establishment's revenues derive from the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of said items; or 
(5)  The establishment maintains at least thirty-five (35) percent of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(6)  The establishment maintains at least five hundred (500) square feet of its floor space for the display, sale, and/or rental of said items (aisles and walkways used to access said items shall be included in "floor space" maintained for the display, sale, or rental of said items); or 
(7)  The establishment regularly offers for sale or rental at least two thousand (2,000) of said items; or 
(8)  The establishment regularly features said items and regularly advertises itself or holds itself out, by using "adult," "adults-only," "XXX," "sex," "erotic," "novelties," or substantially similar language, as an establishment that caters to adult sexual interests; or 
(9)  The establishment maintains an "adult arcade," which means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one (1) time, and where the images so displayed are characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas." 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, regardless of whether alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features live conduct characterized by semi-nudity. No establishment shall avoid classification as an adult cabaret by offering or featuring nudity. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" are regularly shown to more than five (5) persons for any form of consideration. 
    Characterized by means describing the essential character or quality of an item. As applied in this article, no business shall be classified as a sexually oriented business by virtue of showing, selling, or renting materials rated "NC-17" or "R" by the Motion Picture Association of America. 
    City means Kenner, Louisiana. 
    Criminal background check means a National Criminal Background Check to include those counties and parishes where the employee and/or future hires has resided after he/she has obtained the age of eighteen (18) years and older. 
    Director means the director of the inspections and code enforcement department of the City of Kenner or his or her designee. 
    Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, regardless of whether the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises. 
    Establish or establishment means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented business, to any sexually oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually oriented business. 
    Floor space means the floor area inside a sexually oriented business that is visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. 
    Hearing officer means an attorney, not otherwise employed by the city, who is licensed to practice law in Louisiana, and retained to serve as an independent tribunal to conduct hearings under this article. 
    Influential interest means any of the following: (1) the actual power to operate the sexually oriented business or control the operation, management or policies of the sexually oriented business or legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business, (2) ownership of a financial interest of thirty (30) percent or more of a business or of any class of voting securities of a business, or (3) holding an office (e.g., president, vice president, secretary, treasurer, managing member, managing director, etc.) in a legal entity which operates the sexually oriented business. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
    Nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
    Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually oriented business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall operational control of the business premises. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually oriented business regardless of whether that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Person means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Premises means the real property upon which the sexually oriented business is located, and all appurtenances thereto and buildings thereon, including, but not limited to, the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways, and parking lots and/or parking garages adjacent thereto, under the ownership, control, or supervision of the licensee, as described in the application for a sexually oriented business license. 
    Regularly means the consistent and repeated doing of an act on an ongoing basis. 
    Semi-nude or semi-nudity means the showing of the female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola and extending across the width of the breast at that point, or the showing of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall include the lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breasts exhibited by a bikini, dress, blouse, shirt, leotard, or similar wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Semi-nude model studio means a place where persons regularly appear in a state of semi-nudity for money or any form of consideration in order to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. This definition does not apply to any place where persons appearing in a state of semi-nudity did so in a class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class. 
    Sexual device means any three (3) dimensional object designed for stimulation of the male or female human genitals, anus, buttocks, female breast, or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others and shall include devices commonly known as dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, cock rings, anal beads, butt plugs, nipple clamps, and physical representations of the human genital organs. Nothing in this definition shall be construed to include devices primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy. 
    Sexual device shop means a commercial establishment that regularly features sexual devices. This definition shall not be construed to include any pharmacy, drug store, medical clinic, any establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare products or services, or any establishment that does not limit access to its premises or a portion of its premises to adults only. 
    Sexually oriented business means an "adult bookstore or adult video store," an "adult cabaret," an "adult motion picture theater," a "semi-nude model studio," or a "sexual device shop." 
    Specified anatomical areas means and includes: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered: human genitals, pubic region; buttock; and female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and 
(2)  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified criminal activity means any of the following specified crimes for which less than five (5) years has elapsed since the date of conviction, plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date: 
(1)  Rape and sexual battery offenses; 
(2)  Sexual offenses affecting minors; 
(3)  Offenses concerning prostitution; 
(4)  Offenses concerning disorderly places and obscenity; 
(5)  Offenses concerning operating places of prostitution; 
(6)  Offenses concerning violations of the Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law; 
(7)  Offenses concerning money laundering; 
(8)  Offenses concerning tax evasion; 
(9)  Offenses concerning voyeurism; 
(10)  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one (1) of the foregoing offenses; 
(11)  Any offense enumerated in the states code which contains the same elements as one (1) of the foregoing state offenses; or 
(12)  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Louisiana, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
    Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in [subsection] (a) above. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities which constitute an influential interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Viewing room means the room, booth, or area where a patron of a sexually oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-123. - Business license required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented business in the city without a valid sexually oriented business license. 
(b)  Application. An applicant for a sexually oriented business shall file in person at the office of the director of the inspections and code enforcement department a completed application made on a form provided by the director. A sexually oriented business may designate an individual with an influential interest in the business to file its application for a sexually oriented business license in person on behalf of the business. The application shall be signed as required by subsection (d) herein and shall be notarized. An application shall be considered complete when it contains, for each person required to sign the application, the information and/or items required in this subsection (c), accompanied by the appropriate licensing fee: 
(1)  The applicants full legal name and any other names used by the applicant in the preceding five (5) years. 
(2)  Current business address or another mailing address for the applicant. 
(3)  Written proof of age, in the form of a driver's license, a picture identification document containing the applicant's date of birth issued by a governmental agency, or a copy of a birth certificate accompanied by a picture identification document issued by a governmental agency. 
(4)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually oriented business. 
(5)  If the application is for a sexually oriented business license, the name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
(6)  A statement of whether an applicant has been convicted of or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this article, and if so, each specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
(7)  A statement of whether any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest, has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to a court order of closure or padlocking. 
(8)  Certify that applicant has conducted a National Criminal Background Check on all employees of the sexually oriented business and will conduct a National Criminal Background Check of all future hires of the sexually oriented business. Applicant will further certify that he will not allow to be employed at the sexually oriented small business any employee who has been convicted of, pled guilty to, or pled nolo contendere to any of the following within five (5) years prior to the date the National Criminal Background Check is completed: 
a.  Rape and sexual battery offenses; 
b.  Sexual offenses affecting minors; 
c.  Offenses concerning prostitution; 
d.  Offenses concerning disorderly places and obscenity; 
e.  Operating places of prostitution, voyeurism; 
f.  Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law; 
g.  Any attempt, solicitation, or conspiracy to commit one (1) of the foregoing offenses; 
h.  Any offense enumerated in the state's code which contains the same elements as one (1) of the foregoing state offenses; or 
i.  Any offense in another jurisdiction that, had the predicate act(s) been committed in Louisiana, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses. 
(c)  An application for a sexually oriented business license shall be accompanied by a legal description of the property where the business is located and a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor area occupied by the business and a statement of floor area visible or accessible to patrons for any reason, excluding restrooms. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who are required to comply with the stage, booth, and/or room configuration requirements of this article shall submit a diagram indicating that the setup and configuration of the premises meets the requirements of the applicable regulations. The director may waive the requirements of this subsection (c) for a renewal application if the applicant adopts a legal description and a sketch or diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
The information provided pursuant to this subsection (c) shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the director within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(d)  Signature. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license under this section is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who seeks a sexually oriented business license is other than an individual, each person with an influential interest in the sexually oriented business or in a legal entity that controls the sexually oriented business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(e)  The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license under this article shall be maintained by the office of the director on a confidential basis, and such information may be disclosed only as may be required, and only to the extent required, by governing law or court order. Any information protected by the right to privacy as recognized by state or federal law shall be redacted prior to such disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-124. - Issuance of business license. 
(a)  Business license. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually oriented business license, the director shall immediately issue a temporary license to the applicant if the completed application is from a preexisting sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating in the city and the completed application, on its face, indicates that the applicant is entitled to an annual sexually oriented business license. The temporary license shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant an annual license. Within twenty (20) days of the filing of a completed sexually oriented business license application, the director shall either issue a license to the applicant or issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to the applicant. The director shall issue a license unless: 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information required by this article for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  The license application fee required by this article has not been paid. 
(4)  The sexually oriented business, as defined herein, is not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this article or is not in compliance with the locational requirements of any other part of the Kenner City Code. 
(5)  Any sexually oriented business in which an applicant has had an influential interest has, in the previous five (5) years (and at a time during which the applicant had the influential interest): 
a.  Been declared by a court of law to be a nuisance; or 
b.  Been subject to an order of closure or padlocking. 
(6)  An applicant has been convicted of or pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity, as defined in this article. 
(b)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, and, if the license is for a sexually oriented business, the address of the sexually oriented business. The sexually oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that it may be read at any time that the business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-125. - Fees. 
    The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually oriented business licenses shall be as follows: One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the initial fee for a sexually oriented business license and fifty dollars ($50.00) for annual renewal. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-126. - Inspection. 
    Sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees shall permit the director and his or her agents to inspect, from time to time on an occasional basis, the portions of the sexually oriented business premises where patrons are permitted, for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this article, during those times when the sexually oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open to the public. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this article, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-127. - Expiration and renewal of license. 
(a)  Each license shall remain valid for a period of one (1) calendar year from the date of issuance unless otherwise suspended or revoked. Such license may be renewed only by making application and payment of a fee as provided in this article. 
(b)  Application for renewal of an annual license should be made at least ninety (90) days before the expiration date of the current annual license, and when made less than ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the expiration of the current license will not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-128. - Suspension. 
    The director shall issue a written notice of intent to suspend a sexually oriented business license for a period not to exceed thirty (30) days if the sexually oriented business licensee has knowingly or recklessly violated this article or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-129. - Revocation. 
(a)  The director shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if the licensee knowingly or recklessly violates this article or has knowingly or recklessly allowed an employee or any other person to violate this article and a suspension of the licensee's license has become effective within the previous twelve-month period. 
(b)  The director shall issue a written notice of intent to revoke a sexually oriented business license if: 
(1)  The licensee has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually oriented business license; 
(2)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(3)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed prostitution on the premises of the sexually oriented business; 
(4)  The licensee knowingly or recklessly operated the sexually oriented business during a period of time when the license was finally suspended or revoked; 
(5)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly engaged in or allowed any specified sexual activity or specified criminal activity to occur in or on the premises of the sexually oriented business; or 
(6)  The licensee has knowingly or recklessly allowed a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to consume alcohol or appear in a state of semi-nudity or nudity on the premises of the sexually oriented business. 
(c)  The fact that any relevant conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license, provided that, if any conviction which serves as a basis of a license revocation is overturned or reversed on appeal, that conviction shall be treated as null and of no effect for revocation purposes. 
(d)  When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in this article, the city revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date revocation becomes effective. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-130. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-131. - Hours of operation. 
    No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually oriented business that holds a valid license from the city or state to sell alcoholic beverages may remain open to sell alcoholic beverages under the terms of that license if it does not conduct, offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-132. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films on premises. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business which exhibits in a booth or viewing room on the premises, through any mechanical or electronic image-producing device, a film, video cassette, digital video disc, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all operator's stations, booths or viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain equipment for displaying films, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other video reproductions. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architects blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The director may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
(3)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) footcandles as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no specified sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet is limited to one (1) person. 
b.  That specified sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
c.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
d.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
e.  That violations of these regulations are unlawful. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator to enforce the regulations articulated in subsections (5)a. though d. above. 
(7)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from an operator's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. An operator's station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more operator's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms, from at least one (1) of the operator's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the operator's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one (1) employee is on duty and situated in each operator's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that no porous materials are used for any wall, floor, or seat in any booth or viewing room. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under subsections (a)(1) through (a)(8) to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(c)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly enter or remain in a viewing room less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet in area that is occupied by any other patron. 
(d)  No patron shall knowingly or recklessly be or remain within one (1) foot of any other patron while in a viewing room that is one hundred fifty (150) square feet or larger in area. 
(e)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly make any hole or opening between viewing rooms. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-133. - Loitering, exterior lighting and monitoring, and interior lighting requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to: (i) ensure that at least two (2) conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the premises are posted on the premises; (ii) designate one (1) or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on the premises by visually inspecting the premises at least once every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting the premises by use of video cameras and monitors; and (iii) provide lighting to the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. Said lighting shall be of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1.0) footcandle as measured at the floor level. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within an operator's station. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually oriented business to ensure that the interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which customers are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five (5.0) footcandles as measured at the floor level and the illumination must be maintained at all times that any customer is present in or on the premises. 
(c)  No sexually oriented business shall erect a fence, wall, or similar barrier that prevents any portion of the parking lot(s) for the establishment from being visible from a public right-of-way. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly or recklessly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-134. - Penalties and enforcement. 
(a)  A person who violates any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to a citation and a civil fine, not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), upon proper adjudication before the Kenner City Court. Each day a violation is committed, or permitted to continue, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be fined as such. 
(b)  The city's legal counsel is hereby authorized to institute civil proceedings necessary for the enforcement of this article to enjoin, prosecute, restrain, or correct violations hereof. Such proceedings shall be brought in the name of the city, provided, however, that nothing in this section and no action taken hereunder, shall be held to exclude such criminal or administrative proceedings as may be authorized by other provisions of this article, or any of the laws in force in the city or to exempt anyone violating this Code or any part of the said laws from any penalty which may be incurred. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-135. - Hearing; license denial, suspension, revocation; appeal. 
(a)  When the director issues a written notice of intent to deny, suspend, or revoke a license, the director shall immediately send such notice, which shall include the specific grounds under this article for such action, to the applicant or licensee (respondent) by personal delivery or certified mail. The notice shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the director for the respondent. The notice shall also set forth the following: The respondent shall have ten (10) days after the delivery of the written notice to submit, at the office of the director, a written request for a hearing. If the respondent does not request a hearing within said ten (10) days, the director's written notice shall become a final denial, suspension, or revocation, as the case may be, on the thirtieth day after it is issued, and shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
    If the respondent does make a written request for a hearing within said ten (10) days, then the director shall, within ten (10) days after the submission of the request, send a notice to the respondent indicating the date, time, and place of the hearing. The hearing shall be conducted not less than ten (10) days nor more than twenty (20) days after the date that the hearing notice is issued. The city shall provide for the hearing to be transcribed. 
    At the hearing, the respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf, and cross-examine any of the director's witnesses. The director shall also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license. The hearing shall take no longer than two (2) days, unless extended at the request of the respondent to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. The hearing officer shall issue a final written decision, including specific reasons for the decision pursuant to this article, to the respondent within five (5) days after the hearing. 
    If the decision is to deny, suspend, or revoke the license, the decision shall advise the respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent jurisdiction, and the decision shall not become effective until the thirtieth day after it is rendered. If the hearing officer's decision finds that no grounds exist for denial, suspension, or revocation of the license, the hearing officer shall, contemporaneously with the issuance of the decision, order the director to immediately withdraw the intent to deny, suspend, or revoke the license and to notify the respondent in writing by certified mail of such action. If the respondent is not yet licensed, the director shall contemporaneously therewith issue the license to the applicant. 
(b)  If any court action challenging a licensing decision is initiated, the city shall prepare and transmit to the court a transcript of the hearing within thirty (30) days after receiving written notice of the filing of the court action. The city shall consent to expedited briefing and/or disposition of the action, shall comply with any expedited schedule set by the court, and shall facilitate prompt judicial review of the proceedings. The following shall apply to any sexually oriented business that is lawfully operating as a sexually oriented business on the date on which the completed business is filed with the director: Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of any denial, suspension, or revocation of a temporary license or annual license, the director shall immediately issue the respondent a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the respondent to continue operation of the sexually oriented business will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the respondent's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-136. - Prohibited conduct. 
(a)  No patron, employee, or any other person shall knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually oriented business, appear in a state of nudity or engage in a specified sexual activity. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly or intentionally appear in a semi-nude condition in a sexually oriented business. 
(c)  No person shall possess, use, or consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of a sexually oriented business that is not properly licensed for on-premises alcohol consumption under the state and city alcoholic beverage regulations. 
(d)  No person shall knowingly or recklessly allow a person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain on the premises of a sexually oriented business. 
(e)  No operator or licensee of a sexually oriented business shall knowingly violate the regulations in this section or knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the regulations in this section. 
(f)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the director, and summarizing the provisions of subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e), shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. No person shall cover, obstruct, or obscure said sign. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-137. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
    This article does not impose strict liability. Unless a culpable mental state is otherwise specified herein, a showing of a knowing or reckless mental state is necessary to establish a violation of a provision of this article. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this article, an act by an employee that constitutes a violation of this article shall be imputed to the sexually oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this article, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly or recklessly allowed such act to occur on the premises. It shall be a defense to liability that the person to whom liability is imputed was powerless to prevent the act. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-138. - Failure of city to meet deadline not to risk applicant/licensee rights. 
    In the event that a city official is required to act or to do a thing pursuant to this article within a prescribed time, and fails to act or to do such thing within the time prescribed, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required of the city official under this article, and not completed in the time prescribed, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for a sexually oriented business license (including a renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city's action has passed. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-139. - Severability. 
    This article and each section and provision of said article hereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, not withstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of said article, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. Should any procedural aspect of this article be invalidated, such invalidation shall not affect the enforceability of the substantive aspects of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-140. - Conflicting code provisions repealed. 
    Any provision(s) in the Kenner City Code specifically in conflict with any provision in this article is hereby deemed inoperative and repealed. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-141. - Effective date. 
    This article shall become effective after publication as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-142. - Applicability of article to existing businesses. 
    All preexisting sexually oriented businesses lawfully operating in the city in compliance with all state and local laws prior to the effective date of this article are hereby granted a De Facto Temporary License to continue operation or employment for a period of ninety (90) days following the effective date of this article. By the end of said ninety (90) days, all sexually oriented businesses and sexually oriented business employees must conform to and abide by the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,268, § 1, 8-4-11) 
Sec. 10-143. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9912, § 26, adopted May 21, 2009, repealed Art. VI, §§ 10-141-10-152, which pertained to massage parlors and derived from Ord. No. 2979, §§ A-L, 7-2-81. 

Secs. 10-144-10-158. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,062, § 3, adopted March 17, 2016, repealed art. VII, §§ 10-159-10-169, which pertained to group homes and community homes and derived from Ord. No. 5870, § I, adopted June 4, 1987. 

Secs. 10-159-10-169. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - SALES FROM TEMPORARY STANDS OR VEHICLES AND HOUSE TO HOUSE SALE AND SOLICITATIONS 

Sec. 10-170. - Permit required. 
(a)  The sale of any merchandise, wares, goods, food, food products, plants, flowers, seafood of any kind, paintings, mirrors, or any artifact or saleable product from foot or from any truck, automobile, motor vehicle, mobile unit, cart, stand table, temporary building, portable or moveable container or display case, whether closed or enclosed, or operating on a permanent, temporary or seasonal basis shall be permitted, where the sale is conducted from privately-owned property provided the person desiring to conduct such sales obtains a permit as provided in this article. Additionally, house to house canvassing or solicitation of an economic or commercial nature, or sales, shall be permitted, provided the person desiring to conduct such activities obtains a permit as provided in this article. 
(b)  Exceptions: 
(1)  Notwithstanding the provisions of [subsection] (a)(1), the owner or lessee of a business which has a current occupational license, and which operates such business from a permanent building may display and sell its normal merchandise from temporary displays or units located within its property boundaries without obtaining a permit as provided for in this article. 
(2)  Members of any scouting group, playground, booster club or students of any elementary or high school, or the parents, guardians, teachers, booster club or PTA representative of any such students may make house to house sales or solicitations sanctioned by the scouting group, playground or school without obtaining a permit as provided for in this article. 
(3)  Members of any religious organization holding an exemption pursuant to 26 U.S.C. 502(C) may make house to house sales or solicitations of religious materials without obtaining a permit as provided for in this article. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell any merchandise, wares, goods, food, food products, plants, flowers, seafood of any kind, paintings, mirrors, or any artifact or saleable product from foot or from any truck, automobile, motor vehicle, mobile unit, cart, stand, table, temporary buildings, portable or moveable container or display case, whether closed or enclosed, or operating on a permanent, temporary, or seasonal basis upon public rights-of-way such as a street, boulevard, highway, roadway, emergency lane, neutral ground, or shoulder of a road which is used for vehicular traffic or any other public property dedicated for specific use. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 10,467, § 3, 10-18-12; Ord. No. 11,248, § 1, 4-20-17) 
Sec. 10-171. - Application. 
    Application must be made with the director of code enforcement for a permit under this article to conduct the sale of any merchandise, wares, goods, food, food products, plants, flowers, seafood of any kind, paintings, mirrors, or any artifact or saleable product whatsoever. The application must be accompanied by the following: 
(1)  A copy of the current lease or a letter of permission from the owner, lessor or sublessor of the property, showing the exact location where the business activity shall be conducted. 
(2)  A permit from the Jefferson Parish Health Unit where the product to be sold is food or foodstuff. 
(3)  State and city occupational license and sales tax number. 
(4)  A letter of approval by the planning department showing that the property is properly zoned for the intended use by the applicant. 
(5)  If applicant is an itinerant vendor as defined by R.S. 37:1921, then the name and address of the agent and a copy of the bond required by R.S. 37:1922 shall be provided. 
(6)  The applicant and each person who will be doing the sales or solicitations on the applicant's behalf shall submit to a background check which shall include a check of the person's police record. If the person has ever been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state or any other state or country, that person shall be denied a permit. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-172. - Fees. 
(a)  In addition to any other fees that may be charged, each vendor shall pay one of the following fees: 
(1)  Vendor may pay a fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the conduction of business at a single location. This permit shall be valid for three (3) consecutive calendar days. At the discretion of the director of code enforcement, if one (1) of those consecutive calendar days has bad weather, then the days may be extended provided that the permit shall not be for any more than three (3) days total. 
(2)  Vendor may pay a fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for the conduction of business within its parking area(s) if the vendor is the owner or lessee of a business which has a current occupational license and operates from a permanent building. The permit shall be valid for one (1) year. 
(b)  The council president is hereby authorized and empowered to sign any plans or documents which may be necessary to carry into effect the foregoing. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96; Ord. No. 7711, § 1, 5-15-97; Ord. No. 11,248, § 2, 4-20-17) 
Sec. 10-173. - Suspension and/or revocation. 
    Any vendor who secures a permit under the regulations of this division but otherwise fails to abide by this article shall be subject to suspension and/or revocation of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-174. - Sign required. 
    Prior to conducting of the business activity under this article the permittee must secure from the department a sign or I.D. which will contain the trade name of the vendor, the authorized location, and the time of authorization together with the city authorization to conduct such business activity, which sign, or a copy, must be displayed conspicuously at the location at all times during the conduct of business. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-175. - Prices to be posted. 
    All vendors under this article must have the minimum and maximum price of the merchandise, wares, goods, food, food products, plants, flowers, seafood of any kind, paintings, mirrors, or any artifact or saleable product whatsoever, posted conspicuously on a sign no larger than six (6) square feet. No other signs, except an identification sign supplied by the city, shall be allowed at the vendor's location. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-176. - Area to be kept clean. 
    All vendors under this article must keep the area upon which they conduct the sale of products and those areas immediately adjacent thereto free from all refuse, litter and trash attributable to their business activity. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-177. - Harassment of public prohibited. 
    At no time shall any vendor under this article harass the public to purchase this merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-178. - Food and food product requirements. 
(a)  All vendors under this article dispensing food or food products are required to provide an on site depot or processing plant for adequate storage, proper refrigeration and proper cleaning and sanitizing of equipment. Such depot shall be permitted and monitored by the state health department. 
(b)  Prior to approval and issuance of a permit by the department of code enforcement, the applicant shall provide documentation verifying compliance of the depot with this section and with all applicable state and city ordinances. See state department of health regulations governing "depots for potentially hazardous food vendors." 
(c)  However, any potentially hazardous food, meaning any food that consists in whole or in part of milk products, eggs, meats, poultry, fish, shellfish, edible crustacea, or other ingredients, including synthetic ingredients, shall not be sold in a raw or unprocessed condition and shall only be sold if it is properly cooked or processed and sold in containers. 
(d)  Furthermore, the vendor of potentially hazardous food, as defined above, or his employer shall maintain a fifty thousand dollar ($50,000.00) comprehensive general liability policy which shall include products liability coverage. Proper proof of such coverage must be submitted to the department of code enforcement prior to the approval and issuance of any permit. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-179. - Change of location. 
    Any vendor under this article may change his location without the payment of any additional fees provided he complies with all other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-180. - Compliance with laws and ordinances and reports. 
    All vendors under this article must also comply with all pertinent city ordinances and state health laws and shall make such sales tax returns and other reports as are required. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
Sec. 10-181. - Violations. 
    Anyone in violation of the provisions of this article shall be subject to the penalty provisions contained in section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 7425, § 1, 4-18-96) 
ARTICLE IX. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9741, adopted on July 24, 2008, repealed article IX, §§ 10-182-10-191 in its entirety. The former article IX pertained to alarm monitoring businesses. See also the Code Comparative Table. 

Secs. 10-182-10-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PERMITS FOR PUBLIC GATHERINGS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Section 19 of Ord. No. 7978, adopted Sept. 3, 1998, added a new Art. VIII to Chapter 10. Inasmuch as there already exists an Art. VIII, to avoid duplication, the editor has redesignated said article as Art. X and renumbered its section to maintain uniformity in sequential numbering. 

Sec. 10-200. - Permit for conduct of public gatherings for profit, nonprofit, or charitable purposes. 
(a)  Scope. Any person, persons, association, corporation, firm, partnership, or body desiring to conduct a public gathering, whether for profit, nonprofit, or charitable purposes, shall first apply for a permit to hold such function as provided in this section. This permit shall not be transferable. 
(b)  Definition of "public gathering." A public gathering shall, for purposes of this section, be defined to include any and all planned, advertised, or announced gatherings, where one hundred (100) or more persons are anticipated to be in gross attendance, be they participants in an event, spectators to an event, or otherwise, taking place in any open or enclosed space within the City of Kenner, subject to the specific exceptions and exemptions which are or may be hereinafter provided in this section. A public gathering as defined herein shall include, but in no way be limited to, dances, bazaars, celebrations, meetings, festivals, music performances, theatrical performances, and the like, whether held on open grounds or in a building or buildings or parking lots. 
(c)  Exemptions from this section. Specifically excluded and exempted from the provisions of this section are the following four (4) enumerated classes or categories of public gatherings: 
(1)  Any public gathering conducted continuously as a business in and upon premises duly approved and licensed therefor by the City of Kenner now or in the future. Currently, such gathering may include, but not limited to, those found in duly licensed bars, restaurants, lounges, motion picture theaters, bowling alleys, gaming vessels and the like. This exemption shall not apply to any event held on the parking lot of such building or any open air property adjoining the building. 
(2)  Any public gathering resulting exclusively from passengers or future passengers disboarding, boarding, awaiting the arrival of, or congregating about or in any aircraft, omnibus, bus, boat, train, ship, coach, interurban car or street railway car, provided that said conveyance be regularly engaged in interstate commerce. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not limited to, those found in airports, or aircraft, interurban bus depots, railway passenger trains and stations and the like. 
(3)  Any public gathering conducted in or about any building or buildings duly approved, licensed and regulated for such recurring use by the City of Kenner. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not limited to, those found in duly licensed hired meeting halls, ballrooms, banquet rooms, lodge halls and the like. This exemption shall not apply to any event held on the parking lot of such building. 
(4)  Any nonprofessional sporting or athletic event scheduled and/or specifically sanctioned by the City of Kenner recreation department or by the Parish of Jefferson School Board, or by any private or parochial educational institution domiciled in and regularly conducting such activities in the City of Kenner. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not limited to, those found at duly sponsored nonprofessional games of football, baseball, basketball, track events and the like. 
(d)  Permit applications. Permit applications as required by this section shall be made to the director of the department of community service who shall forward said application to the various departments of the City of Kenner as required by this section prior to submission to the mayor and the city council for approval. Said application shall list the name and address of applicant, a description of the proposed public gathering, all food and/or beverage items that will be served or available for purchase on the premises, the location of the proposed public gathering, the date and hours of the proposed public gathering, the number of people expected, the charge per person, the total anticipated gross income as hereinafter provided for, the sources of anticipated gross income as hereinafter provided for, whether or not the gathering is to be held indoors or outdoors, whether or not the buildings used for indoor gatherings have been approved for occupancy and are licensed by the City of Kenner to conduct such business therein, and a description of such building. 
(e)  Letter from Kenner Fire Chief. If the proposed public gathering is in a building, the applicant shall attach to his or her application a letter from the Kenner fire chief certifying that the building is safe and acceptable for the proposed and anticipated use and providing the maximum number of people that said building can safely accommodate for the proposed and anticipated use. Such letter shall be dated no more than three (3) months prior to any anticipated dates of the gathering. 
    The Fire Chief of the City of Kenner shall also make his recommendation as to fire safety requirements for the duration of the said gathering necessary in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Kenner. The fire chief shall require only as many fire officials as are necessary to uphold and enforce applicable laws and regulations, and to maintain fire safety regulations at the gathering. 
(f)  Action on application by the department of inspections and code enforcement. The department of inspections and code enforcement shall promptly determine whether the premises is zoned properly, contains proper sanitary facilities, has proper ingress and egress, and has sufficient off-street parking to conduct the proposed gathering without jeopardizing public safety, health and general welfare of the citizens of Kenner, and shall certify the said department's approval of the application only if all appropriate laws, regulations, requirements, ordinances, and resolutions relative to the foregoing have been complied with. Should the said department disapprove such application, it shall immediately advise the applicant in writing of the reason or reasons for said disapproval and recommend corrective measures. 
(g)  Security requirements. After consideration by the department of inspections and code enforcement, the application shall be forwarded to the chief of police of the City of Kenner, who shall make his recommendation as to security requirements for the duration of the said gathering necessary in the interest of public safety, health, and general welfare of the citizens of the City of Kenner. He shall require only as many police officers as are necessary to uphold and enforce applicable laws and regulations; and to maintain peace and order at the gathering. It shall be the responsibility of the permit holder to guard against trespassers, and if said holder wishes the chief of police to assist in their exclusion, he shall so state in his or her application in order that the number of additional officers the chief may deem necessary shall be assigned. 
(h)  Permit fee. Except as hereinafter provided, a fee for the permit required by this section shall be charged. Said fee shall become due and payable at the time the application for said permit shall be filed. Said permit fee shall be either ten (10) percent of anticipated gross income to be derived from the said public gathering, or two dollars ($2.00) per person anticipated in gross attendance at said public gathering, or two hundred dollars ($200.00), whichever is greatest. In no event shall the permit fee be less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(i)  Definition of "gross income." "Gross income," for purposes of this section shall include, but not limited to, income from admission charges or fees however collected, income from the sale or rental of any goods or services, income from fees charged to participants or spectators to any game or activity, income from the sale or rental of advertising space or sales promotion services, and income from prior or subsequent sale of tickets or other devices evidencing past or future payment, provided that such income be a direct result of the gathering and be received by anyone having to do the promotion, sponsoring, production or operation of any activity within the confines of the gathering. No distinct or severable portion of income shall be included in gross income if it is already licensed for, taxed, or specifically exempted from licensing or taxation under any other applicable section of the Kenner City Code in effect. 
(j)  Definition of "gross attendance." "Gross attendance," for purposes of this section shall include, but not limited to, all persons anticipated or actually in attendance at the said public gathering, and includes, but is not limited to, the permit application, his or her associates, partners, employers, employees, guests, invitees, customers, patrons, servants, franchisees, lessors, lessees, or sublessees, as well as trespassers, provided that such persons are in anticipated or actual attendance. 
(k)  Adjustment of permit fee. Within three (3) days of the commencement of any public gathering governed by this section, the permit holder, unless specifically exempted from the permit fee, shall submit to the department of community service in authentic form, a statement of the gross income actually derived from the said public gathering, and a statement of the actual number of persons in gross attendance at the said public gathering. If the amount previously paid as the permit fee is less than either ten (10) percent of actual gross revenues, or two dollars ($2.00) per person in gross attendance, the permit holder shall remit to the director of the department of community service the difference between the permit fee paid and the larger of the two (2) aforesaid amounts. If the amount previously paid as the permit fee is greater than the larger of either ten (10) percent of actual gross revenues or two dollars ($2.00) per person, the difference between the said permit fee and the larger of these amounts shall be promptly refunded to the permit holder by the City of Kenner, provided that no refund shall issue to reduce the total permit fee paid to less than two hundred dollars ($200.00) minimum permit fee. If the public gathering is still in progress three (3) days after its commencement, the permit holder, unless specifically exempted from the permit fee, shall submit to the director of the department of community service authentic statements of the gross income thereof and gross attendance thereat, along with the appropriate payments as thereby indicated, in installments of not less than one day each. It is expressly intended that the statement of any day's gross income from and gross attendance at the public gathering along with any appropriate payments thereby indicated be submitted to the director of the department of community [service] within three (3) days after that day. 
(l)  Fee for security personnel. Separate from and in addition to the permit fees as afore provided, a distinct charge for the payment of security personnel required to be assigned to the public gathering by the chief of police for the anticipated duration of the said gathering shall be assessed to the permit applicant. The minimum assessment for said personnel shall be one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per officer for a four-hour minimum, plus thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour or fraction thereof over and above the four-hour minimum for each officer. The one hundred and twenty dollar ($120.00) per officer minimum shall apply each day the gathering is in progress. The chief of police shall estimate how many officers are required basing said estimation on factors contained in the permit application. The permit applicant shall pay the detail supervisor the total amount assessed for security at the conclusion of said function in accordance with police department regulation DR 120-4. 
(1)  Fee for fire department personnel. Separate from and in addition to the permit fees and the fees for police security personnel as afore provided, a distinct charge for the payment of fire official personnel required to be assigned to the public gathering by the fire chief for the anticipated duration of the said gathering shall be assessed to the permit applicant. The minimum assessment for said fire official personnel shall be one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00) per fire official for a four-hour minimum, plus thirty dollars ($30.00) per hour or fraction thereof over and above the four-hour minimum for each fire official. The one hundred twenty dollar ($120.00) minimum shall apply each day the gathering is in progress. The fire chief shall estimate how many fire officials are required basing said estimation on factors contained in the permit application and applicable law. The permit applicant shall pay the fire department's detail supervisor the total amount assessed for fire official personnel at the conclusion of said function. If the proposed public gathering is scheduled on a city holiday then the fire official personnel required to be assigned to the public gathering shall receive double the fee as afore provided. 
(2)  Fee increases. In the event that the rate of compensation for either the police security or fire department personnel, as provided herein, are increased by amendment of this section, then the rate of compensation for both shall be deemed to have been increased. 
(m)  Exemption from permit fee. Specifically excluded and exempted from the provisions of this section only in that the permit application shall not be required to pay any permit fee in order to be issued a permit are the following five (5) enumerated classes or categories of public gatherings: 
(1)  Any public gathering held exclusively for charitable purposes. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not limited to, sales, bazaars, fairs and the like, conducted to raise money, provided that all gross income is used or set aside for charitable purposes. 
(2)  Any public gathering held exclusively not-for-profit, wherein all gross income is projected to be used and is subsequently used or set aside to pay the legitimate expenses of the gathering. Such legitimate expenses shall not include salaries or other remuneration paid to or received by the permit applicant, his partners, associates, employees or shareholders, or anyone in gross attendance at the gathering. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not be limited to, club or fraternal gatherings and the like conducted to raise no more money than is expended in their production. 
(3)  Any public gathering generating no gross income. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not limited to, those found at parades not otherwise licensed, receptions, meetings and the like. 
(4)  Any public gathering conducted by a corporation domiciled in Kenner for at least six (6) months prior to the date of such gathering, and chartered in Louisiana as nonprofit, provided said corporation permit applicant attaches to its application a current letter of the United States Internal Revenue Service certifying that it is exempt from federal income taxation, and providing that the gross income derived from the public gathering is to be used or set aside exclusively for the purposes enumerated in its articles of incorporation. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not limited to, those found at educational seminars and the like. 
(5)  Any public gathering conducted exclusively to promote and/or finance the election of any candidate or candidates to public office or to promote and/or finance passage or defeat of any laws, resolutions, amendments or measures in any public election or referendum, provided that all, some, or any citizens of the City of Kenner are qualified to vote for or against such candidate or measure. Currently, such gatherings may include, but not be limited to, political rallies, testimonial dinners, fund-raising meetings, scheduled or planned speeches, and the like. 
(n)  Enforcement. Whoever violates this section or any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. Each day of violation of this section or any part of this ordinance shall constitute a separate offense. 
(o)  Severability. It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the subsections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this section are severable and, if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or subsection of this section shall be declared invalid or unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and subsections of this section, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in this section of any such invalid or unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or subsection. 
(p)  Emergency ordinance. The matters to which this section addresses itself are hereby declared to be an emergency and this section shall be effective immediately upon its adoption. 
(q)  Restrooms or port-o-let facilities. Notwithstanding any other provisions of subsection (c) hereof which exempts certain types of public gatherings from the provisions of this section, it shall be unlawful for any persons to hold or sponsor a public gathering as defined in subsection (b) hereof without providing adequate restrooms or port-o-let facilities for persons attending the public gathering. At least one (1) port-o-let shall be provided for every two hundred (200) persons attending at any public gathering. 
(r)  Issuance and posting of certificate. After city council approval of the public gatherings permit, the applicant shall obtain the public gatherings permit at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled event. The said certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous public area at the site of the public gathering. 
(Ord. No. 7978, § 19(10-800), 9-3-98; Ord. No. 8335, § 1, 8-17-00; Ord. No. 8416, §§ 1, 2, 3-15-01; Ord. No. 9287, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 9287, § 1, 5-18-06; Ord. No. 9986, § 1, 9-3-09) 
Secs. 10-201-10-224. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FORTUNETELLERS 

Sec. 10-225. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to practice fortunetelling, as herein defined, unless that person holds a valid unexpired and unrevoked license to engage in the practice of fortunetelling issued by the city. The department of inspections and code enforcement shall issue each license holder a photographic identification card which must be visibly displayed at the license holders place of business. 
(Ord. No. 8137, § I, 7-15-99) 
Sec. 10-226. - Application. 
    Any person desiring to practice fortune telling shall make application for a license to the department of inspections and code enforcement on forms to be prepared by said department. This form shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  The full name and address of the applicant. 
(2)  Any aliases by which the applicant has ever been known. 
(3)  Each address of the applicant, including municipal number, city and state, for the last five (5) years. 
(4)  A statement that the applicant has not been convicted of a felony, plead guilty or nolo contendere to a felony or two (2) or more prior misdemeanors involving crimes of theft and/or violence. 
(5)  Written authorization to the police department to obtain fingerprints and criminal history background checks of the applicant. 
(6)  Furnish the department of inspections and code enforcement with two (2) photographs showing a front and side picture of the full face of the applicant, size two and one-half (21/2) × two and two-thirds (2 2/3 ) inches. 
(Ord. No. 8137, § I, 7-15-99) 
Sec. 10-227. - Revocation and suspension. 
    The city shall revoke the license of a fortuneteller for any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Fraud or willful and knowing misrepresentation or false statements made in the application for license. 
(2)  Fraud or any conviction of any crime involving theft or misappropriation of any funds or property. 
The director of inspection and code enforcements, in order to revoke a license, shall notify the license holder in writing of his intention to revoke the license, which shall be effective forty-five (45) days after the date of the notice. During that forty-five-day period, the license holder may request a hearing to show cause why the license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 8137, § I, 7-15-99) 
Sec. 10-228. - Fees. 
    The application for a fortunetelling license shall be accompanied by a fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) payable to the City of Kenner. Any renewal shall be accompanied by a fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Each original license or renewal shall be valid for one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 8137, § I, 7-15-99) 
Sec. 10-229. - Definition. 
    Fortunetelling means the prediction of a person's future or revelation of their past, by any means whatsoever, including but not limited to clairvoyance, palmistry, phrenology, card, tea leaf reading or handwriting analysis, in return for a fee, gift or a donation of any kind. 
(Ord. No. 8137, § I, 7-15-99) 
Secs. 10-230-10-245. - Reserved. 
Article XII. - PERMITS FOR FILMING[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, adopted Nov. 2, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as Art. XII, §§ 10-230-10-241. To preserve the style of this Code, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Art. XII, §§ 10-246-10-256. 

Sec. 10-246. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the motion picture, television and photographic production rules of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-247. - Purpose and intent. 
    This chapter is to establish procedures for the review and issuance of city filming permits allowing work associated with the production of commercial filming activities, within the city, subject to the permit requirements. The intent of this article is to facilitate the production of such work while protecting the residents and property owners from the potential adverse impacts of filming activities. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-248. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    City filming permit means a permit issued by the city to allow the activities associated with the production, filming or video taping of motion picture and television shows, programs, commercials and still photography. 
    City filming permit coordinator means the director of inspection and code enforcement of the city. 
    City-produced or city-sponsored government or educational access productions means motion picture, television, or still photography produced by or in association with the city. 
    Family video means the filming or videotaping of motion pictures or taking of still photographs solely for private use. 
    Motion picture, television, or still photography means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting motion pictures, television shows or programs, and commercials and to the taking of single or multiple photographs for sale or commercial use where the photographer sets up stationary equipment in any one (1) location for longer than five (5) consecutive minutes. 
    News media means the photographing, filming or videotaping for the purpose of spontaneous, unplanned television news broadcast or reporting for print media by reporters, photographers or cameramen. 
    Student films means motion picture, television, or still photography produced to satisfy a course or curriculum requirement at an educational institution. The student film maker must supply proof that he or she is currently enrolled. 
    Studio means a legally established, commercial, motion picture/television/still photography place of business where filming activities (motion or still photography) are regularly conducted inside a studio/stage upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-249. - Permit required. 
    No person shall use any public or private property, building, facility or residence for the purpose of producing, taking or making any motion picture, television or still photography production without first obtaining a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-250. - Permit exceptions. 
    The provisions of section 10-249 shall not apply to the following: 
(a)  News media; 
(b)  Family video; 
(c)  Studio productions; 
(d)  Sports photography. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-251. - Permit application and issuance. 
(a)  Permit application. Any person desiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall fill out an application provided by the city. The form must be signed and accompanied by an insurance certificate required by this article before the permit will be processed. Such application shall be submitted at least seven (7) to ten (10) days prior to the date on which such person desires to conduct the activity for which a permit is required. If such activity interferes with traffic or involves potential public safety hazards, an application shall be submitted at least five (5) days in advance of the requested filming date. 
    Written evidence of permits and/or coordination with other public agencies may be required upon submission of an application for a film permit. Requirements of these responsible agencies shall be requirements of this permit. Examples of such agencies include, but are not limited to, the planning department, the public works department, the city police department and the city fire department. 
(b)  Permit issuance. The director of inspection and code enforcement shall designate the person or body responsible for issuing permits under this article. 
    The director of inspection and code enforcement or his or her designee shall issue a permit as provided for in this article when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may be otherwise obtained, the application complies with the provisions of this article and he or she finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with traffic or pedestrian movement or endanger public safety and that no streets will be completely closed to traffic for an unreasonable period of time. Forty-eight (48) hours notice of any street closure shall be given; and 
(2)  The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with normal governmental or city operations; threaten to result in damage or detriment to public property; or result in the city incurring costs or expenditures in either money or personnel not reimbursed in advance by the applicant; and 
(3)  At the determination of the city's public works department, the city police department and the city fire department, that the condition of such activity will not constitute a fire hazard or any other type of hazard and all proper safety precautions will be taken as determined by the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designee. 
(c)  Additional conditions. The director of inspection and code enforcement may impose any additional conditions found necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city. The applicant shall comply with any conditions or restrictions the city may impose as a condition to issuing a permit. No changes shall be made by the applicant without first obtaining the city's approval. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-252. - Appeal procedures. 
    The decision to issue, conditionally issue, or not issue a permit shall be final unless appealed in writing within five (5) days of the decision by requesting a hearing of the city council at the next available meeting. The appeal must include copies of all pertinent material necessary to reinforce the applicant's position supporting the appeal. Written notice of the appeal will be mailed to residents within at least a one hundred fifty-foot radius of each filming location. Any decision of the city council shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-253. - Rules and regulations. 
(a)  Rules. The director of inspection and code enforcement, or his or her designee, is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations governing the form and location of any film activity set forth within the city. He or she shall also set forth the procedures for the issuance of permits. The rules, regulations, and procedures shall be based on the criteria set forth in section 10-235. 
(b)  Neighborhood notification. Before a permit is issued, the film company must notify affected residents, occupants and businesses, in advance of filming and as instructed by the city, of the duration and location of filming, including information about planned special effects, road and lane closures, or any other pertinent information. The notice of intent for filming shall include information for affected residents to contact city code enforcement occupational division with the city's address, phone number and an email address for any concerns regarding the intended filming. 
(c)  Directional signage. The filming company shall be allowed to place directional signs in designated areas by the city no earlier than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the commencement of filming and to be removed no later than twenty-four (24) hours after completion of filming. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-254. - Permit fees. 
(a)  [Permit fee.] A permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per location shall be submitted with the permit application. 
(b)  Cost of additional services. If deemed necessary by the director of inspection and code enforcement or his or her designee, or the heads of the aforementioned departments or their designee, additional police, code enforcement, fire, and other city services shall be provided for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed activity. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant. Any additional city services will be provided/coordinated through the director of inspection and code enforcement or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-255. - Liability provisions. 
(a)  Liability insurance. Before a permit is issued, a certificate of insurance will be required in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the city as an additional insured for protection against claims of third persons for personal injuries, wrongful death, and property damage and to indemnify the city for damage to city property arising out of the permittee's activities. The certificate shall not be subject to cancellation or modification until after thirty (30) days' written notice to the city. Such insurance shall be evidenced by the standard general liability special endorsement form which will remain on file with the personnel department. The use of special effects and explosives may require a certificate of insurance in an amount greater than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) naming the city as an additional insured and it must be obtained and submitted at the time of request. 
(b)  Worker's compensation insurance. Applicants shall conform to all applicable federal and state requirements for worker's compensation insurance for all persons operating under a permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-256. - Enforcement. 
    If an applicant violates any provisions of this article or a permit issued pursuant hereto, the city may cancel the permit. Violation of the provisions of this article shall be a misdemeanor and may be punishable by fine, imprisonment, or by both such fine and imprisonment in accordance with section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Sec. 10-257. - Administrative procedures. 
    The director of inspection and code enforcement and his or her designee is authorized to promulgate and enforce administrative procedures in the implementation and enforcement of this article. There shall be included a recommendation regarding the use of local business resources while filming in the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,349, § 1, 11-2-17) 
Chapter 11 - POLICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Duties of marshal, § 2-4; resisting an officer, § 7-86; refusal or failure to obey lawful orders of police prohibited, § 7-87; obstruction of police, § 7-88; cursing, etc., police prohibited, § 7-89; stop and frisk law, § 7-90; rescue prohibited, § 7-91; occupational license for detective or watchman agencies, § 10-86; police department vehicles exempted from speed limit restrictions, § 15-19. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 11-1. - Police department organizational chart and structure. 
(a)  The organizational chart of the Kenner Police Department, a copy of which is attached hereto and made a part hereof, be and is hereby adopted. 
(b)  The chief of police of the City of Kenner be and is hereby authorized, directed and empowered to implement the organizational structure as depicted on said organizational chart. 
(Ord. No. 1391, §§ 1, 2, 4-10-72) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1391, §§ 1 and 2, did not expressly amend this Code, hence inclusion herein as § 11-1 was at the discretion of the editors. The organizational chart is not set out herein, but is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city clerk and chief of police. 
Sec. 11-2. - Systematic funding of police department. 
(A)  The police department of the City of Kenner shall be funded annually, commencing on July 1, 1974, and annually thereafter, as follows: 
(1)  The Kenner Police Department shall be provided with an annual appropriation equal to twenty-one per cent (21%) of the City of Kenner's gross anticipated annual revenues. "Gross anticipated revenues," as used herein, shall mean total revenues dedicated, received, or available for operation and capital expenditures except the following revenues and/or receipts which shall be excluded therefrom: 
(a)  Revenues received from the New Orleans Aviation Board pursuant to its contract with the City of Kenner for airport security. 
(b)  Federal and state revenue sharing funds. 
(c)  Public building fund revenues. 
(d)  Federal and state grants for specific purposes and projects unrelated to the operation of the police department. 
(2)  The appropriation as provided in the foregoing subsection shall be utilized by the chief of police for all operating expenditures, including operation and maintenance of the jail, and for all capital expenditures of the Kenner Police Department, except as follows: 
(a)  Expenditures incurred in fulfillment of the City of Kenner's contract with the New Orleans Aviation Board, the cost of which is borne by the New Orleans Aviation Board. 
(b)  Capital expenditures for buildings which shall be provided for in the City of Kenner's general budget. 
(c)  The salary of the chief of police which will be provided for, as an elected official, in the general budget of the City of Kenner. 
(B)  In accordance with Section 5.11 of the Charter of the City of Kenner, the chief of police shall establish quarterly allotments of expenditures and no encumbrances shall be approved that are in excess of such allotments. 
(C)  In accordance with Section 6.07 of the Charter of the City of Kenner, all appropriations shall be for one fiscal year and shall lapse at the end of the year, unused funds reverting to the general fund. 
(D)  This section shall not be rescinded, amended or modified except by a two-thirds ( 2/3 ) vote of the entire authorized membership of the council as provided in Section 5.10 of the Charter of the City of Kenner. 
(E)  This section shall become effective for the fiscal year beginning on July 1, 1974, and the budget for the fiscal year beginning on said July 1, 1974, shall provide for an appropriation to the Kenner Police Department as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1588, §§ 1-5, 12-10-73) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1588, §§ 1-5, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 11-2 at the discretion of the editors. 
Secs. 11-3-11-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PENSION AND RELIEF PLAN[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Special act creating firemen's pension and relief fund, App. B. 
State Law reference- Police pension and relief fund, R.S. 33:2221 et seq. 

Sec. 11-16. - Compliance with state law; state law prevails if provisions conflict. 
    It is the intention of this article to comply exactly with R.S. 33:2221 et seq. If any conflict should arise between this article and those statutes, the statutes shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 23, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-17. - Establishment of fund. 
    In order to establish a system for the retirement of members of the police department, their widows, children and dependents, there is hereby established "The City of Kenner Police Pension and Relief Fund," referred to herein as the police pension and relief fund, in accordance with R.S. 33:2221. 
(Ord. No. 904, § I, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 1, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-18. - Appropriation to fund. 
    There shall be paid into the police pension and relief fund at the end of each month twenty-five (25) per cent of the fines collected by the mayor's court for the infraction of municipal ordinances and twenty (20) per cent of the money collected for licenses, privilege taxes, or permits for the sale of beverages containing alcohol. The said fund shall be administered for the sole purposes as herein stated and at no time shall said fund be commingled or combined with any other fund. 
(Ord. No. 904, § II, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 2, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-19. - Board of trustees generally. 
    There is hereby created a board of trustees for the police pension and relief fund, which board shall consist of the mayor, the superintendent of police, the city attorney, a member elected from membership of the police department by a majority vote, and the city clerk. The mayor shall be the president of the board, and the city clerk shall be secretary-treasurer of the board and shall keep all records, and perform other duties without additional compensation. 
(Ord. No. 904, § III, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 3, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-20. - Management of fund, salary deduction. 
    The board of trustees of the police pension and relief fund shall have exclusive control of the fund. The board of trustees may assess each member of the police department an amount not to exceed six (6) per cent of his salary, to be deducted monthly. This assessment is to be deposited by the treasurer of the fund in a depository chosen by the board and subject to the orders of the board. 
(Ord. No. 904, § IV, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 4, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-21. - Action of board to be final; meetings. 
    The board of trustees for the police pension and relief fund shall make regulations for the government and shall hear and decide all applications for relief or benefits under this article; its decision on applications shall be final and conclusive and shall not be subject to review or reversal except by the board. The board shall keep a record of all of its meetings and proceedings. The board shall meet at least every three (3) months and when called by the president or secretary. 
(Ord. No. 904, § V, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 5, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-22. - Duties of treasurer; bond. 
    The treasurer of the board of trustees for the police pension and retirement fund shall be custodian of the fund and he shall keep his books and accounts in the manner prescribed by the board. The books and accounts shall be subject to the inspection of a member of the board at any time. The treasurer shall deposit all money in the bank selected by the board. Upon the expiration of the treasurer's term of office, he shall deliver to his successor all unexpended money and all property which has come into his keeping as treasurer. The treasurer shall, within ten (10) days after his appointment, execute a bond to the board with good and sufficient sureties in the sum directed by the board for the faithful performance of his office. The bond shall be filed in the office of the board and in case of its breach, suit may be brought on the bond in the name of the board of any person injured by the breach. The premium on said bond shall be paid out of the police pension and relief fund. 
(Ord. No. 904, § VI, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 6, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-23. - Deposit of money collected for fund. 
    Not later than thirty (30) days after the close of the calendar month, the treasurer of the board of trustees for the police pension and relief fund shall deposit to the credit of the fund, in the bank designated by the board, the amounts prescribed in section 11-18 and all money collected under this article and turned into the municipal treasury during the preceding month. 
(Ord. No. 904, § VII, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 7, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-24. - Minimum fund required before disbursement can be made. 
    The board of trustees for the police pension and retirement fund may receive property of any nature for the benefit of the fund. The sum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) shall be retained as a permanent fund. No pension shall be paid or anything drawn from the fund until the sum of fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500) above the fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) held as a permanent fund, is to the fund's credit. 
(Ord. No. 904, § VIII, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 8, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-25. - Investment of fund. 
    The board of trustees for the police pension and relief fund may invest the permanent fund or any portion thereof in the name of the "Board of Trustees of the Police Pension and Relief Fund" in interest bearing bonds of the United States, of the state, and of the city or in certificates of deposit in banks of the United States and/or the state. All securities shall be deposited with the treasurer, subject to the orders of the board. 
(Ord. No. 904, § IX, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 9, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-26. - Money available for pensions. 
    The interest received from investments after the police pension and relief fund has reached fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000) and all money received from any source shall be applicable to the payment of pensions and relief under this article. 
(Ord. No. 904, § X, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 10, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-27. - Disbursements upon warrants. 
    Money shall be paid by the treasurer from the police pension and relief fund only upon warrants signed by the president and countersigned by the secretary. No warrant shall be drawn except by order of the board of trustees for the fund. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XI, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 11, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-28. - Annual financial report. 
    The condition of the police pension and relief fund shall be reported to the mayor and board of alderman of the city by the board's secretary in January of each year, and at any time that the mayor and board of aldermen of the city requires a report. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XII, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 12, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-29. - Retirement for disability or length of service; benefit payments. 
    The board of trustees of the police pension and relief fund shall retire from service in the police department any member of the department found by a majority vote of the board to have become physically or mentally, permanently or temporarily, disabled while in the performance of his duties, as determined by the report of the department physician, and shall place the retired member on the pension or relief roll. Upon written request any member of the department who has performed twenty (20) years of service in the department shall also be retired and placed under the pension or relief roll. In addition, any member of the department who has performed at least eighteen (18) consecutive years of service in the department and has reached sixty-five (65) years of age shall, upon his application and request therefor, be eligible for retirement and be placed on the pension or relief roll. The amount of the pension or relief shall be two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the highest average monthly salary for any continuous twelve (12) month period of time worked prior to retirement, but shall not be less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month. Pension or relief shall be paid in monthly installments to persons entitled thereto, except in cases of mentally incapacitated members, when the pension or relief shall be paid monthly to their legal representatives. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 13, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-30. - Fund not subject to claims against beneficiaries. 
    The police pension and relief fund, or any portion thereof, before or after an order for its distribution is issued, shall be exempt from assignment or pledge by a beneficiary of the fund or from seizure by virtue of any judicial process issued against the beneficiary. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XIV, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 14, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-31. - Examination of retired member; termination of payments and reinstatement on recovery of member. 
    A member of the police department retired because of disability received while in the performance of his duty shall submit to examination by the department physician every six (6) months. The department physician shall report his findings to the board of trustees for the police pension and relief fund, which shall remove the member from the disability list if the report of the physician shows that he is no longer disabled. When the report shows that the member is no longer disabled and can resume his duties as a police officer, the department head shall restore him to employment in the department with the rank and grade enjoyed at the time of his removal from service. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XV, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 15, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-32. - Death benefits. 
    If a member of the police department dies as a result of injuries received while in the performance of duty or dies of a disease contracted by reason of his occupation, or dies from natural causes while in police service or while receiving a pension, and leaves children under seventeen (17) years of age, a widow, or a dependent mother, these survivors shall be paid as follows: dependent mother, fifty dollars ($50.00) per month; widow, two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month as long as she remains unmarried; each child under seventeen (17) years of age, seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per month but not to exceed one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month regardless of the number of children. The benefits as provided for in this section shall be paid to all beneficiaries even though their right to receive the same accrued prior to the passage of this article. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XVI, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 16, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-33. - Funeral expenses. 
    Whenever an active or retired officer dies, the board of trustees for the police pension and relief fund shall appropriate from the fund the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) towards funeral expenses. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XVII, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 17, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-34. - Filing names of persons entitled to death benefits. 
    Every member of the police department shall file with the secretary of the board of trustees for the police pension and relief fund the name of any beneficiary to whom death benefits shall be paid and his relation to the member. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XVIII, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 18, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-35. - Rights of members employed prior to July 28, 1948. 
    R.S. 33:2234 and 33:2236 shall not affect the rights acquired by members of the police department employed prior to twelve (12) o'clock noon, July 28, 1948, and shall not affect their right to retirement after twenty (20) years of service, and employees of police departments of the city coming under this law by reason of population increases shall have the same benefits granted herein if such employees were employed prior to twelve (12) o'clock noon, July 28, 1948. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 19, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-36. - Eligibility for appointment to department; physical examination. 
    Persons eligible for first appointment to the police department shall be between the ages of twenty-one (21) and forty-five (45) years at the time of such original appointment and shall be subject to reemployment after the age of thirty-five (35) years. No person shall be employed in the department without first submitting to a physical examination by the municipal physician. If not pronounced physically fit by the physician the applicant shall not under any conditions be eligible for benefits from the police pension and relief fund. The physician shall make a written report of each applicant examined to the commissioner of public safety and to the board of trustees for the fund immediately upon examination. 
(Ord. No. 904, § XX, 2-14-66; Ord. No. 1115, § 20, 2-27-69) 
Sec. 11-37. - Credit for time in military service of United States. 
    All wartime military service for the United States Government during World War II not to exceed three (3) years, shall be deemed to constitute and shall be credited as "service", as used in this article. Only such wartime service which shall be rendered after the commencement of employment in the police department shall be deemed to constitute and be credited as service as used in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1115, § 21, 2-27-69) 
Chapter 13 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PROPERTY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- For provisions related to street lighting construction, maintenance, and requirements, see the building code of the city as provided in section 5-16 et seq. and related regulations of Jefferson Parish including ordinance number 2225 of the parish. 
Cross reference- Planning commission and zoning commission, § 2-56 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, § 5-1 et seq.; obstruction of highway of commerce, § 7-65; obstruction of walks, § 7-66; removal of materials from roads, streets, etc., prohibited; exceptions, § 7-08; historical district, Ch. 93/4; subdivisions, § 14-1 et seq.; traffic, § 15-1 et seq.; parking on sidewalks prohibited, § 15-55; zoning, App. A. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Certain ordinances relating to streets not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed as repealing or otherwise affecting the validity of any ordinance: 
(1)  Dedicating, accepting, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating any street or other public way in the city; 
(2)  Relating to municipal street maintenance agreements with the state; 
(3)  Establishing or prescribing grades for streets in the city; 
(4)  Ordinance No. 283, of April 13, 1951, concerning nondedication and acceptance for maintenance of streets purported to have been dedicated for public use by map or plan; or 
(5)  Ordinance No. 422, of May 20, 1957, adopting the property numbering and street naming plan prepared by Dan S. Martin and associates; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
Sec. 13-2. - Minimum standards for acceptance of work done by private developers. 
    Prior to granting acceptance of any completed work done by an individual developer under private contract consisting of street paving, subsurface drainage, sanitary sewerage, underground street lighting and other incidental work, the following minimum procedures are established: 
(1)  The city engineer shall inspect the completed work to establish conformance with the plans, specifications and acceptable standards of the city. 
(2)  The owner or developer requesting acceptance of the project shall submit to the city engineer a maintenance guaranty bond, which bond shall be for a period of one year from date of acceptance by the date and for a value not less than ten (10) per cent of the construction cost of the completed work. The bond shall guarantee that the owner or developer will be held responsible for, and must correct and rectify all defects discovered within a period of one year after acceptance. 
(3)  The city engineer shall submit a written recommendation to the mayor and board of aldermen that the work is acceptable along with the prescribed guarantee bond. 
(4)  The bond shall be retained by the city clerk with the records at city hall. 
(Ord. No. 1145, § 1, 9-8-69) 
Secs. 13-3-13-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-18. - Permittees to provide traffic control and security guards and obtain other necessary permits. 
    The holder of a permit for a parade shall provide at his own expense such traffic control and security guards as is deemed necessary by the marshal of the city and shall obtain any other necessary parade permits at his own expense. 
Sec. 13-19. - Use, possession of glass bottles and/or containers by spectators and participants in carnival parades and festivities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any spectator, participant in carnival festivities, or any person whatsoever to use and/or have in his possession, upon the streets, sidewalk and public properties of the City of Kenner, during carnival parades and/or festivities, any glass bottles or glass containers of any kind whatsoever. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 1382, §§ 1, 2, 3-13-72) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1382, §§ 1 and 2, being nonamendatory of this Code, has been included herein as § 13-19 at the discretion of the editors. 
Secs. 13-20-13-23. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 13-24. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to organize, stage, schedule or participate in any parade within the City of Kenner without first obtaining a permit from the City of Kenner as provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74) 
Sec. 13-25. - Application for permit. 
    Any person desiring to organize, stage or schedule any parade within the city shall file an application therefor on a form provided by the clerk of the city. All applications for a Mardi Gras Parade shall be filed with the city by September first in the year prior to the scheduled parade date. 
    Mardi Gras parades are defined as a parades beginning the third Saturday preceding Mardi Gras and ending Mardi Gras evening. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74; Ord. No. 3644, § 1, 9-1-83) 
Sec. 13-26. - Approval by mayor and board of aldermen. 
    Upon receipt of proper application and supporting documents as required, the board of aldermen, after due consideration to the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of Kenner and the effect of the proposed parade upon the traffic interruption, police manpower requirements and cost of cleanup, etc., may issue a permit as requested, which said permit shall be conditioned upon applicant meeting all of the requirements of section 13-18 and section 13-30 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74) 
Sec. 13-27. - Corporate applicant. 
    If the applicant is an incorporated organization, pursuant to the corporate laws of the State of Louisiana, such applicant shall attach a copy of the certificate of incorporation to its application for permit and the permit shall be issued in the corporate name. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74) 
Sec. 13-28. - Noncorporate applicant. 
    If the applicant is an unincorporated association, group, or individual person, the permit shall issue in the name of the designated applicant, and only that designated applicant shall be afforded preferences for subsequent permits as provided in section 13-29 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74) 
Sec. 13-29. - Preference to renewal permits for annually reoccurring parades. 
    Corporations or individuals having applied for and received a permit for and actually staging a parade within the city during the previous Mardi Gras season shall, provided application therefor is made prior to September first, be given preference in the issuance of a permit and shall also be given preference to the same corresponding parade date in relationship to Mardi Gras as its last parade date. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74; Ord. No. 3644, § 2, 9-1-83) 
Sec. 13-30. - Requirements prior to issuance. 
    Prior to issuance of the permit for a parade, the applicant shall satisfy the following requirements: 
(a)  Obtain approval of the chief of police of the city of the proposed parade route insofar as said route pertains to city streets. 
(b)  Obtain the approval of the fire chief of the city of the proposed parade route insofar as said route pertains to city streets. 
(c)  Obtain approval from the state highway department for the proposed route as it relates to streets or boulevards and/or highways within the city and falling within the jurisdiction of the state highway department. 
(d)  Obtain approval from Louisiana Power and Light and/or any and all utility companies whose service lines and/or facilities may need special protection during the parade. 
(e)  Deposit with the clerk of the city prior to receipt of a parade permit, and at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the contemplated parade a certificate of liability insurance with limits of one hundred thousand dollars/five hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00/$500,000.00) for bodily injury and two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000.00) for property damage. On said policy, the city shall be named as an additional named insured relating to parade activities, and nonowned automobile exposure. Said certificate of insurance shall further contain the provision that the policy or policies of insurance may not be cancelled without giving the city, through the city clerk, a fifteen-day notice of cancellation. 
(f)  No permit shall be granted for a Mardi Gras Parade unless the organization meets the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  There shall be a minimum of twelve (12) floats having at least twelve (12) riders per float (excluding the king and queen floats). 
(2)  The krewe must consist of at least one hundred fifty (150) riding members. 
(3)  The parade must also have a minimum of ten (10) marching bands. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74; Ord. No. 3644, § 3, 9-1-83) 
Sec. 13-31. - Violations; false applications. 
    Whoever violates the provisions of section 13-24 through section 13-30, or who knowingly files a false application for a permit, shall be penalized as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 1632, 3-25-74) 
Sec. 13-32. - Irish-Italian Parade. 
    The Irish-Italian Parade Committee of Jefferson Parish is hereby authorized to conduct annually the Irish-Italian Parade on the first Sunday following St. Patrick's Day. The route for said parade is hereby established as follows: Starting at David Drive to Veterans Boulevard, Veterans Boulevard to Twenty-first Street, Twenty-first Street to Williams Boulevard, ending at Twenty-fifth Street. 
(Ord. No. 3750, § 1, 11-17-83) 
Secs. 13-33-13-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - UNIFORM SYSTEM FOR NUMBERING BUILDINGS AND NAMING STREETS 

Sec. 13-36. - Uniform system adopted. 
    For the purpose of clarifying and systematizing the present street naming pattern in the city and to implement the assignment of house and building numbers, a uniform street naming and property numbering plan for the city is hereby adopted as shown on the map titled "Kenner Property Numbering and Street Naming Plan", dated October 17, 1971, revised December 23, 1976, prepared by the department of planning of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1977, § 2, 1-24-77) 
Sec. 13-37. - Base lines established. 
(a)  Crestview Avenue and Minden Avenue running generally in a north-south direction from the Mississippi River to Interstate 10 Highway and the Western boundary line of University City Subdivision running generally in a north-south direction from Interstate 10 Highway to Lake Pontchartrain, is established as the east-west base line, dividing the city into eastern and western parts. 
(b)  All east-west streets west of this base line shall be considered west streets, and shall carry the prefix "west" as part of the official street name. 
(c)  All east-west streets east of this line shall be considered as east streets, however, the prefix "east" will not be a part of the official name. 
(d)  Each building west of the east-west base line as hereinabove defined and facing a street running in a westwardly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location west of said base streets. 
(e)  Each building east of the east-west base line as hereinabove defined and facing a street between this base line and the eastern boundary line of the city and running in an eastwardly direction shall carry a number indicating its location east of said base streets. 
(f)  In order to coordinate house numbering and street naming in the city with the Jefferson Parish Plan, east-west streets in the city east of the eastern boundary line of the city will carry city street names and city house numbers. 
    The north shore line of the Mississippi River running generally in an east-west direction is established as the north-south base line which marks the point of beginning for numbering of houses and buildings facing on streets running generally in a northwardly direction. 
(g)  Each building north of the Mississippi River north shore line and facing a street running in a northwardly direction shall carry a number and address indicating its location north of said base line. 
Sec. 13-38. - Treatment of irregular streets. 
    All buildings on irregular streets shall be numbered with numbers 1, 2, 3, 4, etc., beginning with No. 1 at the southwestern end of that street. Streets having cul-de-sacs at their end shall be numbered in the same manner. 
Sec. 13-39. - Method of building number assignment. 
(a)  The numbering of buildings on each street shall begin at the base line. All numbers shall be assigned on the basis of one number for each twenty (20) feet of frontage along the street. Grid lines, as shown on the property numbering map, indicate the point at which numbers will change from one hundred to the next higher hundred. All buildings on the south side of east-west streets and the west side of north-south streets shall bear odd numbers, and likewise all buildings on the north side of east-west streets and the east side of north-south streets shall bear even numbers. 
(b)  Where any building has more than one entrance serving separate occupants, a separate number shall be assigned to each entrance serving an occupant, even though both entrances may fall within the same increment. 
(c)  The building shall be assigned the number of the twenty (20) foot interval in which the main entrance of the building falls. In measuring the twenty (20) foot intervals of street frontage, if the main entrance of the building falls exactly upon the line which divides a twenty (20) foot interval from the next higher interval, either the number of the lower interval or the number of the next higher interval will be assigned to that entrance. 
(d)  A multiple family dwelling having only one main entrance shall be assigned only one number, and separate apartments in the building will carry a letter designation such as A, B, C, in addition to the number assigned to the main entrance of the building. 
Sec. 13-40. - Notification of change of address and installation of numbers. 
(a)  The mayor and board of aldermen of the city, shall make arrangements for the written notification of all occupants and owners of buildings not conforming with the street naming and property numbering provisions of this article. Within thirty (30) days after the receipt of such notice the owner, occupants, or agent of the building shall place or cause to be placed on each house or building controlled by him the number or numbers assigned under the uniform property numbering and street naming system as provided in this article. 
(b)  The cost of the address numbers shall be paid for by the property owner. Selection and purchase of address numbers shall be at the discretion of the property owner; provided, however, that numbers used shall not be less than four (4) inches in height for residential structures and not less than eight (8) inches in height for commercial structures. Numbers shall be made of a durable and clearly visible material. 
(c)  The numbers shall be conspicuously placed immediately above or on the side of the proper door on each building so that the number can be seen plainly from the street line. The numbers should be placed at such a location so that they will not be hidden at any time by obstructions, screen or storm doors, or shrubbery. Whenever any building is situated more than fifty (50) feet from the street line, house numbers shall be placed near the walk, driveway or common entrance to such building and upon a gate post, fence, tree, post, or other appropriate place so as to be easily discernible from the sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. 11,211, § 1, 12-15-16) 
Sec. 13-41. - Building inspector will determine building number. 
    It shall be the duty of the building inspector to inform any party applying therefor of the number or numbers belonging to or embraced within the limits of any said lot or property as provided in this article. In case of conflict as to the proper number to be assigned to any building, the said building inspector shall determine the number of such building. 
Sec. 13-42. - Continuance of system. 
    Whenever any house, building, or structure shall be erected or located in the city after the establishment of a uniform system of house and building numbering has been completed, in order to preserve the continuity and uniformity of numbers of the houses, buildings, and structures, it shall be the duty of the owner to procure the correct number or numbers as designated from the city building inspector for the said property and to immediately fasten the said number or numbers so assigned upon said building as provided by this article. No building permit shall be issued for any house, building, or structure until the owner has procured from the building inspector the official number of the premises. Final approval of any structure erected, repaired, altered, or modified after the effective date of this article shall be withheld by the city building inspector until permanent and proper numbers have been affixed to said structure. 
(Ord. No. 423, § VIII, 5-20-57) 
Sec. 13-43. - Naming of new streets. 
    Every subdivision plat submitted to the planning commission for their approval after the effective date of this article shall show the proper names of any and all streets and these street designations shall be approved by the planning commission before such new streets are officially named and dedicated. 
(Ord. No. 423, § IX, 5-20-57) 
Sec. 13-44. - Procedure for change of street name. 
(a)  Anyone desiring to change a street name in the City of Kenner shall submit to the department of planning the following information: 
(1)  A letter of transmittal briefly stating the reason that the name change is requested. 
(2)  An original and eleven (11) copies of the proposed ordinance to change the street name (sample ordinances may be obtained from the department of planning). 
(3)  A petition signed by at least fifty-one (51) percent of the owners of property fronting the subject street, expressing their approval of the proposed name change. 
(4)  A processing fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00), plus the actual cost of notifications provided for herein. 
(b)  Upon receipt of all information required above, the proposal will be placed on the agenda of the next available meeting of the planning and zoning commission. No case will be processed until all of the information required in subsection (a) has been received. 
(c)  The applicant and all owners of property fronting along the subject street shall be notified by certified mail as to the date, time and place of the meeting of the planning and zoning commission. Notice of the meeting shall additionally be published in the official journal once a week for three (3) different weeks prior to the meeting. 
(d)  In addition, written comments shall be requested from the city police department, the city fire department, the director of public works, and the city postmaster. 
(e)  Upon presentation of a proposal to the planning and zoning commission, the department of planning shall make a recommendation based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Whether the proposed street name conflicts with an existing street name either as a duplication or as a similar sounding name. 
(2)  Whether the current street name signifies any historical person, event or period which would require consideration of the preservation of such name. 
(f)  At the conclusion of its hearing, the planning and zoning commission shall recommend either approval or disapproval of the application, and shall forward the matter to the city council with its recommendations. 
(g)  Any City of Kenner elected official who desires a street name change shall be governed by the procedure set forth herein, with the exception of the payment of the processing fee and the costs of notification. 
(h)  As soon as practical after the adoption of an ordinance authorizing the change of a street name in the City of Kenner, the department of public works shall proceed to make all physical changes to street signs as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 7010, § 2 (Exh. B), 5-5-94) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7010, § 1(Exh. A) and § 2(Exh. B) adopted May 5, 1994, respectively repealed former § 13-44 and enacted a new § 13-44 derived from Ord. No. 423, adopted May 20, 1957; and Ord. No. 1612, adopted Feb. 11, 1974. 
Secs. 13-45-13-49. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET PAVING, SUBSURFACE DRAINAGE AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION 

Sec. 13-50. - Specifications. 
(a)  All streets and subsurface drainage in the city shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications outlined in this section. Permanent surface streets constructed in the City of Kenner shall be either Portland Cement concrete or asphaltic concrete in accordance with these specifications. Prior to roadway construction the developer will be required to submit contract drawings prepared by a Louisiana licensed engineer, for the director of public works review and approval. The contract drawings must show location, type, and dimensions of the prescribed work and must include layouts, profiles, cross sections and other details necessary for review and construction. Permanent street construction adjacent to drainage canals shall be constructed based upon the standard requirements for paving structures and the recommendations of a site-specific soils report which addresses slope stability. A copy of the soils report shall be given to the director of public works. 
(1)  Portland Cement concrete streets shall be constructed with sand sub-base over which the concrete shall be placed. The concrete and joint specifications are as follows: 
a.  Concrete shall have a minimum compressive strength of 4,000 PSI @ 28 days. 
b.  The slump shall not exceed 5 inches. 
c.  The pavement shall not be opened to traffic until 14 days after concrete has been placed unless the director of public works approves otherwise. 
d.  Roadway thickness shall be designed at eight (8) inches, reinforced with 6 × 12-0/1 mesh. Acceptance requirements, however, shall be in accordance with the most recent edition of the Louisiana Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges. 
e.  Expansion joints shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of LDOTD Standard Plan CP-01 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Details. 
f.  Construction joints shall be constructed in accordance with the latest edition of LDOTD Standard Plan CP-01 Portland Cement Concrete Pavement Details. 
g.  A longitudinal metal keyed joint shall be located at the street centerline. 
(2)  Asphaltic concrete surface streets: Asphaltic concrete streets constructed in the City of Kenner shall meet the requirements of paragraphs (a)(2) through (m). 
Streets will be classified as either "residential" or "nonresidential" by the director of public works. 
a.  Residential streets: 
1.  Base material shall be composed of 61/2" crushed stone compacted to 98 percent of maximum dry density at optimum water content in accordance with ASTM D 1557. 
2.  Asphaltic concrete shall be 11/2" Type 1 wearing course, 21/2" Type 1 binder course. 
3.  Subbase thickness specified in paragraph (f) may be 12 inches. 
b.  Nonresidential streets: 
1.  Base material shall be composed of 6" thick crushed stone compacted to 98 percent of maximum dry density at optimum water content in accordance with ASTM D 1557. 
2.  Asphaltic concrete shall be 11/2" Type 1 wearing course, 21/2" Type 1 binder course and 4" Type 5A base course. 
The following paragraphs shall apply to all surface streets constructed in the City of Kenner. 
(b)  Materials and construction specifications shall meet the minimum requirements of the latest edition and revisions of the Louisiana Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges, published by the State of Louisiana, Department of Transportation and Development, Office of Highways, except as modified by this section. 
(c)  Site preparation: The site shall be adequately drained to prevent the accumulation of water and shall be maintained during the entire course of construction. 
(d)  Subgrade preparation: The existing ground surface beneath new pavement areas shall be stripped of all vegetation, trees, stumps, loose topsoil, debris and any other deleterious materials. Any weak areas, stump holes, ditches and/or depressions within these areas shall be thoroughly cleaned out to the surface of firm undisturbed soil and backfilled with a select fill material as defined by DOTD designation: TR 423 Classes A-1-a, A-1-b, A-3, A-2-4, A-2-6, A-4 or A-6 having a maximum liquid limit of 35 and a maximum Plasticity Index of 15. 
(e)  Geotextile fabric: Woven geotextile fabric with the following minimum properties shall be placed on the subgrade without folds or wrinkles and in accordance with manufacturers' recommendations: 
Fabric Property Test Method Minimum 
Specifications Apparent Opening Size ASTM D4751-87 (U.S. Standard Sieve Size) 100<eos<30 Puncture Resistance ASTM D4833 115 lbs Mullen Burst ASTM D3786 600 psi Trapezoid Tear Strength ASTM D4533-85 110 lbs Grab Tensile/Elongation ASTM D4632-86 280 lbs/15% UV Resistance ASTM D4355-84 (% required after 500 hours) 70% Laps shall be as recommended by the manufacturer but in no case shall be less than 24".  
(f)  Subbase shall be structural fill locally available, hydraulically dredged river sand. Materials shall be non-plastic, free of roots, clay lumps and any other deleterious materials with no more than 10 percent weight passing a U.S. Standard No. 200 sieve. The subbase sand should be placed in thin lifts (not exceeding 12 inches loose thickness) and each lift compacted to at least 98 percent of maximum dry density at optimum water content in accordance with ASTM D 1557 (95 percent for the bottom layer). 
    The subbase thickness shall be a minimum of 24 inches for concrete streets and 20 inches for asphaltic concrete streets. 
(g)  Curbs: Barrier or rollover concrete curbs shall be constructed for Portland Cement concrete or asphaltic concrete streets and shall be in accordance with the plans approved by the City of Kenner. 
(h)  Drainage: The following drainage requirements shall be met: 
(1)  Inlet spacing shall be in accordance with Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development Hydraulics Manual, latest edition, and shall be approved by the director of public works. Inlets shall be installed at a maximum spacing of 200 feet on center. 
(2)  One 12-inch diameter, P.V.C. pipe shall be installed on the opposite side of street from main storm drainage line using the same slope as the main line and shall be connected into the drain inlets. 
(3)  The drain pipe under the street shall be placed on a foundation consisting of two 2 × 12 boards parallel with the pipe and one 2 × 12 board spaced at 2 feet on center perpendicular to the pipe with 12 inch minimum crushed stone base. 
(4)  The size and type of the drainage pipe and drain inlets shall be as per the latest editions of the Jefferson Parish Drainage Design Manual and the Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development Hydraulics Manual and shall be approved by the director of public works. 
(i)  Right-of-way width, grade and elevations: 
(1)  The minimum right-of-way for 26-foot two lane street shall be 50 feet. 
(2)  The minimum right-of-way for a 4-lane street with a 24-foot median shall be 100-feet. 
(3)  The minimum grade at the street center line shall be 0.3%. 
(4)  The minimum street elevation at the crown shall be 18 inches below the flood elevation established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) on its Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). A variance for lower street elevations may be permitted by the director of public works where existing developed areas dictate a lower minimum street elevation. 
(j)  Traffic signs, street signs and striping shall be designed and constructed in accordance with Kenner ordinances and the Louisiana Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices published by the Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development. All traffic signs and striping shall be provided by the developer and shall be in place prior to opening of the street. Signing and striping plans shall be reviewed and approved by the director of public works prior to street construction. 
(k)  Surcharge: A major portion of the City of Kenner consists of drained wetlands in which soil subsidence is a major characteristic. In order to minimize post-construction settlements of roadways constructed in drained wetlands, the city will require a preload-surcharge program. The director of public works will determine in what areas of Kenner a preload-surcharge program is required based on existing soil survey data and site specific conditions. 
    The objective of the preload-surcharge is to achieve 90 percent of the primary consolidation of the swamp marsh deposits. The preload-surcharge program will be based on a subsoil investigation report prepared by a geotechnical engineer approved by the director of public works. For projects with streets totaling less than five hundred (500) linear feet, the developer has the option of placing, for a period of six (6) months, a surcharge equivalent to two (2) times the final roadway section which shall include the initial fill, subbase, base and surface material. 
(l)  Notice-to-proceed: Before starting construction, the developer must receive written notice from the department of public works stating that the city is satisfied that the project plans and specifications conform to the City of Kenner Code of Ordinances and the developer has met all of the city's preliminary requirements. 
(m)  Acceptance of roadway: Permanent roadways constructed with Portland Cement concrete or asphaltic concrete surface shall be accepted by the City of Kenner for maintenance upon completion. The condition of acceptance for maintenance will be based on the following requirements: 
(1)  Testing laboratory: Testing and inspection required by these specifications and the latest edition and revisions of the Louisiana Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges shall be performed by testing laboratories acceptable to the city and developer and the costs thereof shall be borne by the developer. 
(2)  Testing procedures: 
a.  Subbase: Subbase depth shall be checked at 1 point every 100 feet of roadway. Underthickness tolerance will be limited to minus 0.10 feet (11/4"). 
b.  Concrete and asphalt tests shall be in accordance with the latest edition and revisions of the Louisiana Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges. 
c.  Concrete thickness shall be checked by coring at 1 point as selected by the city inspector every 100 feet. Concrete not meeting the thickness requirements shall be removed. 
d.  Concrete test cylinders: Four (4) cylinders shall be required for each day's pour or each 100 cubic yards of concrete placed. If the tests indicate a cylinder compressive strength of less than 4000 psi, concrete cores shall be taken from where the cylinder was made and tested. If the core strength is less than 4,000 psi, the panel shall be removed and replaced. The panels which are adjacent to the removed panel shall be cored and the same procedure followed until strength requirements are met. 
(3)  As-built Drawings: The developer shall furnish as-built drawings of the roadway and associated work on a reproducible film. The as-builts, prepared by the street construction contractor, shall include elevations and utility inverts determined by a Louisiana licensed surveyor and shall be reviewed by the developer's engineer. 
(4)  Resident inspection: Prior to issuance of the notice-to-proceed, the developer shall deposit with the city a check for inspection fees. The amount of deposit will be 2.2% of the mutually agreed upon construction cost of the items to be inspected as specified on the plans and specifications approved by the city council. The items of work to be included in the construction cost are those pertaining to surcharge, sidewalks, roadways, drainage, sewerage, lighting and fire safety. The 2.2% fee does not include testing laboratory costs and survey verification which will be paid directly by the developer. The deposit will be adjusted to include major changes in the work prior to the city accepting the streets for maintenance. 
(n)  Temporary roads constructed on unimproved streets or driveways shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  A permit shall be obtained from the department of public works. The permit shall be for a two-year period which may be renewed upon reapplication. 
(2)  The permit fee will be $100.00 for every 300 linear feet of roadway or portion thereof. 
(3)  The roads shall be maintained by permittee throughout the permit period. Failure to maintain the roadway may result in revocation of the permit. 
(4)  No building permit shall be issued for a lot fronting the temporary road. 
(5)  Temporary roads shall be equipped with proper traffic signs as approved by the director of public works. 
(6)  Traffic will be permitted only on approval from the director of public works. 
(7)  Temporary roads shall be constructed of 21/2" asphaltic concrete on an 81/2" base course. 
(8)  Drainage: Grassed swales with approved erosion control measures shall be constructed to drain the road. 
(9)  Elevation shall be as per the provisions of paragraph (i) of this section. 
(10)  Temporary roadway width shall be a minimum of 22' with 3' shoulders on both sides of the road (28' total width). 
(11)  Temporary roadway cross slope shall be 0.025 foot per foot for the roadway and shoulders. Side slopes shall be 2' horizontal to 1' vertical, maximum. 
(o)  Utilities: All public and private utilities including cable television, telephone and electrical services shall be installed in accordance with Chapter 50, electrical rules and regulations as outlined in the building code of the City of Kenner, unless superseded by other city ordinances or electrical code standards as set by the National Electrical Code and/or the governing authority of the City of Kenner with the exception that the wording "or rear line overhead" shall be omitted. A variance may be permitted by the director of public works where existing overhead utilities are present. 
(1)  Street lights shall be constructed in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical Code, the electrical rules and regulations of the building code of the City of Kenner and the following specific requirements for residential streets: 
a.  Street light fixtures shall be Carouse Hinds RMA15-SN4-22-L5, 150 watt, HPS, 240 volt 5% with Fisher Pierce Series 6660 photo cell, or approved equal. 
b.  Street light standards shall be eighteen foot (18') P&K tapered spun aluminum street light standard with six foot (6') arm and twenty foot (20') mounting height, or approved equal. 
c.  All wiring and foundations shall be in accordance with Chapter 50, electrical rules and regulations as outlined in the building code of the City of Kenner, unless superseded by other city ordinances or electrical code standards as set by the National Electrical Code and/or the governing authority of the City of Kenner. Any variance to the aforesaid paragraph may only be allowed with the approval of the chief of the office of inspections and code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 6493, § 2, 9-20-90; Ord. No. 6992, §§ 1, 2, 3-17-94; Ord. No. 7146, § 1, 1-5-95) 
Sec. 13-51. - Sidewalk specifications. 
    All sidewalks in the City of Kenner shall be constructed in accordance with the standard specifications listed below: 
(1)  Concrete: 
(a)  2,500 psi @ 28 days. 
(b)  Slump shall not exceed 5 inches. 
(c)  Thickness shall be minimum of 4 inches with number 10 gauge mesh (residential). 
(d)  Thickness shall be minimum of 6 inches with 6 × 12-0/1 mesh (commercial). 
(2)  Sand: 
(a)  Pumped river sand. 
(b)  Thickness shall be a minimum of six (6) inches. 
(c)  Compacted to ninety-seven (97) percent proctor density. 
(3)  Tests: 
(a)  Check sand depth at three (3) points. 
(4)  City inspector: 
(a)  City inspector will determine the location of points to be checked for thickness of the sand. 
(b)  Inspections must be called for when any concrete is being placed. City inspector's presence is not required on concrete being poured but may be required at city inspector's option. 
(5)  Minimum thickness: 
(a)  Sand base, if less than six (6) inches remove sand excavate to proper depth. 
(6)  Joints: 
(a)  A minimum one-half-inch redwood, asphalt or treated lumber expansion joint to be placed at four (4) feet on center. 
(b)  Scored joints are to be spaced at four (4) feet on center. 
(7)  Minimum width: 
(a)  Sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet. 
(b)  In the replacement of a existing three-foot sidewalk, it is permissible to replace it with the same width, depending on transition circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 3931, § 1, 4-19-84; Ord. No. 4189, § 1, 10-18-84; Ord. No. 5775, § 1, 10-16-86) 
Note -See the editor's note following section 13-52. 
Sec. 13-52. - Construction and repair of sidewalks. 
(a)  Definition; property owner to provide sidewalk; objections. 
(1)  A sidewalk is defined as a concrete pedestrian walkway in that portion of a street right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines. 
(2)  The owner of any property shall provide sidewalks along the street side/sides of his property. 
(3)  In the event any property owner has been notified by the director of the department of public works as provided in section 13-52(c) and has an objection to the construction of a sidewalk, he may appeal by filing a written objection in affidavit form to the board of zoning appeals for the City of Kenner, which board of zoning appeals shall determine whether or not the objection is valid. 
(4)  The decision of the board of zoning appeals for the City of Kenner regarding these objections shall be final. 
(5)  i.  Notwithstanding any provisions of this section to the contrary, the requirement of sidewalks between curb lines and property lines may be satisfied by the provision of sidewalks within common areas of a residential development provided all individual lots within the development have direct, contiguous access to such common areas and sidewalks constructed therein. 
ii.  A sidewalk constructed in such common areas must also be directly accessible to a public right-of-way from at least one (1) location within the development, and shall additionally provide for handicap accessibility throughout. 
iii.  Any individual lots which do not have direct, contiguous access to a common area within the development shall be required to provide sidewalks in accordance with subparagraph (1) above. 
iv.  Any sidewalk constructed within a common area as authorized by this subparagraph (5) shall be constructed in full compliance with the provisions of section 13-51 and shall be owned and maintained in perpetuity by the owner(s) of the common areas on which the sidewalk is located. 
(b)  Specifications. 
(1)  All sidewalks shall be constructed of Portland cement concrete which shall have a compressive strength of three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch in twenty-eight (28) days. All sidewalks constructed for residential dwellings shall have a minimum thickness of five (5) inches and all sidewalks constructed for commercial buildings shall have a minimum thickness of six (6) inches. 
(2)  All sidewalks shall have a minimum width of four (4) feet and shall be constructed within the street right-of-way at a distance of one (1) foot from the property line or, in cases where a servitude exists adjacent to the property line, it may be required to place the sidewalk within said servitude one (1) foot offset from the servitude line. 
(3)  Sidewalk shall be scored to a depth of one-quarter (1/4) inch at four-foot intervals and expansion joints placed at maximum intervals of twenty (20) feet. All corners shall be formed by expansion joints. Expansion joints shall be constructed of one-half (1/2) inch thick premolded expansion material. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to construct any sidewalk on the property of the city until the alignment and elevation thereof has been established by the department of public works. 
(5)  All sidewalks constructed on public property within the city must comply with the specifications provided herein, particularly Ordinance Number 3931, section 13-51 of the City Code. 
(c)  Construction and repair of sidewalk; notice to property owner; assessment of cost when city completes work. 
(1)  The director of the department of public works shall have the authority and is directed to construct or repair sidewalks within the unincorporated areas of the city and, in cases where sidewalks need to be constructed or repaired under the provisions of this section, the director shall notify the owner of record of the adjacent property, or his agent, in writing by certified or registered mail, that it is necessary for the said property owner to construct a sidewalk. 
(2)  Such written notice shall contain an estimated cost of the work to be done and shall give the owner sixty (60) days in which to complete the construction or repair of the sidewalk at his own expense. Said notice shall also contain a notice to the property owner of his right to object to the construction of said sidewalk, provided such objection is filed in written affidavit form, duly notarized, with the board of zoning appeals for the city, within thirty (30) days of the date that the notice is mailed. 
(3)  Should the property owner have no residence in the city, or if the director of the department of public works is unable to locate the owner of the property or if the property owner has no agent or representative upon whom said notice may be served, the director shall cause notice to be published three (3) times within a thirty-day period in the official journal of the city, which notice shall adequately describe the property affected and shall describe the extent, character and cause of the work to be done. In this event, the property owner shall have thirty (30) days from the date of the last publication to file his objection in affidavit form, duly notarized, with the board of zoning appeals for the City of Kenner. 
(4)  Should the property owner refuse to construct or repair the sidewalk as specified in the written notice within the sixty-day period commencing from the date of mailing of the said notice, and should there be no written objection as provided for in this section, the city may proceed to have the work done by its employees or an independent contractor any may charge against the property involved the actual cost of the work plus accrued legal interest, in accordance with Article 2924 of the Louisiana Civil Code, from the date of completion of said work. 
(d)  Local and special assessments on property owners refusing to pay cost of construction or repair; collection. 
(1)  The city may adopt an ordinance levying a local or special assessment against the property and its owner in such cases where the property owner shall refuse to pay the cost of construction or repair. 
(2)  A certified copy of the local or special assessment ordinance shall be filed with the clerk of court in and for the Parish of Jefferson, who shall record same in the mortgage records of the parish and said ordinance, when so filed and recorded, shall operate as a lien and privilege shall rank from the date of filing in the mortgage records and shall prime all other claims, mortgages and liens except taxes and/or prior recorded special assessment liens. 
(3)  The amounts assessed in the said local and special assessment ordinance may be amortized and collected by the city in such manner as the city council may hereinafter provide, or the amounts so assessed may be placed on the assessment rolls of the city and in such case, shall be included in and from part of the taxes due by said property owner and shall be collected by the city in the same manner and at the same time as ad valorem taxes are collected by the city. 
(4)  The property owner may, upon written request, have the construction cost divided into five (5) equal payments of one-fifth ( 1/5 ) each, payable over a five-year period with legal interest, in accordance with Article 2924 of the Louisiana Civil Code, from the actual date of completion. 
(Ord. No. 4188, §§ 1-4, 10-18-84; Ord. No. 8947, § 1, 11-20-03) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 4188, adopted Oct. 18, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code; hence inclusion of §§ 1-4 herein as § 13-52 was at the discretion of the editor. Where the provisions of this section and § 13-51 conflict, it is presumed the more recent provisions will prevail. 
Sec. 13-53. - Stormwater runoff detention. 
(a)  For all proposed developments, other than single-family residential, totaling ten thousand (10,000) square feet or more of land area (all phases), and all single-family residential developments totaling five (5) acres or more (all phases), the ten-year storm event post-development rate of runoff shall not exceed the ten-year storm event predevelopment rate of runoff. To insure that the postdevelopment rate of runoff does not exceed the predevelopment of runoff, on-site detention will be required in a manner approved by the city department of public works. The detention system cannot release water from the site at a rate greater than the pre-development rate of runoff. 
(b)  The design concepts for detention facilities and determination of storm runoff shall be consistent with sound hydrological and hydraulic engineering principles and practices, and the provisions of the Jefferson Parish "Storm Drainage Design Manual" dated 1981 and latest revisions and "Parking Lot Storm Runoff Detention Manual" prepared by the engineering division of the Jefferson Parish department of public works. 
(c)  The developer shall submit drainage design calculations including a drainage map along with engineering plans to the City of Kenner department of public works for approval by the director. The drainage map shall include a line diagram reflecting the existing drainage system from the outfall [end] of the proposed development to the receiving outfall canal, reflected in the applicable current drainage map. The developer shall also submit calculations showing the impacts to the detention facility from a 100-year storm event. 
(d)  Drainage calculations shall address all relevant information that would affect the hydraulics of the drainage system including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Drainage basin characteristics; 
(2)  System hydraulics; and 
(3)  Other external influences upstream and downstream from the drainage system that may impact or be impacted by the proposed system. Drainage calculations shall consist of: (1) ten-year pre-development flow; (2) ten-year post-development flow; (3) description of release facility and volume of release versus depth of storage in detention facility for ten-year and 100-year storm events; 
(4)  Maximum depth of water in the detention facility for design storms; 
(5)  Description of impact to the proposed facility resulting from increased depth of storage; and 
(6)  The description of how the system will be maintained. 
(e)  Unless unstable or highly erosive soil conditions indicate that a lower design velocity is desirable, or unless ditch paving at the outlet is provided, the maximum velocity for culvert design shall adhere to the criteria in the Jefferson Parish "Storm Drainage Design Manual" dated 1981 and latest revisions. 
(f)  The City of Kenner director of the department of public works shall review for approval each proposed development covered by this section prior to the issuance of permits to proceed with said development. 
(Ord. No. 8592, § 1, 12-20-01) 
Secs. 13-54-13-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEVELOPMENT OR CONSTRUCTION ON MEDIAN, EASEMENT, RIGHT-OF-WAY OR SERVITUDE UNDER JURISDICTION OR CONTROL OF CITY 

Sec. 13-61. - Development or construction without prior approval prohibited; filing of application; penalty for violation. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to develop or construct any structure of any nature whatsoever, whether public or private, on any median, easement, right-of-way or servitude under the jurisdiction or control of the City of Kenner without prior approval of the Kenner City Council. 
(b)  Persons wishing to develop or construct any structure as outlined in (a) hereof shall file an application with the regulatory section of the department of public works. The director of the department of public works shall, within a reasonable time prepare a resolution of council consideration and make a recommendation to council for the approval or disapproval of the application. The standards to be used by the director of the department of public works and by the city council shall include, but shall not be limited to considerations such as the proposals aesthetic appeal; the need for future use of the median, easement, right-of-way or servitude; safety; visibility; maintenance; and public or private needs to be served by the proposal. 
(c)  Whoever violates the terms of this article [Ordinance Number 5746] shall be penalized as provided in section 1-9 of the Kenner City Code of Ordinances and by any other appropriate injunctive or other civil relief that the city may deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 5746, § II, 8-21-86) 
Sec. 13-62. - Obstacles placed near fire hydrants prohibited; defacing hydrants. 
(a)  Definitions: The following definitions shall govern the use and interpretation of this section unless the content clearly indicates otherwise. 
(1)  Fire hydrant: A public utility device installed by the Jefferson Parish Department of Public Works/Water Department on public or private property, which provides a water supply for the local fire protection agency. 
(2)  Obstacles: Anything placed or allowed to remain adjacent to a fire hydrant, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, shrubs, trees, flowers, vines, mail boxes, vehicles, water craft, trailers, structures, or other movable or immovable objects. 
(b)  Prohibitions. Notwithstanding any other law to the contrary. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to place any obstacle within a five-foot radius of any fire hydrant measure from the top center of the fire hydrant, within the City of Kenner, except as herein provided. 
(2)  It shall further be unlawful for any person who owns or manages property adjoining the berm on which a fire hydrant may be located, or who owns the land on which a fire hydrant may be located, to knowingly allow any obstacles to remain within a five-foot radius of the fire hydrant. 
(3)  It shall further be unlawful for anyone to paint, alter the original appearance of, or deface in any manner any fire hydrant within the City of Kenner, except as provided herein. 
(4)  It shall further be unlawful for anyone to obstruct from view, or access from a public street, or emergency access, any fire hydrant. 
(c)  Exceptions. 
(1)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the normal maintenance procedure of the Jefferson Parish Department of Public Works/Water Department, the City of Kenner, or their designees, from performing normal maintenance or otherwise performing necessary repairs to any fire hydrant. 
(2)  Protective post(s) as deemed necessary by the Jefferson Parish Department of Public Works/Water Department and/or the Fire Department for the City of Kenner shall be exempt from the provisions of this section only if express written consent is granted by the Fire Chief of the City of Kenner and the design and location thereof meet the approval of said fire chief. The fire chief shall be notified prior to and after the post(s) are installed, and he or his designee shall inspect the site prior to and immediately after installation, to ensure proper compliance with this section [Ordinance No. 6601]. 
(3)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the planting and cultivation of small flowering plants (but not including shrubbery of any kind) within five (5) feet of fire hydrants, provided that such plants are (1) approved by the department of inspections and code enforcement, and (2) maintained at a height not exceeding the height of the hose connections on such hydrant. 
Notwithstanding the above, the City of Kenner, its agents and employees shall not be liable for any damages caused to such plants as a result of the use, maintenance of testing of such hydrant. 
(d)  Enforcement. 
(1)  The Police Department [of] the City of Kenner and/or the Inspection and Code Enforcement Department of the City of Kenner shall have authority to enforcement [of] this section [Ordinance No. 6601]. 
(2)  Anyone who violates this section shall be penalized as provided in section 1-9 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 6601, § 1, 5-16-91) 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 8. 
Secs. 13-63-13-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SMOKING IN CITY OWNED BUILDINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 5843, § 1, adopted April 2, 1987, amended this chapter by the addition of Art. V, §§ 13-60-13-63; however, inasmuch as Ord. No. 5746, adopted Aug. 21, 1986 had previously enacted an Art. V, § 13-61, the provisions of Ord. No. 5843 have been included herein at the discretion of the editor as Art. VI, §§ 13-70-13-73. 

Sec. 13-70. - Smoking regulation-Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall govern the use and interpretation of this article unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. 
    Smoking or smoke: Inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying any lighted smoking equipment for tobacco or any other weed or plant. 
(Ord. No. 5843, § I, 4-2-87) 
Sec. 13-71. - Prohibition on smoking. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke at the following locations: 
(1)  Any building that is owned, operated, or managed by the City of Kenner; 
(2)  Any outdoor area proximate to a City of Kenner-owned, operated, or managed building that is within twenty-five (25) feet of an entrance or exit of the building; 
(3}  Any outdoor sports arena, stadium, recreational area containing playground equipment or sports field(s) or court(s), or amphitheater that is owned, operated, or managed by the City of Kenner. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in Section 1-9 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 5843, § I, 4-2-87; Ord. No. 10,272, § 1, 8-4-11; Ord. No. 10,871, § 2, 2-19-15; Ord. No. 10,888, § 1, 4-23-15) 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 10,888, adopted April 23, 2015, changed the title of § 13-71 from "Prohibition on smoking in city owned buildings; designated smoking areas at outdoor playgrounds and recreational facilities; mutilation of signs" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 13-72. - Signs and announcements required. 
    The fire department shall post or cause to be posted and prominently displayed, and shall maintain "NO SMOKING" signs in conspicuous locations within the above describe "NO SMOKING" areas. All such signs shall clearly and conspicuously recite the phrase "NO SMOKING" or use the international no smoking symbol. The signs shall be posted not less than five (5) feet, nor more than eight (8) feet, above floor level and shall be of sufficient number and location to cause the message to be clearly visible, legible, and readable. 
(Ord. No. 5843, § I, 4-2-87) 
Sec. 13-73. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment in accordance with section 1-9 of the Kenner Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 5843, § I, 4-2-87) 
Secs. 13-74-13-79. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - BILLBOARDS, SIGNS, GUARD RAILS, MARKERS, POSTS, ETC. 

Sec. 13-80. - Billboards, signs, guard rails, markers, posts, etc., on public property restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, or cause the construction of any billboard, sign, or any other devices which will prevent or obstruct the public view at approaches of any railroad crossings or main tracks of any railroad. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, maintain, or cause to be erected or maintained upon any highway, right-of-way, public building, servitude, or street, including any part of the street between the curb or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, any warning or direction sign, marker, signal light, or any sign bearing any commercial advertising, billboard, sign, guard rail, post, chain fence, or similar structure, except in accordance with section 13-61. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, wave any signs or wear billboards on any public streets, servitude, or right-of-way, including any part of the street between the curb and lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line and medians. 
(d)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be penalized as provided in section 1-9. 
(e)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, any sign placed on any median, easement, right-of-way or servitude under the jurisdiction or control of the city in violation of the foregoing subsection (b) shall be removed by the regulatory section of the department of inspections and code enforcement after due notice to the benefactor of such placement. This notice to remove shall be done as follows: 
(1)  All political candidates qualifying for elections which take place within the city shall be sent a certified letter immediately upon qualification notifying the candidate of this regulation. Any such political sign placed in violation of this section shall immediately be removed by the department of code enforcement and a second letter shall be sent to such candidate. The sign shall be held in the city storage area for fifteen (15) days after which time it will be destroyed. 
(2)  Persons applying for permits for garage sale within the city shall be given a letter immediately upon application notifying the person of this regulation. Any sign advertising the garage sale placed in violation of this section shall immediately be removed by the department of code enforcement and a second letter shall be sent to such person. The sign shall be held in the city storage area for fifteen (15) days after which time it will be destroyed. 
(3)  All other signs placed in violation of this act shall receive notice by certified letter to the benefactor notifying him that he has forty-eight (48) hours from the receipt of the notice to remove the placement. Upon expiration of this period, the signs shall be removed and stored in a city storage area for fifteen (15) days after which time it will be destroyed. For purposes of this section, benefactor shall mean the person that derives the primary benefit from having the sign placed for the public to view. 
(4)  Persons wishing to reclaim such signs from the city may do so within the fifteen-day period and must pay the city a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) per sign. 
(f)  Exceptions. Any church or nonprofit organization desiring to erect a sign on a neutral ground, median, easement, right-of-way or servitude under the jurisdiction or control of the city in such a manner and in such a location that it will not constitute a dangerous or hazardous condition (herein defined as a sign erected in such a manner and placed that it cannot block the clear, unobstructed view of motorists or pedestrians) may apply to the chief of police and the department of code enforcement for the city for permission to erect a sign at a specific location. Applications for permission must be made in writing and have the location for the signature of approval by the chief of police and the department of code enforcement that the sign will not constitute a dangerous and hazardous condition as defined herein. The application then will be presented to the council of the city for final approval. Upon a finding by the council that the erection of such a sign will not constitute a dangerous or hazardous condition, as defined herein above, and in agreement with the chief of police the council may issue a permit for the erection of the sign or signs at a specific location or at specific locations for a stated period of time. The church or nonprofit organization obtaining the permit shall remove the sign within the time stated in their permit, or sooner at the request of the regulatory department or be subjected to the provisions of subsection (e) above. 
(Ord. No. 7511, § 1(13-700), 8-15-96; Ord. No. 10,112, § 1, 6-17-10) 
Chapter 131/2 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license for transportation of passengers by railroad, § 10-69; occupational license for business of selling railroad tickets, § 10-78; occupational license for sales of magazines and confections on railroad trains, § 10-100. 
State Law reference- Railroads generally, R.S. 39:78 et seq. and 45:321 et seq. 

Sec. 131/2-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein, unless it shall be apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Safe and suitable state of repair: A proper road surface of crossings and approaches so as to permit safe and convenient vehicular traffic at the speed limit established for the street or avenue crossed by a railroad. 
    Notice: Delivery or attempted delivery during normal working hours, by mail or by hand, to the address provided to the director of public works of the City of Kenner as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 1, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-2. - Speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person having the supervision or control of any railroad, locomotive, or car or train of cars to run through, over or across the public avenues, streets, roads, or other public ways within the City of Kenner at a greater speed than: 
(a)  Ten (10) miles per hour in those instances where a notice of unsafe and unsuitable state of repair or a notice of excessive weed height has been given to a railroad, railway, or street railway company, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, continuing until such time that proper repairs or weed cutting has been accomplished and approved by the director of public works of the City of Kenner. 
(b)  Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in all other cases. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 2, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-3. - Obstruction of public crossings. 
    No railroad locomotive, car or train of cars, whether stopped or moving, shall obstruct or block any public avenues, streets, roads or other public ways within the corporate limits of the City of Kenner for a longer period than ten (10) minutes; provided however, the obstruction or blocking of any such avenue, streets, roads or other public ways for a longer period of time than ten (10) minutes due to contingencies and happenings beyond the control of the operator or any person responsible for the operation of the locomotive, car or train of cars, or anyone exercising supervisory powers or direct control over any such person, shall not constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 3, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-4. - Construction and repair of streets, bridges or culverts. 
(a)  In order that such will not adversely affect the present or future drainage of the City of Kenner, no construction or repair of any bridge or culvert over which railroad tracks are laid shall be performed prior to obtaining the approval of the plans for such construction or repairs by the director of public works, and such construction or repairs shall be done in conformity with said approved plans. 
(b)  All railroads, railways, and street railway companies whose tracks are laid on or across the public streets, and avenues of the City of Kenner, shall keep in safe and suitable state of repair for vehicular traffic, as defined herein, that portion of the street lying between the rails of the track of such railroad and railways, and for a distance of two (2) feet on the outside of each rail of the tracks used or operated by them, together with the necessary headers; and when the street is paved or overlaid, whether before or after the tracks are laid, they shall pave, repave, repair and keep in safe and suitable state of repair for vehicular traffic that portion of the public street lying between the rails of the tracks used or operated by them; if the ties of any track shall exceed for a greater distance than two (2) feet on the outside of the rails, the duty of obligation of the railroads or railways to pave, repave, repair and keep in safe and suitable state of repair, shall extend to the end of the ties; in addition the railroad or railways shall in all cases install and maintain the necessary headers to separate that portion of the public street to be paved, repaved, repaired and maintained by them from the other portions of the public street. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any railway, railroad, railroad corporation receiver or assignee thereof to suffer or permit its crossings over public streets, avenues and highways, and roads to fall into a state of unsafe and unsuitable repair. 
(d)  Should the owner or operator of a railway, railroad company, receiver, or assignee thereof permit a railroad street crossing to fall into an unsafe and unsuitable state of repair, as defined herein, the director of public works of the City of Kenner shall serve notice, as provided herein, upon said owner or operation that the railroad street crossing is not in a safe and suitable state of repair, whereupon: 
(1)  The speed limit over that particular crossing shall immediately, upon notice, be reduced to ten (10) miles per hour and shall so remain at ten (10) miles per hour until suitable repairs have been made and approved by the director of public works; and 
(2)  The owner or operator shall, within thirty (30) days of notice, complete repairs so as to render said crossing in a safe and suitable state of repair. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 4, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-5. - Maintenance and removal of weeds and grass on and along railroad and railway right-of-ways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any railroad, railway and street railway company whose tracks are laid in and through the City of Kenner to suffer or permit the growth of grass and weeds upon any railroad right-of-way property, at a height of more than fifteen (15) inches. 
(b)  Should the owner or operator of a railway, railroad company, receiver, or assignee thereof permit the growth of grass or weeds, on or along railroad right-of-way property within the City of Kenner, at a height in excess of fifteen (15) inches, the director of public works of the City of Kenner shall serve notice, as provided herein, upon said owner or operator that the weed or grass is at a height in excess of fifteen (15) inches, whereupon: 
(1)  The speed limit over that particular railroad or railway shall immediately, upon notice, be reduced to ten (10) miles per hour and shall so remain at ten (10) miles per hour until the weeds or grass have been cut and approved by the director of public works. 
(2)  The owner or operator shall, within ten (10) days of notice, cut weeds or grass to a height of less than fifteen (15) inches. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 5, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-6. - Placing railroad cars within fifty feet of street intersection restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad corporation, officer or employee thereof or receiver or assignee thereof to place or station, or cause to be placed or stationed, any freight tank, or gandola railroad car in excess of one hour, within fifty (50) feet of any street, intersecting railroad tracks within the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 6, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-7. - Requirement of address for notice. 
    All owners or operators of railroads, railways, and street railway companies whose tracks are laid in and through the City of Kenner shall, within five (5) days of written request, furnish the director of public works of the City of Kenner, the municipal address of its local or district office within the State of Louisiana designated by said owner or operator, as the proper office to receive notices, as provided for in this chapter, during normal working hours. Such designation shall remain effective and valid unless amended in writing by said owner or operator. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 7, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-8. - Civil and injunctive remedies. 
    The City of Kenner through its mayor is hereby authorized and empowered to bring injunctive proceedings or other civil proceedings in the name of and on behalf of the City of Kenner against any person, firm or corporation or officer, agent or employee thereof, to compel performance with this section or to enjoin any acts or practices which may violate the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 8, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-9. - Penalties. 
    Any person, firm or corporation, including any railroad company, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or to imprisonment, for not more than thirty (30) days, or both, at the discretion of the court having jurisdiction; and each day of a continuing violation shall constitute a separate and distinct violation; provided, however, that in case of a railroad or other corporation found violating the provisions of this chapter, any or all the employees of such railroad or other corporation responsible for such violation shall be deemed guilty of the violation of this chapter. This penalty is in addition to civil and injunctive remedies afforded the City of Kenner herein. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 9, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-10. - Severability clause. 
    If any section or part of this chapter be for any reason held unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter, and such remaining portions shall be and remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1891, § 10, 8-9-76) 
Sec. 131/2-11. - Notification of derailment required. 
    All railroads are required to immediately notify the City of Kenner Fire Department of any derailment of any of their train engines and/or train cars within the corporate limits of the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 2395, § 1, 9-25-78) 
Sec. 131/2-12. - Report of probable cause; contents. 
    All railroads are required to submit, to the mayor of the City of Kenner, within ten (10) calendar days after a derailment, a report containing the following information: Date; time; place; number of cars; contents of cars; position in the train or cut; length of cars; speed; direction of train movement; probable cause or cause; remedy; other comments as necessary for a full report. 
(Ord. No. 2395, § 1, 9-25-78) 
Chapter 15 - TRAFFIC AND MOTOR VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, § 13-1 et seq.; railroads, Ch. 131/2; vehicles for hire, § 16-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - State laws adopted. 
    Pursuant to the authority conferred by R.S. 32:41C, the city hereby adopts the provisions of R.S. Title 32, Chapter 1, being R.S. 32:1 et seq., as such provisions currently exist or may be amended in the future, and all regulations of the state department of highways and director of public safety adopted pursuant thereto with respect to streets within the city, except such as are in conflict or inconsistent with this chapter or the other ordinances of the city and except such as by their nature are inapplicable to municipalities. Such provisions shall be referred to or cited as sections of the Highway Regulatory Act or as sections of the Revised Statutes. 
(Ord. No. 9089, § 1, 10-21-04) 
Sec. 15-2. - Deposit of license in lieu of security upon arrest; receipt issued; disposal of license for failure to appear. 
(a)  Whenever any person lawfully possessed of a chauffeur's or operator's license theretofore issued to him by the department of public safety shall be arrested and charged with a violation of any municipal ordinance regulating traffic in the city, he shall have the option of depositing his chauffeur's or operator's license with the police officer or court in lieu of any other security required for his appearance in municipal court in answer to any such charge before said court. 
(b)  Whenever any person as described in subsection (a) hereof deposits his chauffeur's or operator's license as provided in said subsection, either the officer or the court demanding bail as hereinabove described, shall issue said person a receipt for said license upon a form approved or provided by the department of public safety, and thereafter said person shall be permitted to operate a motor vehicle upon the public highways of this state during the pendency of the case in which the license was deposited. 
(c)  The clerk of the city shall immediately forward to the department of public safety the license of a driver deposited in lieu of bail if the driver fails to appear in answer to the charge filed against him. 
(Ord. No. 1241, §§ I-III, 9-28-70) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:411. 
Sec. 15-3. - All drivers must secure license. 
(a)  Every person operating a motor vehicle other than vehicles with registration of over thirty-five hundred (3500) pounds or operating a motor vehicle for transportation of persons or property for hire, before driving any such motor vehicle on any highway shall secure from the Department of Public Safety of the state, a driver's license. 
(b)  Every person who is employed by another for the principal purpose of driving a motor vehicle and every person who drives any motor vehicle that has a registration of over thirty-five hundred (3500) pounds, or drives a motor vehicle for the transportation of persons or property for hire, before driving any such motor vehicle on any highway shall secure from the department a chauffeur's license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on any highway unless he has been issued a license by the Department of Public Safety of the state, in accordance with the provisions of state law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:402. 
Secs. 15-4-15-17. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES GENERALLY 

Sec. 15-18. - Speed limit established; exceptions generally. 
    Except as otherwise provided for authorized emergency vehicles in section 15-19, it shall be unlawful for any person to run or operate any motor vehicle through or upon the streets of the city at a greater speed than twenty (20) miles per hour with the exceptions as stated in this section. When signs are posted indicating the speed limits as established in such exceptions, it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle in excess of such speed limits. The exceptions are as follows: 
(1)  The speed limits established in Title 32 of the Revised Statutes of Louisiana or as posted by the Louisiana State Highway Department are hereby adopted as the speed limits on state highways running through the city; 
(2)  The speed limit on Thirty-fifth Street from the eastern boundary of the City of Kenner to its western extremity at its intersection with Grand Lake Boulevard, shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour for automobiles and twenty-five (25) miles per hour for trucks in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds; 
(3)  The speed limits on Roosevelt Boulevard, from its intersection with Airline Highway to its intersection with Veterans Memorial Highway shall be thirty (30) miles per hour for automobiles and twenty (20) miles per hour for buses and trucks weighing in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds; 
(4)  The speed limits shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Nineteenth Street (sometimes known as West Metairie) from its easterly boundary of the city to the westerly boundary of said street where it intersects Williams Boulevard; 
(5)  The speed limits on Veterans Memorial Highway shall be forty (40) miles per hour, both eastbound and westbound, from the eastern boundary of the city to its intersection with Williams Boulevard; the speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour, both eastbound and westbound, from its intersection with Williams Boulevard to its intersection with Loyola Drive. The speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour, both eastbound and westbound, from its intersection with Loyola Drive to the western boundary of the city; 
In addition thereto, the speed limit between its intersection with Greenwood Street to its intersection with Sharon Street, both eastbound and westbound, shall be twenty (20) miles per hour during the hours of 6:15 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:15 p.m. to 4:00 p.m. Monday through Friday; 
(6)  It shall be unlawful to travel in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in school zones on streets abutting schools and for a distance of three hundred (300) feet on either side thereof during the following time limits: 
7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. 
11:45 a.m.-1:30 p.m. 
2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m. 
(7)  It shall be unlawful for any person operating any vehicle to travel in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour in any playground zone on streets abutting a playground and for a distance of three hundred (300) feet on either side thereof, when signs indicating such zone are posted; 
(8)  The speed limits shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour on Crofton Street in the vicinity of its intersection with the U.S. 61 Overpass, as controlled by speed limit signs; 
(9)  The speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Chateau Boulevard from West Esplanade to Sunset Boulevard (44th Street); 
(10)  The speed limit on Loyola Drive from its intersection with Veterans Memorial Boulevard to its intersection with West Esplanade shall be thirty (30) miles per hour for automobiles and twenty (20) miles per hour for trucks; 
The speed limit on East Loyola from its intersection with Loyola Drive to its intersection with West Esplanade shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour for automobiles and twenty (20) miles per hour for trucks; 
The speed limit on West Loyola from its intersection with Loyola Drive to its intersection with West Esplanade shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour for automobiles and twenty (20) miles per hour for trucks; 
(11)  The speed limit on Forty-first Street, from its intersection with Lake Trail Drive to its intersection with the Duncan Canal shall be thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(12)  The speed limit on Forty-fourth Street from its intersection with Williams Boulevard to its intersection with the Duncan Canal shall be thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(13)  The speed limit on Sunset Boulevard from its intersection with the Duncan Canal to its intersection with Woodlake Boulevard shall be thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(14)  The speed limit on Vintage Drive (formerly 41st Street) from its intersection with Duncan Canal to its intersection with East Loyola Drive shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour; 
(15)  The speed limit on Pine Lane between railroad and Airline Highway shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour; 
(16)  The speed limit on Power Boulevard from its intersection with West Esplanade north for approximately five hundred (500) feet shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour for automobiles; and, from a point approximately five hundred (500) feet north of West Esplanade to its intersection with Vintage, the speed limit shall be thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(17)  The speed limit on Thirty-second Street from its eastern intersection with Williams Boulevard to its western boundary with the Esplanade Shopping Mall's Ring Road shall be twenty-five (25) miles per hour; 
(18)  The speed limit shall be forty-five (45) miles per hour on the New Orleans International Airport limited access roadway from its intersection with Veterans Highway to the first traffic signal light at the entrance to the New Orleans International Airport; 
(19)  The speed limit on Loyola Drive, from its intersection with West Esplanade Avenue to its intersection with Vintage Avenue shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour for automobiles and twenty (20) miles per hour for trucks; 
(20)  The speed limit on Vintage Drive, from its intersection with West Loyola Drive to its intersection with East Loyola Drive shall be twenty (20) miles per hour; 
(21)  The speed limit on Power Boulevard both northbound and southbound lanes between West Esplanade and Vintage Drive shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(22)  The speed limit on levee rights-of-way within the City of Kenner shall be fifteen (15) miles per hour; 
(23)  The speed limit on Vintage Drive both eastbound and westbound lanes between Alabama Avenue and Power Boulevard shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(24)  The speed limit on Twenty-first Street from Roosevelt Boulevard to Williams Boulevard shall be thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(25)  The speed limit on Vintage Drive both eastbound and westbound lanes between West Loyola Drive and Grandlake Boulevard shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(26)  The speed limit on Loyola Drive both northbound and southbound lanes between Veterans Boulevard and East and West Loyola Drives shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour; 
(27)  The speed limit on Twenty-third Street both eastbound and westbound lanes between Williams Boulevard and Roosevelt Boulevard shall be twenty (20) miles per hour; 
(28)  The speed limit on Loyola Drive both northbound and southbound lanes between Vintage Drive and Sunset Boulevard shall be thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(29)  The speed limit on Williams Boulevard between Sunset Boulevard and a point three hundred ninety (390) feet south of the East Jefferson Levee District Bike Path, shall be thirty (30) miles per hour; 
(30)  The speed limit on Williams Boulevard from the East Jefferson Levee District Bike Path to a point three hundred ninety (390) feet south thereof shall be twenty (20) miles per hour; 
(31)  The speed limit on Vintage Drive from Cocos Plumosas Drive to the Duncan Canal shall be twenty (20) miles per hour for motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds; 
(32)  The speed limit on Power Boulevard from West Esplanade Avenue to Vintage Drive shall be twenty (20) miles per hour for motor vehicles with a gross vehicle weight in excess of six thousand (6,000) pounds; 
(33)  The speed limit shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour on Loyola Drive from Vintage Drive to Joe Yenni Boulevard; 
(34)  The speed limit on 23rd Street both eastbound and westbound between Maine Avenue and Williams Boulevard shall be thirty-five (35) miles per hour and twenty (20) miles per hour for Regional Transit Authority buses. 
(35)  The speed limit on Chateau Boulevard starting at the intersection with St. Julian Drive and continuing two hundred fifty (250) feet south of Tavel Drive shall be that of a school zone as established by this section. 
(Ord. No. 323, 6-24-54; Ord. No. 542, 5-11-69; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64; Ord. No. 1081, § 1, 8-12-68; Ord. No. 1086, 10-14-68; Ord. No. 1093, § 2, 11-11-68; Ord. No. 1468, 11-27-72; Ord. No. 1603, 1-14-74; Ord. No. 1744, 7-28-75; Ord. No. 1873, 6-28-76; Ord. No. 1968, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 2020, 3-28-77; Ord. No. 2285, 5-1-78; Ord. No. 2344, 7-17-78; Ord. No. 3633, § 1, 8-18-83; Ord. No. 5402, § 1, 5-16-85; Ord. No. 5456, § 1, 7-9-85; Ord. No. 5529, § 1, 9-19-85; Ord. No. 5562, § 1, 10-17-85; Ord. No. 5569, § 1, 10-17-85; Ord. No. 5632, § 5, 1-23-86; Ord. No. 5834, § 2, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 6272, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6420, § 1, 6-7-90; Ord. No. 6451, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6527, § 1, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6583, § 1, 3-21-91; Ord. No. 6663, § 1, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 6677, § 1, 10-3-91; Ord. No. 6687, § 1, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6694, § 1, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 6716, § 1, 1-23-92; Ord. No. 7293, § 1, 9-7-95; Ord. No. 7419, §§ 1, 2, 4-11-96; Ord. No. 8462, § 1, 5-17-01; Ord. No. 8463, § 1, 5-17-01; Ord. No. 8502, § 1, 8-2-01; Ord. No. 9155, § 1, 7-7-05; Ord. No. 9283, § 1, 4-20-06; Ord. No. 11,019, § 1, 12-3-15; Ord. No. 11,341, § 1, 10-19-17) 
Sec. 15-19. - Authorized emergency vehicles exempted from speed restrictions. 
    Authorized emergency vehicles have limited exemption from speed restrictions. The speed limitations set forth in section 15-18 shall not apply to vehicles when operated with due regard for safety under the direction of the police department, the marshal, or his deputies, and other peace officers in chase or apprehension of the violators of the law or persons charged with or suspected of any violation, nor the fire department or fire patrol vehicles when traveling in response to a fire alarm, nor to public or private hospital ambulances when traveling in emergencies. This exemption shall not protect the driver, owner or operator of such vehicles from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64) 
Sec. 15-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of Ord. No. 8077, adopted May 6, 1999, repealed § 15-20 which pertained to load limits and derived from Ord. No. 1093, adopted Nov. 11, 1968; and Ord. No. 1119, adopted April 14, 1969. See § 15-20.2 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 15-20.1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases when used in the following section shall have the following meanings: 
    Commercial or business vehicles means a vehicle which is used primarily in the conduct of a business, and has a logo, sign, lettering or other graphics in any way identifying such business, applied to the doors, hood, trunk, roof, or any other part of the vehicle; or exhibits a commercial, public or vehicle for hire license plate. 
    Trailer means every single vehicle without motor power, designed for carrying property wholly on its own structure, and drawn or designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle, and having two (2) or more load-carrying axles. 
    Truck means every motor-propelled single vehicle for the conveyance of property or things for hauling purposes, and having one (1) front steering axle and one (1) or more rear or load-carrying axles. 
    Truck-tractor means every motor vehicle designed and used primarily for drawing other vehicles or trailers and not "constructed as to carry a load other than part of the weight of the vehicle or trailer and load being drawn. 
(Ord. No. 8077, § 2, 5-6-99) 
Sec. 15-20.2. - Load limit established; exceptions; penalty. 
(a)  Except as provided hereinafter, no truck, trailer, truck-trailer or other motor vehicle whose combined weight of body and load exceeds five (5) tons (ten thousand (10,000) pounds) shall be operated on any street within the limits of the city which has been posted with a sign or signs stating "Trucks Prohibited," "No Truck Route," or the universal symbol indicating same, as designated in section 15-23(c) of this Code. 
(b)  The provision herein established shall not apply to fire, police and emergency vehicles, road repair equipment, commercial garbage, refuse or trash removal vehicles, public or private utility vehicles, or commercial passenger-carrying vehicles. 
(c)  The provision established herein shall not apply to any vehicle delivering materials or merchandise to, or picking up materials or merchandise from any resident of this city, or any commercial establishment located upon the "No Truck Route;" provided, however, that in making such deliveries or pick-ups, the vehicle operator shall stay on a route on which trucks are allowed until reaching the closest possible intersection to the destination location, and only from that closest intersection enter onto the street designated as a "No Truck Route." 
(d)  Any person who operates a motor vehicle in violation of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction by a court of competent jurisdiction be penalized as provided in section 1-9 of the Kenner Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 8077, § 3, 5-6-99) 
Sec. 15-21. - Locations for stop signs established; failure to obey signs prohibited. 
    The following locations are hereby established for stop signs in the city. When such signs are located as indicated, it shall be unlawful for any person driving a motor vehicle to fail to stop such vehicle as indicated by the sign before proceeding. Signs shall be located as follows: 
    Aberdeen at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Aberdeen at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Acadia at Mesa facing south. 
    Acadia at Woodlake facing north. 
    Acadia at Woodlake facing south. 
    Acron at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Acron at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Acron Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Acron Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Alabama Avenue at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Alabama Avenue at Forty-third Street facing west. 
    Alabama Avenue at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Alabama Avenue at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Alabama Avenue at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Alabama Crossing at Vintage Drive for southbound Alabama Avenue traffic, facing north. 
    Albany Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Albany Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Albany Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Albany Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Albany Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Albany Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Alton Street at Warren Street facing west. 
    Alton Street at Decatur Street facing east. 
    Amelie Avenue at Driftwood Drive on the north corner. 
    Anjou at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    Anjou Drive at Brittany facing east. 
    Anjou Drive at Brittany Drive facing west. 
    Anjou Drive at Normandy Drive facing west. 
    Antigua at Thirty-eighth Street facing south. 
    Antoine Wattigny Boulevard at Irish Bend Road facing north. 
    Antoine Wattigny Boulevard at West Esplanade facing south. 
    Appian Drive at Hilton Street facing north. 
    Appian Drive at Hilton Street facing south. 
    Appian Drive at Sessions Lane facing north. 
    Appian Drive at Vanderbilt Lane facing south. 
    Arbor Court at St. Julien facing south. 
    Arizona Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing north. 
    Arizona Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Arizona Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the southeast corner. 
    Arizona Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street facing north. 
    Arizona Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Arizona Avenue at Forty-third facing north. 
    Arizona Avenue at Forty-third facing south. 
    Arizona Avenue at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street on the north corner. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing north. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street facing north. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the north corner. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street facing east and west. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    Arkansas Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Asher Court at St. Julien facing south. 
    Athens Street at Bainbridge Street, facing west. 
    Athens Street at Marietta Street, facing east. 
    Auburn at Northwestern facing east. 
    Augusta Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Augusta Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Augusta Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing east. 
    Augusta Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing west. 
    Augusta Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Augusta Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Augusta Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Augusta Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Ausonne Drive at Magdelaine Drive facing east. 
    Arizona Avenue at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    Arizona Avenue at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    Bainbridge at Danville Street facing north. 
    Bainbridge at Veterans Boulevard facing south. 
    Bainbridge at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Bainbridge Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Bainbridge Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Baron and Glen Eagle facing south. 
    Baron and Presidential facing south. 
    Baron and Valmount facing south. 
    Baron Lane at Rancher Road facing west. 
    Baron Lane at Valmont Lane facing east. 
    Baron Lane at Valmont Lane facing west. 
    Baroni Drive at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Baylor Place and Crestview facing east. 
    Beaujolais Drive at Champaigne Drive facing north. 
    Beaujolais at St. Julien facing south. 
    Beaune Drive at Champaigne Drive facing north. 
    Beaune at St. Julien facing south. 
    Bertolino Drive at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Bertolino Drive at Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Bertolino Drive at Maggiore Drive facing west. 
    Bertolino Drive at Stoulig Drive facing east. 
    Bessemer at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Bessemer at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Billyday Avenue at Gelpi Avenue on the east corner. 
    Billyday Avenue at West Esplanade on the north corner. 
    Bimini at Gelpi Avenue facing west. 
    Bimini and Martinique facing east. 
    Bistineau Court at East Grandlake Boulevard facing west. 
    Bistineau Court at West Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Boimaire Avenue at Emile Avenue on the north corner. 
    Boimaire Avenue at Gelpi Avenue on the east corner. 
    Bordeaux Drive at Chablis Drive facing north and south. 
    Bordeaux at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    Bordeaux at St. Julien facing south. 
    Beouf Court at East Grandlake Boulevard facing west. 
    Beouf Court at West Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Brake Tag Station-Two (2) stop signs facing east. 
    Brittany Drive at Anjou Drive facing north. 
    Brittany Drive at Anjou Drive facing south. 
    Brittany at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    Brittany Drive at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Brittany (south side off) at Forty-first Street facing south. 
    Bruin Drive at Kansas Avenue facing east. 
    Bruin Drive at Kansas Avenue facing west. 
    Bruin Drive at Maine Avenue facing east. 
    Bruin Drive at Maine Avenue facing west. 
    Bruin Drive at Thirtieth Street (I-10 Service Road-West) facing in a southerly direction. 
    Bruin Street at Illinois Avenue all way. 
    Bruin Street at Indiana Avenue all way. 
    Bruin Street at Roosevelt Street all way. 
    Bruin Street at Texas all way. 
    Bundick Court at East LaFourche Court facing north. 
    Bundick Court at East LaFourche Court facing south. 
    Butler Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Calcasieu Court at East Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    California Avenue at Arkansas Avenue on the west corner. 
    California Avenue at Newport facing north. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north and south. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-second Street on the north corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-second Street on the south corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street on the north corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing south. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-fifth Street on the north corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-fifth Street on the south corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing north. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing south. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing north. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the north corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the south corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street facing east and west. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street on the north corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street on the south corner. 
    California Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street facing east and west. 
    California Avenue at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    California Avenue at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    California Avenue at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    California Avenue at Forty-second Street on the north corner. 
    California Avenue at Forty-second Street on the south corner. 
    California Avenue at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    California Avenue at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    California Avenue at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Cambridge Street at Kentucky Avenue facing east. 
    Cameron Drive at Presidential Drive facing east. 
    Canary Ansas Drive at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Canary Ansas Drive at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Caney Court at East LaFourche Court facing north. 
    Caney Court at East LaFourche Court facing south. 
    Carlsbad at McKinley facing north. 
    Carlsbad at Sequoia facing south. 
    Carmenere Drive at Echezeaux Drive facing east. 
    Carmenere Drive at Echezeaux Drive facing west. 
    Carmenere Drive at Traminer Drive facing west. 
    Carriage Place at Irish Bend Road facing west. 
    Carroll at Bainbridge facing west. 
    Carroll at Lexington facing east. 
    Carroll at Virginia facing west. 
    Castle Drive at its intersection with Cameron Court facing north. 
    Castle Drive at its intersection with Cameron Court facing south. 
    Castle Drive at Hilton Street facing north. 
    Castle Drive at Hilton Street facing south. 
    Castle Drive at Mayfair Lane, facing south. 
    Centanni Road at Kenner Avenue facing south. 
    Chablis at Bordeaux facing north. 
    Chablis at Lorie facing east. 
    Champaigne at Bordeaux facing east. 
    Champaigne Drive at Medoc Drive facing west. 
    Champaigne Drive at Beaujolias Drive facing east. 
    Champaigne Drive at Beaujolias Drive facing west. 
    Champaigne Drive at Montrachet Drive facing east. 
    Champaigne Drive at Montrachet Drive facing west. 
    Canary Ansas Drive at Palm Vista Drive facing south. 
    Charles Street at Sheryl Street facing south. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Holiday Court facing north. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Holiday Court facing south. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Forty-first Street facing south. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Saxony Lane/Holiday Court facing north. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Saxony Lane/Holiday Court facing south. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Sessions Lane facing north. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Sessions Lane facing south. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Village Road in the crossover facing east. 
    Chateau Boulevard at Village Road in the crossover facing west. 
    Chateau Boulevard at West Esplanade Avenue facing north. 
    Chateau Boulevard at West Esplanade Avenue facing south. 
    Chateau Boulevard, at the intersection of Chateau Boulevard and the private driveway fronting the Noveau Marc Retirement Residence facing west. 
    Chateau Latour at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    Chateau Mouton at Chateau St. Michel facing east. 
    Chateau Mouton at Chateau St. Michel facing west. 
    Chateau Talbot at Forty-first Street facing south. 
    Chateau Rothchild and Chateau Mouton at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    Cheval Place at Antoine Wattigny Boulevard facing west. 
    Cheval Place at Cannes Place facing east. 
    Clay Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Clay Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Clay Street at Kenner Avenue facing north. 
    Clay Street at the crossover at West Metairie Avenue facing south. 
    Clay Street at Twelfth Street facing north. 
    Clay Street at Twelfth Street facing south. 
    Clay Street at Sixteenth Street facing north. 
    Clay Street at Sixteenth Street facing south. 
    Clemson at Northwestern facing east. 
    Clemson Drive at Loyola Drive on the east corner. 
    Clemson Drive at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    Clemson Place at Trinity Drive facing east and west. 
    Cocodrie Court at East Grandlake Boulevard facing west. 
    Cocodrie Court at West Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Cocos Plumosas at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Cocos Plumosas at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Cocos Plumosas Drive at Palm Vista Drive facing south. 
    Cognac Drive at Champaigne Drive facing north. 
    Cognac Drive at Tavel Drive facing south. 
    Coleman at Kenner Avenue facing south. 
    Coleman Place at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Colorado Avenue at Twentieth Street facing south. 
    Colorado Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing south. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street, four-way stop at corner. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing north. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the north corner. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the south corner. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street facing north. 
    Colorado Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street facing south. 
    Colorado Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Colorado Avenue at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Colorado Avenue at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Colorado Avenue at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Commander and Baron Lane facing south. 
    Commander and Spartan Lane facing south. 
    Compromise Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Compromise Street at Corwin Street facing south. 
    Compromise Street at Twelfth Street facing north and south. 
    Compromise Street at Sixtieth Street facing north. 
    Compromise Street at Sixtieth Street facing south. 
    Compromise Street at Eighteenth Street on the north corner. 
    Compromise Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Connecticut Avenue at West Esplanade facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at its intersection with Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Connecticut Avenue at its intersection with Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Connecticut Avenue at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Connecticut Avenue at its intersection with Thirty-sixth Street facing north. 
    Continental and Baron facing east. 
    Continental Drive at Spartan Lane facing north. 
    Continental Drive at Spartan Lane facing south. 
    Continental Drive at Thirty-fifth Street facing south. 
    Continental Drive at Vanderbilt Lane facing north. 
    Continental Drive at Vanderbilt Lane facing south. 
    Continental Drive at its intersection with Baron Lane Street facing north. 
    Continental Drive at its intersection with Baron Lane Street facing south. 
    Coronado at Gelpi facing west. 
    Coronado at Martinique facing east. 
    Craig Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Craig Avenue at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Craig Avenue at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Craig Avenue at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Crofton Street on the east side of U.S. 61 Overpass facing south. 
    Crossing on Loyola Drive 200 feet north of Interstate 10 facing east. 
    Crossing on Loyola Drive 200 feet north of Interstate 10 facing west. 
    D'Arbonne Court at East Grandlake Boulevard facing west. 
    D'Arbonne Court at West Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Daniel Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Daniel Street at Fourth Street facing north. 
    Daniel Street at Fourth Street facing south. 
    Daniel Street at Fifth Street facing north and south. 
    Daniel Street at Ninth Street facing south. 
    Daniel Street at Tenth Street facing north. 
    Daniel Street at Tenth Street facing south. 
    Daniel Street at Eleventh Street facing north. 
    Daniel Street at Eleventh Street facing south. 
    Daniel Street at Twelfth Street facing north. 
    Daniel Street at Twelfth Street facing south. 
    Daniel Street at Thirteenth Street facing north. 
    Daniel Street at Thirteenth Street facing south. 
    Daniel Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Daniel Street at Toledano Street facing north and south. 
    Danville at Bainbridge facing west. 
    Danville at Lexington facing east. 
    Dartmouth Drive at Duke Drive facing north. 
    Dartmouth Drive at Duke Drive facing south. 
    Dartmouth Place at Emerson Drive facing north. 
    Dartmouth Place at Emerson Drive facing south. 
    Dartmouth Drive at Georgetown Drive facing north. 
    Dartmouth Drive at Georgetown Drive facing south. 
    Dauterive Court at Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Dauterive Court at Grandlake Boulevard facing west. 
    David Drive at Thirty-seventh Street, facing south. 
    David Drive at Thirty-ninth Street, facing south. 
    David Drive at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    David Drive at Forty-second Street on the north corner. 
    David Drive at Forty-second Street on the south corner. 
    David Drive at Forty-third Street on the north corner. 
    David Drive at Forty-third Street on the south corner. 
    David Drive at Forty-fourth Street on the north corner. 
    David Drive at Forty-fourth Street on the south corner. 
    David Drive at Forty-seventh Street facing south. 
    David Drive at eastbound Vintage Drive facing south. 
    David Drive at West Esplanade facing north. 
    Dawson at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Dawson at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Dawson at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Dawson Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Dawson Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Decatur Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Decatur Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Veterans Highway facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at West Esplanade facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the north corner. 
    Delaware Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the south corner. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the north corner. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street on the south corner. 
    Delaware Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Forty-first Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at its intersection with Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue at its intersection with Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Delaware Avenue at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Dolphin at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    Driftwood at Thirty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Driftwood at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Driftwood Boulevard and Gelpi facing east. 
    Driftwood Boulevard and Martinique facing east. 
    Driftwood Boulevard and Martinique facing west. 
    Driftwood Drive at Gelpi Avenue on the east corner. 
    Driftwood Drive at Gelpi Avenue on the west corner. 
    Driftwood Drive at West Esplanade on the north corner. 
    Driftwood Drive at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Driftwood Drive at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    DuJardin Drive at Trianon Drive facing west. 
    Dublin Street at Bainbridge Street, facing west. 
    Dublin Street at Marietta Street, facing west. 
    Duke and Crestview facing east. 
    Duncan Canal bridge at Thirtieth Street facing west. 
    Duncan Street at Fourth Street on the north corner. 
    Duncan Street at Fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Duncan Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Duncan Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Duncan Street at Thirty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Duncan Street at intersection with canal facing east. 
    Duncan Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Duke at Trinity facing east. 
    Duke at Trinity facing west. 
    East Access Road at Crofton Street facing north. 
    East Grandlake Boulevard at Calcasieu Court facing north and south. 
    East Grandlake Boulevard at D'Arbonne Court facing north. 
    East Grandlake Boulevard at D'Arbonne Court facing south. 
    East Grandlake Boulevard at Dauterive Court facing north. 
    East Grandlake Boulevard at Maurepas Lane facing south. 
    East Lafourche Court at North Lafourche Court facing south. 
    East of Lexington, by driveway, at Veterans Boulevard, facing north. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Colgate Place on the north corner. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at East Notre Dame Place facing north (two (2) signs). 
    East Louisiana State Drive at East Notre Dame Place facing south (two (2) signs). 
    East Louisiana State at East Oglethorpe facing north. 
    East Louisiana State at East Purdue facing north. 
    East Louisiana State at East Rice facing north. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Loyola Drive on the east corner. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Marquette Drive on the north corner. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Marquette facing north (two (2) signs). 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Marquette facing south (two (2) signs). 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Princeton on the north corner. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Stanford Place facing north. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Villanova Place facing north. 
    East Louisiana State Drive at Villanova Place facing south. 
    East Stanford and East Louisiana State Drive facing east. 
    East Loyola Drive and Stanford Place facing east. 
    East Loyola Drive and East Stanford Place facing east. 
    East Loyola Drive at East Rice Place facing south. 
    East Loyola Drive at West Esplanade facing north. 
    East Loyola Drive at West Esplanade facing south. 
    East Loyola Drive and Fortieth Street facing east. 
    East Loyola at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    East Loyola at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    East Rice at East Loyola Drive facing east. 
    East Temple Place at East Louisiana State Drive facing east. 
    East Temple at East Louisiana State Drive facing west. 
    East Temple and East Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Echezeaux Drive at Chambertin Drive facing north. 
    Echezeaux Drive at Chambertin Drive facing south. 
    Emile Avenue at Driftwood Drive on the west corner. 
    Erlanger Road at Forty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Erlanger Road at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Erlanger Road at Forty-fifth Street facing north. 
    Erlanger Road at Forty-fifth Street facing south. 
    Erlinger Drive at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Erlinger Drive at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Erlinger Drive at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Erlinger Drive at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Erlinger Road at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Ernest Street at Lisa Avenue on the west corner. 
    Everglades at Mesa facing south. 
    Everglades at Woodlake facing north. 
    Emerson and Furman Circle east and west on the eastern loop of the intersection. 
    Fairway Drive at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Fairway Street at Twelfth Street facing north. 
    Fairway Street at Twelfth Street facing south. 
    Fairway Street at Fifteenth Street facing north. 
    Fairway Street at Fifteenth Street facing south. 
    Fairway Street at its intersection with 17 th Street facing north. 
    Fairway Street at its intersection with 17 th Street facing south. 
    Farm at Kenner Avenue facing south. 
    Farm at Morey facing north. 
    Farrar Street at Jefferson Highway on the north corner. 
    Farrar Street at Jefferson on the south corner. 
    Farrar Street at Short Street facing north. 
    Fayette Street at Twenty-second Street facing north. 
    Fayette Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Felix Street at Corwin Street facing south. 
    Filmore Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Florida Avenue at Veterans Highway facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at West Esplanade facing north. 
    Florida Avenue at Twentieth Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Florida Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Florida Avenue at Twenty-second Street facing north. 
    Florida Avenue at Twenty-second Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue and Twenty-fifth Street facing north. 
    Florida Avenue and Twenty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Florida Avenue at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-third Street on the north corner. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-third Street on the south corner. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing north and south. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-sixth Street facing north and south. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-eighth Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street on the north corner. 
    Florida Avenue at Forty-second Street facing North. 
    Florida Avenue at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Florida Avenue at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Florida Avenue at Forty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Forstall Avenue at Lisa Avenue facing east. 
    Forstall Avenue at Lisa Avenue facing west. 
    Frontier at Pollock facing west. 
    Fulton at Bainbridge facing west. 
    Fulton at Lexington facing east. 
    Furman and Crestview facing west. 
    Furman at Tulane facing east. 
    Furman in the corner turn at Tulane facing east. 
    Furman Circle at Emerson facing north. 
    Furman Circle at Emerson facing south. 
    Furman Circle at its eastern corner facing south. 
    Furman Circle at its eastern corner facing west. 
    Furman Circle at its western corner facing south. 
    Furman Circle at its western corner facing east. 
    Furman Drive at Loyola Drive on the east corner. 
    Furman Drive at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    Furman Drive at Ole Miss Drive on the east corner. 
    Gadsden at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Gadsden at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Gadsden and Twenty-seventh Street-4-way stop. 
    Galan Drive at East Loyola Drive, facing north. 
    Galan Drive at Hooper Drive facing south. 
    Garden Street at Utah Avenue facing east. 
    Gay Lynn Drive at Janice Avenue facing east. 
    Gay Lynn Drive at Janice Avenue facing west. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Driftwood Drive on the north corner. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Driftwood Drive on the south corner. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Earnest Avenue facing north. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Earnest Avenue facing south. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Granada Drive facing north. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Granada Drive facing south. 
    Gelpi Avenue and Nassau facing east. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Nassau facing north. 
    Gelpi Avenue at Nassau facing south. 
    George Avenue at Louisiana Avenue facing north. 
    George Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    George Street at Railroad K.C.S., facing north. 
    Georgetown Drive at Dartmouth Place facing east and west. 
    Georgetown Drive at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    Georgetown Drive at Northwestern Drive facing east and west. 
    Georgetown Drive at Ole Miss Drive on the east corner. 
    Georgetown Drive at Trinity Drive facing east and west. 
    Georgetown Drive at Tulane Drive facing west. 
    Georgia Avenue at Fourth Street on the north corner. 
    Georgia Avenue at Fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Georgia Avenue at the I-10 Service Road facing east. 
    Georgia Avenue at Twentieth Street on the north corner. 
    Georgia Avenue at Twentieth Street on the south corner. 
    Georgia Avenue at Twenty-second Street facing north. 
    Georgia Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Georgia Avenue at Twenty-sixth Street facing north. 
    Georgia Avenue at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Georgia Avenue at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Georgia Avenue at Thirtieth Street facing south. 
    Georgia Avenue at Thirty-first Court on the east corner. 
    Georgia Avenue at Thirty-first Court on the north corner. 
    Georgia Avenue at Thirty-first Court on the south corner. 
    Georgia Avenue and Thirty-first Court facing south. 
    Georgia Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Georgia Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Georgia Avenue and Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Gerry Street at Tupelo facing west. 
    Glacier Street at McKinley Street facing north. 
    Glacier Street at Verde Street facing south. 
    Glen Eagle at Sessions Lane facing north. 
    Granada Drive at Martinque facing west. 
    Granada Drive at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
    Grandbay Court at Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Grandlake at North LaFourche Court facing north and south. 
    Grandlake at Caney Court facing north and south. 
    Grandlake Boulevard at its intersection with Bundick Court Street facing north. 
    Grandlake Boulevard at its intersection with Bundick Court Street facing south. 
    Grandlake Boulevard at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    Grandlake Boulevard at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    Grandlake Boulevard at North Catahoula Court facing north. 
    Grandlake Boulevard at North Catahoula Court facing south. 
    Greenwood Street at Twenty-second Street, facing south. 
    Greenwood Street at Twenty-second Street, facing north. 
    Greenwood Street at Twenty-third Street, facing north. 
    Greenwood Street at Twenty-third Street, facing south. 
    Guadalupe Street at McKinley Street facing north. 
    Guadalupe Street at Verde Street facing south. 
    Hamlet Street at Twenty-fourth Street, facing west. 
    Hans Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north. 
    Hans Avenue at Thirty-third Street on the north corner. 
    Hanson Place at Airline Highway facing south. 
    Hanson Place at Jefferson Highway on the north corner. 
    Hanson Place at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Hanson Place at Short Street on the south corner. 
    Helena Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Helena Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Helena Street at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Helena Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Hickman Street at Virginia Street facing west. 
    Hilton at Appian Drive facing east. 
    Hilton at Castle Drive facing west. 
    Hollandey Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Holly Heights Drive at Mayfair Lane facing north. 
    Holly Heights Drive at Mayfair Lane facing south. 
    Holly Heights Drive at Vanderbilt Lane facing north. 
    Holly Heights Drive at Vanderbilt Lane facing south. 
    Holly Heights at Thirty-fifth Street on the southeast corner. 
    Holy Cross Place at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    Holy Cross Place at Ole Miss Drive on the east corner. 
    Holy Cross Place at Trinity facing west. 
    Holy Cross Place at Tulane facing east. 
    Hooper Drive at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Houston at Tulane facing east. 
    Houston at West Louisiana State Drive facing west. 
    Hout Brion Drive at Pontet Drive facing south. 
    Hudson Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Hudson Street at Twelfth Street facing north. 
    Hudson Street at Twelfth Street facing south. 
    Hudson Street at Thirteen Street facing north. 
    Hudson Street at Thirteen Street facing south. 
    Hudson Street at Fifteenth Street facing north. 
    Hudson Street at Fifteenth Street facing south. 
    Hudson Street at Seventeenth Street facing north. 
    Hudson Street at Seventeenth Street facing south. 
    Huntsville at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-first Street facing north. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-second Street facing east and west. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing north. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing south. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-sixth Street on the north corner. 
    Idaho Avenue at Twenty-sixth Street on the south corner. 
    Idaho Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Idaho Avenue and Thirty-first Court facing south. 
    Idaho Avenue at Thirty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Idaho Avenue at Thirty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Idaho Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Idaho Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Idaho Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Idaho Avenue at its intersection with Thirty-second Street facing west. 
    Idaho Avenue at Veterans Highway facing south. 
    Idaho Street at Twentieth Street facing north. 
    Idaho Street at Twentieth Street facing south. 
    Idaho Avenue at Vintage Drive facing south. 
    Illinois Avenue at Veterans Boulevard facing north. 
    Illinois Avenue at Veterans Highway on the north corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at West Metairie Avenue on the south corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Illinois Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Illinois Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Illinois Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing north. 
    Illinois Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing south. 
    Illinois Avenue at Thirtieth Street on the north corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at Thirtieth Street facing south corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at Thirty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at Thirty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Illinois Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Illinois Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north and south. 
    Incarnate Word Drive at Loyola Drive on the east corner. 
    Incarnate Word Drive at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    Incarnate Word Drive at Ole Miss Drive on the east corner. 
    Incarnate Word Drive at Trinity facing east. 
    Incarnate Word Drive at Tulane facing east. 
    Indiana Avenue at West Metairie Avenue on the south corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing south. 
    Indiana Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing north. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirtieth Street on the north corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirtieth Street on the south corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Indiana Avenue at Tbirty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street on the north corner. 
    Indiana Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Iowa Avenue at Taffy facing north. 
    Iowa Avenue at Taffy facing south. 
    Iowa Avenue at West Metairie Avenue on the south corner. 
    Iowa Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Iowa Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing south. 
    Iowa Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Iowa Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the north corner 
    Iowa Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the south corner. 
    Iowa Avenue at Twenty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirtieth Street on the north corner. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirtieth Street on the south corner. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirtieth Street facing south. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing east. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing west. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Iowa Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Iowa Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Iowa at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Iowa Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing north and south. 
    Iowa Street at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Iowa Street at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Irene Avenue at Driftwood Drive on the north corner. 
    Irish Bend Road at Antoine Wattigny Boulevard facing east. 
    Irish Bend Road at Antoine Wattigny Boulevard facing west. 
    Irish Bend Road at North Bayou Road facing north. 
    Irish Bend Road at North Bayou Road facing south. 
    Jackson Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Jackson Street at the Kansas City Southern Railway Crossing facing north. 
    Jackson Street at the Kansas City Southern Railway Crossing facing south. 
    Jackson Street at Kenner Avenue on the east corner. 
    Jackson Street at Kenner Avenue on the west corner. 
    Jackson Street at Kenner Avenue facing north. 
    Janice Avenue at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Janice Avenue at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Janice Avenue at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Janice Drive at Forty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Janice Drive at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Jasper Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Jasper Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Jasper at Twenty-seventh Street facing east. 
    Jasper at Twenty-seventh Street facing west. 
    Jasper Street at Thirty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Jasper Street at Thirty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Jasper at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Johns Hopkins Drive at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    Johns Hopkins Drive at Marquette Drive facing east. 
    Johns Hopkins Drive at Marquette Drive facing west. 
    Johns Hopkins Drive at Northwestern facing west. 
    Johns Hopkins Drive at Ole Miss Drive on the east corner. 
    Johns Hopkins at Tulane facing east. 
    Judy Drive at Tupelo Street on the west corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at West Metairie Avenue on the south corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twentieth Street facing north. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twentieth Street facing south. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-first SLreet on the south corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-third Street on the north corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the north corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the south corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-fifth Avenue facing north. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Kansas Avenue at Twenty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Kansas Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Kansas Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing south. 
    Kansas Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Kansas Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Kansas Avenue at Thirty-second Avenue facing north. 
    Kansas Avenue at Thirty-second Avenue facing south. 
    Kansas Avenue at Thirty-third Street on the south corner. 
    Kansas Avenue at Thirty-seventh Street on the north corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Airline Highway (Kenner Overpass), facing east. 
    Kenner Avenue at Clay Street on the east corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Clay Street on the west corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Maria Street facing east. 
    Kenner Avenue at Maria Street facing west. 
    Kenner Avenue at Minor Street on the east corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Oxley Street on the west corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Taylor Street facing east. 
    Kenner Avenue at Taylor Street on the west corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Webster Street on the east corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Webster Street on the west corner. 
    Kenner Avenue at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Kentucky Avenue at West Metairie Avenue on the south corner. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twentieth Street, one facing south, one facing north. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-third Street on the north corner. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-third Street facing south. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing south, 
    Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the north corner. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Thirtieth Street, one facing east, one facing west. 
    Kentucky Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Kentucky Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing south. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Thirty-third Street on the south corner. 
    Kentucky Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Kilgore at Tulane facing east. 
    Kingston Street at Twenty-second Street, facing north. 
    Lake Trail Drive at West Esplanade facing north. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Thirty-seventh Street, one facing north, one facing south. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Thirty-ninth Street, one facing north, one facing south. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Forty-first Street, one facing south, one facing north. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Forty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Lake Trail Drive at Forty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Lancer Lane and Commander Lane facing west. 
    Lexington Street at Veterans Boulevard facing north. 
    Lexington Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Lexington Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Lexington Street at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Lexington Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Lexington Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Libra at Appian Drive facing west. 
    Libra at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    Lisa Avenue at Earnest Avenue facing north. 
    Lisa Avenue at Earnest Avenue facing south. 
    Lisa Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street facing north. 
    Lisa Avenue at Thirty-ninth Street facing south. 
    Lisa Drive at Granada Drive facing south. 
    Little Bayou Lane at Teche Drive facing west. 
    Loire at St. Julien facing north and south. 
    Loire Drive at its intersection with Chablis Drive facing north and south. 
    Loyola Avenue at its intersection with West Esplanade Avenue. 
    Loyola Drive turn around next to Interstate, north side, two (2) signs, one facing east and one facing west. 
    Loyola Drive (left side) at East Loyola Drive facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at 401 Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Loyola Drive at 469 Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Loyola Drive at Pellerin Drive facing north. 
    Loyola Drive at Pellerin Drive facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at Sunset Boulevard facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at Veterans Highway on the south corner. 
    Loyola Drive at Vintage Drive facing north. 
    Loyola Drive at Vintage Drive facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at West Esplanade Avenue facing north. 
    Loyola Drive at 301 West Loyola Drive facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at 3453 West Loyola Drive facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at 3577 West Loyola Drive facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at Thirty-fifth Street facing south. 
    Loyola Drive at Thirty-sixth Street facing south. 
    Lucaya Drive at Androus Avenue facing south. 
    McKinley Street at Yosemite Street facing west. 
    Macon at St. Julien facing north. 
    Macon Drive, at the intersection of Macon Drive and the private driveway fronting the Noveau Marc Retirement Residence facing east. 
    Madrid at Gelpi facing east. 
    Madrid at Lisa facing west. 
    Magdelaine Drive at Forty-first Street facing south. 
    Maine Avenue at Westgate Street on the south corner. 
    Maine Avenue at Twenty-first Street facing north. 
    Maine Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the north corner. 
    Maine Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street on the south corner. 
    Maine Avenue at Twenty-six Street facing south. 
    Maine Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Maine Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing south. 
    Maine Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Maine Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Maine Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Maine Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Maine Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north and south. 
    Maine Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing north and south. 
    Margad Drive at Hout Brion Drive facing west. 
    Maria Drive at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Maria Street at Fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Maria Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Maria Street at Ninth Street on the south corner. 
    Maria Street at Tenth Street facing north. 
    Marietta at Thirtieth Street north. 
    Marietta Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Marietta Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Martinique Avenue at Granada Drive facing north. 
    Martinique Avenue at Granada Drive facing south. 
    Martinique Avenue at Monterey facing south. 
    Maurepas Lane at East Grandlake Boulevard facing west. 
    Maurepas Lane at West Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Maryland Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Maryland Avenue and Thirtieth Street facing south. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing north. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Maryland Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Massachusetts Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Mayfair Lane at Castle Drive facing west. 
    Mayfair Lane at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    Mayfair Lane at Continental Drive facing east. 
    Mayfair Lane at Holly Heights Drive facing east. 
    Mayfair Lane at Holly Heights Drive facing west. 
    Mayfield Street at Utah Avenue facing east. 
    Medoc at Fortieth Street facing north. 
    Medoc Drive at Tavel Drive facing south. 
    Miami Place at Trinity facing west. 
    Miami at Tulane facing east. 
    Millsaps at Tulane facing east. 
    Minden Avenue at Bonner Street facing north. 
    Minden Avenue at Bonner Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Minor Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Minor Street at Toledano Street facing north. 
    Minor Street at Toledano Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Fourth Street on the south corner. 
    Minor Street at Fifth Street on the north corner. 
    Minor Street at Fifth Street facing north. 
    Minor Street at Fifth Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Ninth Street facing north. 
    Minor Street at Ninth Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Tenth Street facing north. 
    Minor Street at Tenth Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Eleventh Street facing north. 
    Minor Street at Eleventh Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Twelfth Street facing north. 
    Minor Street at Twelfth Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Thirteenth Street facing north. 
    Minor Street at Thirteenth Street facing south. 
    Minor Street at Fourteenth Street on the north corner. 
    Minor Street at Eighteenth Street facing north. 
    Moisant Drive at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Moisant Street at Twelfth Street facing north. 
    Moisant Street at Twelfth Street facing south. 
    Moisant Street at Sixteenth Street facing north. 
    Moisant Street at Sixteenth Street facing south. 
    Monte Carlo Drive at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Montego Drive at Androus Avenue facing south. 
    Monterey at Gelpi facing west. 
    Monterrey Avenue at Martinique Drive facing east. 
    Montrachet Drive at Champagne Drive facing north. 
    Montrachet at St. Julien facing south. 
    Moisant Drive at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Morey at Centanni Road facing east. 
    Morey Street at Coleman facing west. 
    Motor Vehicle Inspection Station exit at Twenty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Mouton Drive at entrance to Mouton drive facing south. 
    Nassau at Gelpi facing east. 
    Nassau at Lisa facing east. 
    Nassau Avenue at Martinique Avenue on the east corner. 
    Nassau and Martinique facing west. 
    Newport Place at California Avenue facing east. 
    Newport Place at California Avenue facing west. 
    Newport Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Newport Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Normandy Drive at Anjou Drive facing north. 
    Normandy Drive at Anjou Drive facing south. 
    Normandy Drive at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    North Bayou Road at Irish Bend Road facing east. 
    North Bayou Road at Irish Road facing west. 
    North Catahoula Court at Grandwood Boulevard facing east. 
    North Catahoula Court at Grandwood Boulevard facing west. 
    North Lafourche Court at East Lafourche Court facing west. 
    North St. Blase Drive at St. Blase Drive facing north. 
    North St. Blase Drive at St. Elizabeth Drive facing west. 
    Northwestern at Georgetown facing north. 
    Northwestern at Georgetown facing south. 
    Northwestern at Holy Cross facing north. 
    Northwestern at Holy Cross facing south. 
    Northwestern at Kilgore facing south. 
    Notre Dame Drive at East Louisiana State Drive on the west corner. 
    Notre Dame Drive at Loyola Drive on the east corner. 
    Notre Dame Drive at Loyola Drive on the west corner. 
    Notre Dame Drive at Ole Miss Drive on the east corner. 
    Notre Dame at Tulane facing east. 
    Notre Dame Drive at West Louisiana State Drive facing east. 
    Notre Dame Drive at West Louisiana State Drive facing west. 
    Notre Dame Drive at West Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Oakland at Leasan facing east. 
    Ohio Street at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Ohio Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Ohio Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Ole Miss Drive at East Notre Dame Place facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Ole Miss Drive at East Notre Dame Place facing south (two (2) signs). 
    Ole Miss Drive at East Oglethorpe facing south. 
    Ole Miss Drive at East Purdue facing south. 
    Ole Miss Drive at East Rice facing south. 
    Ole Miss Drive at East Temple Place facing north. 
    Ole Miss Drive at East Temple Place facing south. 
    Ole Miss Drive at Furman facing west. 
    Ole Miss Drive at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    Ole Miss Drive at Forty-first Street facing west. 
    Ole Miss Drive at Holy Cross Place facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Ole Miss Drive at Holy Cross Place facing south (two (2) signs). 
    Ole Miss Drive at John Hopkins Drive facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Ole Miss Drive at John Hopkins Drive facing south (two (2) signs). 
    Ole Miss Drive at Stanford Place facing south for northbound traffic only. 
    Olympic at Woodlake Boulevard facing north. 
    Oxley Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Oxley Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Oxley Street at Kenner Avenue on the south corner. 
    Oxley Street at Short Street facing south. 
    Oxley Street at Fifth Street facing north. 
    Oxley Street at Fifth Street facing south. 
    Oxley Street at Sixth Street on the south corner. 
    Oxley Street at Eleventh Street on the north corner. 
    Orleans Street at Hanson Place on the north corner. 
    Osborne Avenue at Emile Avenue on the north corner. 
    Osborne Avenue at Gelpi Avenue on the east corner. 
    Park Place at Farrar Street facing west. 
    Park Place at Hanson Place facing east. 
    Panama at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Panama at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Panama at Twenty-ninth Street facing south. 
    Pearl Avenue at Emile Avenue on the north corner. 
    Pearl Court at Emile facing north. 
    Pellerin Drive at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Pellerin Drive at Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Pellerin Drive at Maggiore Drive facing west. 
    Pellerin Drive at Stoulig Drive facing east. 
    Petrus Court at Magdelaine Drive facing east. 
    Phoenix Street at westbound Veterans Boulevard facing north. 
    Phoenix at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Piedmont Street at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Piedmont Street at Twenty-third Street facing south. 
    Piedmont at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Platt Drive at Seton Drive facing north and south. 
    Platt Drive at St. Elizabeth Drive facing north and south. 
    Platt Drive at Sunset Boulevard facing north and south. 
    Platt Street at Mckinley facing east. 
    Platt Street at Sequoia facing east. 
    Platt Street at Woodlake Boulevard facing north. 
    Platt Street at Woodlake Boulevard facing south. 
    Platt Street at Fortieth Street facing south. 
    Pollock Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Pommard at Champagne facing north. 
    Pommard at St. Julien facing south. 
    Pontet and Canet Drive at Magdelaine Drive facing southeast. 
    Power Boulevard at Vintage on the north corner. 
    Power Boulevard northbound at Vintage Drive facing south. 
    Power Boulevard southbound at eastbound Vintage Drive facing north. 
    Presidential at Cameron facing south. 
    Presidential at Sessions Lane facing north. 
    Presidential Drive at Cameron Court facing north. 
    Presidential Lane at Sessions Lane facing south. 
    Rancher Road at Baron Lane facing north. 
    Ranch Road at Baron Lane facing south. 
    Rancher Road at Sessions Lane facing north. 
    Ranier at Woodlake Boulevard facing north. 
    Ranson Drive at Continental facing east. 
    Rebecca Avenue at Gay Lynn Drive facing south. 
    Rebecca Avenue at Starl Street facing south. 
    Rebecca Boulevard at Forty-second and Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Rebecca Boulevard at Forty-second and Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Rebecca Drive at Sear Drive facing north. 
    Rhone at Chablis facing north. 
    Rhone at St. Julien facing north. 
    Richland Street at Twenty-second Street, facing north. 
    Richland Street at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Richland Street at Twenty-third Street facing south. 
    Richland at Twenty-seventh Street, facing north. 
    Road (no name) leading to Farrar at Farrar facing east. 
    Road connecting Thirtieth Street to Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard and Twenty-fifth Street four-way stop at corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Thirty-third Street four-way stop at corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Veterans Boulevard facing north. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Veterans Highway on the north corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at West Metairie Avenue on the north corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Twenty-first Street on the north corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Twenty-first Street on the south corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Twenty-fifth Street on the north corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard at Twenty-fifth Street on the south corner. 
    Roosevelt Boulevard north and south on the boulevard at its intersection with 34th Street connecting to Highway Park Playground. 
    Rothchild Drive at Talbot Drive facing east. 
    Rothchild and Mouton at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    Rue Calais at Rue Bayonne facing south. 
    Rue Calais at Rue Dijon facing north. 
    Rue Dijon at Montecarlo Drive facing east. 
    Rue LeMans at Rue Dijon facing north. 
    Rue LeMans at Rue Grenable facing west. 
    Rue St. Peter and Champs Elysee facing southbound. 
    Rutgers Drive East Louisiana State Drive on the west corner. 
    St. Ann Drive at St. Bridget facing north. 
    St. Ann Drive at St. Bridget facing south. 
    St. Ann Drive at St. Thomas Drive facing south. 
    St. Blase Drive at North St. Blase Drive facing east. 
    St. Blase Drive at St. John Drive facing north. 
    St. Bridget Drive at St. Ann Drive facing west. 
    St. Crist Drive at St. Blase Drive facing west. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive and Platt Drive facing west. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive at Seton Boulevard facing north. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive at Seton Boulevard facing south. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive and Seton Drive facing west. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive at its intersection with St. John Drive Street facing north. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive at its intersection with St. John Drive Street facing south. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive at St. Thomas Drive facing east. 
    St. Elizabeth Drive at St. Thomas Drive facing west. 
    St. John Drive at St. Blase Drive facing east and west. 
    St. John Drive at St. Elizabeth Drive facing west. 
    St. Julien Drive at Beaujolais Drive facing east. 
    St. Julien Drive at Beaujolais Drive facing west. 
    St. Julien Drive at Bordeaux Drive facing east and west. 
    St. Julien Drive at its intersection with Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    St. Julien at Lorie facing east. 
    St. Michael Drive at Mouton Drive facing south. 
    St. Thomas Drive at St. Elizabeth Drive facing west. 
    Sabine Court at East Grandlake Boulevard facing west. 
    Sabine Court at West Grandlake Boulevard facing east. 
    Salem Street at Twenty-second Street, facing north. 
    Salem Street at Twenty-third Street facing north. 
    Salem Street at Twenty-third Street, facing south. 
    Salem Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Salem Street at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Saxony Lane and Rancher Road facing south. 
    Schill at Thirty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Schill at Thirty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Schill at Thirty-ninth Street facing south. 
    Sear Drive at Janice facing east. 
    Sear Drive at Toby Lane facing west. 
    Sequoia Street at Guadalupe Street facing west. 
    Sessions Lane at Appian Drive facing west. 
    Sessions Lane at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    Sessions Lane at Glen Eagle Lane facing east. 
    Sessions Lane at Glen Eagle Lane facing west. 
    Sessions Lane at Presidential Drive facing east. 
    Sessions Lane at Presidential Drive facing west. 
    Seton Boulevard and Platt Drive facing west. 
    Sewerage Plant exit at Twenty-fourth Street facing south (2 signs). 
    Shamrops Drive at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Shamrops Drive at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Sharon Street at Twenty-fourth Street, facing north. 
    Shenandoah at Mesa facing south. 
    Shenandoah at Woodlake facing south. 
    Short Street at Coleman Place on the north corner. 
    Short Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Short Street at Filmore Street facing west. 
    South St. Ann Drive at St. Elizabeth Drive facing west. 
    Spartan Lane at Commander Lane facing east. 
    Spartan Lane at Commander Lane facing west. 
    Starl Street at Janice Avenue facing east. 
    Starl Street at Toby Lane facing west. 
    Stoulig Drive at Pellerin Drive facing north. 
    Stoulig Drive at Yenni Drive facing south. 
    Sugarmill Road at North Bayou Road facing north and south. 
    Sunset Boulevard and East Loyola Drive facing south. 
    Sunset Boulevard in back of Ole Miss Drive-Stop sign and post with cable. 
    Sunset Boulevard south side of Canal No. 7 at East Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Sussex Street at Sharron facing west. 
    Taffy Street and Hans Avenue on the east corner. 
    Taffy Street at Indiana Avenue on the west corner. 
    Taffy Street at Kentucky Avenue on the east corner. 
    Taffy Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Taffy at Kentucky Avenue facing west. 
    Talbot Drive at Mouton Drive facing north. 
    Tammy Street at Hans Avenue on the east corner. 
    Tammy Street at Indiana Avenue on the west corner. 
    Tammy Street at Kentucky Avenue on the east corner. 
    Tammy Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Tavel Drive at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    Tavel Drive at Cognac Drive facing east. 
    Tavel Drive at Cognac Drive facing west. 
    Tavel Drive at Medoc Drive facing east. 
    Tavel Drive at Medoc Drive facing west. 
    Tavel Drive at Montrachet Drive facing east. 
    Taylor Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Taylor Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Taylor Street at Twelfth Street facing north. 
    Taylor Street at Twelfth Street facing south. 
    Taylor Street at Thirteenth Street facing north. 
    Taylor Street at Thirteenth Street facing south. 
    Taylor Street at Fifteenth Street facing north. 
    Taylor Street at Fifteenth Street facing south. 
    Taylor Street at Seventeenth [Street] facing north. 
    Taylor Street at Seventeenth [Street] facing south. 
    Tennessee Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Tennessee Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Tennessee Street at Thirty-second Street facing north. 
    Tennessee Street at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Tennessee Avenue at Thirty-third Street on the south corner. 
    Tennessee Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Teton at Woodlake Boulevard facing north. 
    Texas Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Texas Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Texas Avenue at Thirty-second Street facing north and south. 
    Texas Avenue at Thirty-third Street facing south. 
    Texas Avenue at Thirty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Theresa Avenue at Osborne Avenue on the north corner. 
    Theresa Avenue at Osborne Avenue on the south corner. 
    Tifton Street at Twenty-fourth Street, facing north. 
    Tifton Street at Twenty-fourth Street, facing south. 
    Tifton at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Tifton at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Tifton Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Toby Drive at Forty-second Street facing north. 
    Toby Drive at Forty-second Street facing south. 
    Toby Drive at Gay Lynn Drive facing south. 
    Toby Lane at Forty-first Street facing north. 
    Toby Lane at Forty-third Street facing north. 
    Toby Lane at Forty-third Street facing south. 
    Traminer Drive at Carmenere Drive facing south. 
    Traminer Drive at Petit Berdot Drive facing north. 
    Traminer Drive at Petit Berdot Drive facing south. 
    Trianon Drive at DuJardin Drive facing east. 
    Trianon Drive at Forth-first Street facing south. 
    Trinidad Drive at Osborne Avenue on the south corner. 
    Trinidad at Thirty-fifth Street on the north corner. 
    Trinity at Auburn facing north. 
    Trinity at Georgetown facing north. 
    Tulane in the corner turn at Furman facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at Holy Cross Place facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at Holy Cross Place facing south. 
    Tulane Drive and Houston Place facing north and south. 
    Tulane Drive at John Hopkins Drive facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at John Hopkins Drive facing south. 
    Tulane Drive at Milsaps Place facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at Milsaps Place facing south. 
    Tulane Drive at Vintage Drive facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at Vintage Drive facing south. 
    Tulane Drive and West Notre Dame Place facing north and south. 
    Tulane Drive at West Oglethorpe Place facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at West Oglethorpe Place facing south. 
    Tulane Drive at West Perdue Place facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at West Perdue Place facing south. 
    Tulane Drive at West Rice Place facing north. 
    Tulane Drive at West Rice Place facing south. 
    Tupelo at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Tupelo at Twenty-seventh Street facing south. 
    Tupelo Street at Twenty-ninth Street on the north corner. 
    Tupelo Street at Twenty-ninth Street on the south corner. 
    Tupelo Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Tupelo Street at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Tupelo at Thirty-second Street facing south. 
    Turnaround in back of No. 3 Fire Station at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Turnaround in back of No. 3 Fire Station at Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Turtle Bayou Drive at its intersection with Little Bayou Lane facing north. 
    Turtle Bayou Drive at its intersection with Little Bayou Lane facing south. 
    Tyler Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Tyler Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing south. 
    Tyler Street at West Union Street facing north. 
    Tyler Street at West Union Street facing south. 
    Utah Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Utah Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Valmont at Sessions Lane facing north. 
    Vanderbilt Lane at Appian Drive facing west. 
    Vanderbilt Lane at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    Vanderbilt Lane at Holly Heights Drive, facing east. 
    Verde Street at Glacier Street facing east. 
    Verde Street at Glacier Street facing west. 
    Verde Street at Ranier Street facing east. 
    Verde Street at Ranier Street facing west. 
    Verde Street at Teton facing northwest. 
    Vintage Drive north spur roadway approximately 100 feet from Brittancy Drive facing east. 
    Vintage Drive at East Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Vintage Drive at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Vintage Drive at Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Vintage Drive at northbound Power Boulevard facing east. 
    Vintage at Power Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Vintage Drive at Tulane Drive facing east. 
    Vintage Drive at Tulane Drive facing west. 
    Vintage Drive at West Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Virginia Street at Danville Street facing south. 
    Virginia Street at Garden Street facing north. 
    Virginia at Mayfield facing south. 
    Virginia at Twenty-seventh Street facing north. 
    Virginia at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Vouray at Macon facing north. 
    Washington at Thirtieth Street facing north. 
    Washington Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
    Washington Avenue at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
    Webster Avenue at Kenner Avenue facing north. 
    Webster Street at Airline Highway on the south corner. 
    Webster Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Webster Street at Kenner Avenue facing north. 
    Webster Street at Tenth Street facing north. 
    Webster Street at Tenth Street facing south. 
    Webster Street at Twelfth Street on the south corner. 
    Webster Street at Fourteenth Street facing north. 
    Webster Street at Fourteenth Street facing south. 
    Webster Street at Sixteenth Street facing north. 
    Webster Street at Sixteenth Street facing south. 
    West Access Road at Crofton Street facing north. 
    West Esplanade Avenue at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    West Esplanade Avenue at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    West Esplanade Avenue, eastbound lanes, at East Loyola Avenue. 
    West Esplanade at East Loyola Drive facing east. 
    West Esplanade at East Loyola Drive facing west. 
    West Esplanade at Grand Lake Boulevard facing east. 
    West Esplanade Avenue at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    West Esplanade Avenue at Loyola Drive facing west. 
    West Esplanade at West Loyola Drive facing east. 
    West Esplanade at West Loyola Drive facing west. 
    West Esplanade at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    West Grandlake Boulevard at Calcasieu Court facing north and south. 
    West Grandlake Boulevard at D'Arbonne Court facing north. 
    West Grandlake Boulevard at D'Arbonne Court facing south. 
    West Grandlake Boulevard at Dauterive Court facing north. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at Houston Place facing north. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at Houston Place facing south. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at Millsaps Place facing north. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at Millsaps Place facing south. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at Trinity Drive facing east. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at Trinity Drive facing west. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at Vintage Drive facing south. 
    West Louisiana State Drive and West Notre Dame Place facing north. 
    West Louisiana State Drive and West Notre Dame Place facing south. 
    West Louisiana State Drive at West Temple facing south. 
    East and Westbound on West Louisiana State Drive at the Intersection of West Louisiana State Drive and Davidson Place. 
    West Loyola Drive at West Esplanade facing north. 
    West Loyola Drive at West Esplanade facing south. 
    West Metairie Avenue at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    West Oglethorpe Place at Tulane facing east. 
    West Purdue at Tulane Drive facing east. 
    West Stanford at Tulane facing east. 
    West Stanford at West Tulane Drive facing east. 
    West Temple and Tulane facing south. 
    West Union Street at Crestview Street facing west. 
    West Union Street at Twenty-fourth Street facing west. 
    Westgate Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    William and Mary at Tulane facing east. 
    William and Mary at West Louisiana State Drive facing west. 
    Woodlake Boulevard at Platt Street facing east. 
    Woodlake Boulevard at Shenandoah Street facing east. 
    Woodlake Boulevard at Shenandoah Street facing west. 
    Woodward Drive at Hooper Drive facing south. 
    Worth Street at Jefferson Highway on the north corner. 
    Worth Street at Jefferson Highway on the south corner. 
    Yellowstone Street at Platt Street facing east. 
    Yellowstone Street at Woodlake Boulevard facing southwest. 
    Yenni Drive at Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Yenni Drive at Loyola Drive facing west. 
    Yenni Drive at Stoulig Drive facing east. 
    Yosemite at Verde Street facing south. 
    Yosemite at Woodlake Boulevard facing north. 
    Second Street at Farrar facing west. 
    Second Street at Hanson facing east. 
    Fourth Street at Butler Street facing east. 
    Fourth Street at Decatur Street facing east. 
    Fourth Street at Duncan Street facing east. 
    Fourth Street at Felix Street on the west corner. 
    Fourth Street at Filmore Street facing west. 
    Fourth Street at Georgia Avenue on the east corner. 
    Fourth Street at Georgia Avenue on the west corner. 
    Fourth Street at Hollandey Street on the west corner. 
    Fourth Street at Maria Street facing east. 
    Fourth Street at Maria Street facing west. 
    Fourth Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Fourth Street at Warren Street facing west. 
    Fifth Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Fifth Street at George Street facing east. 
    Fifth Street at Maria Street on the west corner. 
    Fifth Street at Minor Street on the east corner. 
    Fifth Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Sixth Street at Compromise Street facing west. 
    Sixth Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Sixth Street at Minor Street on the east corner. 
    Sixth Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Sixth Street at Oxley Street facing west. 
    Sixth Street at Oxley Street on the west corner. 
    Sixth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Ninth Street at Compromise Street on the east corner. 
    Ninth Street at Compromise Street on the west corner. 
    Ninth Street and Daniel Street four-way stop at corner. 
    Ninth Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Ninth Street at Maria Street on the east corner. 
    Ninth Street at Maria Street on the west corner. 
    Ninth Street at Minor Street on the east corner. 
    Ninth Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Ninth Street at Oxley Street on the east corner. 
    Ninth Street at Oxley Street on the west corner. 
    Ninth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Ninth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Clay Street on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Compromise Street on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Compromise Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Daniel Street on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Fairway Drive on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Fairway Drive on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Hudson on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Hudson Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Maria Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Minor Street on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Moisant Drive on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Oxley Street on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Oxley Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Taylor Street on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Tayor Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Webster Street on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Webster Street on the west corner. 
    Tenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Tenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Eleventh Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Eleventh Street at Minor Street on the east corner. 
    Eleventh Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Eleventh Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Eleventh Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Clay Street on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Clay Street on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Compromise Street on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Compromise Street on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Fairway Drive on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Fairway Drive on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Hudson Street on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Hudson Street on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Minor Street on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Moisant Drive on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Moisant Drive on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Taylor Street on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Taylor Street on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Webster Street on the west corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twelfth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Daniel Street on the west corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Fairway Drive on the east corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Fairway Drive on the west corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Hudson Street on the east corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Hudson Street on the west corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Minor Street on the west corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Oxley Street on the west corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Webster Street on the east corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Webster Street on the west corner. 
    Thirteenth Street at Webster Street facing east. 
    Fourteenth Street at Clay Street on the east corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Clay Street on the west corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Compromise Street on the east corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Compromise Street on the west corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Moisant Drive on the east corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Moisant Drive on the west corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Webster Street on the west corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Webster Street facing west. 
    Fourteenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Fourteenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Fifteenth Street at Fairway Drive on the east corner. 
    Fifteenth Street at Fairway Drive on the west corner. 
    Fifteenth Street at Hudson Street on the east corner. 
    Fifteenth Street at Hudson Street on the west corner. 
    Fifteenth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Fifteenth Street at Taylor Street on the east corner. 
    Fifteenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Clay Street on the east corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Clay Street on the west corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Compromise Street on the east corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Compromise Street on the west corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Moisant Drive on the east corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Moisant Drive on the west corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Webster Street on the east corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Webster Street on the west corner. 
    Sixteenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Clay Street on the west corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Compromise Street on the east corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Compromise Street on the west corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Hudson Street on the east corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Hudson Street at the west corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Moisant Drive on the east corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Taylor Street on the east corner. 
    Seventh Street at Taylor Street on the west corner. 
    Seventeenth Street at Webster Street facing east. 
    Seventeenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Eighteenth Street at Compromise Street on the west corner. 
    Eighteenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Eighteenth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Colorado Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Connecticut Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Connecticut Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Delaware Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street and Georgia Avenue facing north. 
    Twentieth Street and Georgia Avenue facing south. 
    Twentieth Street at Idaho Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Idaho Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Illinois Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Illinois Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Illinois Avenue facing north. 
    Twentieth Street at Illinois Avenue facing south. 
    Twentieth Street at Indiana Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Indiana Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Iowa Avenue facing north. 
    Twentieth Street at Iowa Avenue facing south. 
    Twentieth Street at Iowa Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Iowa Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Kansas Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Kansas Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twentieth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-first Street and Colorado Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-first Street and Colorado Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-first Street at Colorado Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-first Street at Connecticut Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-first Street at Connecticut Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-first Street at Florida Street facing west. 
    Twenty-first Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twenty-first Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Aberdeen Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-second Street at Delaware Avenue all way. 
    Twenty-second Street at Florida Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-second Street at Idaho Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-second Street at Florida Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Idaho Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-second Street at Idaho Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-second Street and Idaho Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-second Street at Illinois Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Illinois Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Indiana Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Kansas Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Kansas Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Kentucky Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Kentucky Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Maine Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-second Street at Maine Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Piedmont Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-second Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Twenty-first Street on the east corner. 
    Twenty-second Street at Twenty-first Street on the west corner. 
    Twenty-third Street at Aberdeen Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-third Street at Crestview Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-third Street at Fayette Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-third Street at Fayette Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-third Street at Kingston Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-third Street at Kingston Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-third Street at Richland Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-third Street at Richland Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-third Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing west. 
    Twenty-third Street at Tyler Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-third Street at Tyler Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-third Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Bainbridge Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Crestview Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Dawson Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Dawson Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Hans Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Helena Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Helena Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Illinois Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Illinois Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Iowa Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Kentucky Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Kentucky Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Marietta Street, facing east. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Marietta Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Piedmont Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-fourth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing east. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Idaho Street on the northeast corner facing east. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Idaho Street on the northwest corner facing north. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Idaho Street on the southwest corner facing west. 
    Twenty-fifth Street and Iowa Avenue, four-way stop at corner. 
    Twenty-fifth Street and Kansas Avenue, four-way stop at corner. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Maine Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Maine Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-fifth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Bainbridge Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Bainbridge facing west. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Florida Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Florida Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-sixth Street and Georgia Avenue, four-way stop at corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street and Idaho Avenue, four-way stop at corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street and Indiana Avenue, four-way stop at corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street and Kansas Avenue, four-way stop at corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Idaho Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Idaho Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Lexington facing east. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Sharon Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-sixth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Aberdeen Street facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Aberdeen facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Bainbridge Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Bainbridge facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Crestview Street, facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Georgia Avenue facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Georgia Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Georgia Avenue facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Greenwood facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Greenwood facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Helena Street facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Helena Street facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Huntsville facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Huntsville facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Indiana Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Indiana Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Kansas Avenue on the east corner. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Kansas Avenue on the west corner. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Kingston facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Kingston facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Lexington facing east and west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Marietta facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Marietta facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Panama Street facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Panama Street facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Phoenix facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Phoenix facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Sharon Street facing west. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Sharon Street facing east. 
    Twenty-seventh Street at Virginia facing west. 
    Twenty-ninth Street at Albany facing west. 
    Twenty-ninth Street at Tupelo Street on the east corner. 
    Twenty-ninth Street at Tupelo Street on the west corner. 
    Thirtieth Street at Huntsville Street facing east. 
    Thirtieth Street at Huntsville Street facing west. 
    Thirtieth Street at Illinois Avenue facing east. 
    Thirtieth Street at Illinois Avenue facing west. 
    Thirtieth Street at Kentucky Avenue facing east. 
    Thirtieth Street at Kentucky Avenue facing west. 
    Thirtieth Street at Maine Avenue facing east. 
    Thirtieth Street at Maine Avenue facing west. 
    Thirtieth Street at Maryland Avenue facing west. 
    Thirtieth Street at Tennessee Avenue facing west. 
    Thirtieth Street at Tennessee Avenue facing west. 
    Thirtieth Street at Tupelo Street facing east. 
    Thirtieth Street at Tupelo Street facing west. 
    Thirty-first Court at Georgia Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-first Court at Georgia Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Bainbridge Street facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Bainbridge Street facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Duncan Street facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Georgia Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Georgia Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Helena Drive facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Helena Drive facing west. 
    Thirty-first Court at Idaho Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-first Court at Idaho Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Idaho Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Idaho Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Iowa Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Iowa Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Iowa Avenue, 4-way stop. 
    Thirty-first Street at Jasper Street facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Jasper Street facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Maryland Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Maryland Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Ohio Street facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Ohio Street facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Tifton facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Tifton facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Tupelo Street facing east. 
    Thirty-first Street at Tupelo Street facing west. 
    Thirty-first Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Thirty-first Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Thirty-second Street at California Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at California Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Georgia Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Georgia Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at its intersection with Idaho Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Illinois Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Illinois Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Indiana Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Indiana Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Iowa Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Iowa Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Kansas Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Kansas Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Kentucky Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Kentucky Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Massachusetts Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Tennessee Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Tennessee Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Texas Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-second Street at Texas Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-second Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
    Thirty-third Street at Arkansas Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-third Street at Arkansas Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-third Street at California Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at California Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Colorado Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Colorado Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Connecticut Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-third Street at Connecticut Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-third Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-third Street at Delaware Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Florida Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Florida Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Indiana Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-third Street and Kentucky facing north. 
    Thirty-third Street at Maine Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Maine Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-third Street at Massachusetts Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-third Street at Massachusetts Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-third Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Thirty-third Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Arkansas Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Arkansas Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at California Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at California Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at California Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Connecticut Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Connecticut Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Delaware Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Delaware Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Florida Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Florida Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Maine Street facing east. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Massachusetts Avenue all way. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Maine Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing east. 
    Thirty-fourth Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
    Thirty-fifth Street at California Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-fifth Street at California Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-fifth Street at East Loyola Drive facing east. 
    Thirty-fifth Street at West Louisiana State Drive facing east. 
    Thirty-fifth Street at West Louisiana State Drive facing west. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Arkansas Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Arkansas Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at California Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at California Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Colorado Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Colorado Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at its intersection with Connecticut Avenue facing south. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Florida Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Florida Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-sixth Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street and Arizona Street, four-way stop. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Arkansas Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Arkansas Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at California Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at California Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Colorado Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Colorado Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Connecticut Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Connecticut Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at David Drive facing east. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at David Drive facing west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Erlinger Road facing west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Florida Avenue facing east and west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Janice Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Janice Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Janice facing north. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Janice facing south. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Lake Trail Drive facing east. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Lake Trail facing west. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at northbound Power Boulevard facing east. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Schill Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-seventh Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Antigua facing east. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Arizona facing east. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Arizona facing west. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Colorado Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Colorado Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Connecticut Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Connecticut Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Florida Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Thirty-eighth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Arizona Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Arizona Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Arizona Avenue on the east corner. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Arizona Avenue on the west corner. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Connecticut Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Connecticut Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at David Drive facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at David Drive facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Erlinger Road facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Janice Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Janice Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Lake Trail, one facing west, one facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Lisa facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at northbound Power Boulevard facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Rebecca Avenue facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Rebecca Avenue facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Toby Lane facing east. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Toby Lane facing west. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Williams Boulevard on the east corner. 
    Thirty-ninth Street at Williams Boulevard on the west corner. 
    Fortieth Street at Alabama Avenue on the east corner. 
    Fortieth Street at Alabama Avenue on the west corner. 
    Fortieth Street at Arizona Avenue on the east corner. 
    Fortieth Street at Arizona Avenue on the west corner. 
    Fortieth Street at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    Fortieth Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Fortieth Street at Gelpi facing west. 
    Fortieth Street at Ole Miss facing east. 
    Fortieth Street at Martinique facing east. 
    Fortieth Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Forty-first Street at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
    Forty-first Street at Chateau Boulevard facing west. 
    Forty-first Street at East Louisiana State Drive facing east. 
    Forty-first Street at East Louisiana State Drive facing west. 
    Forty-first Street at Ole Miss Drive facing west. 
    Forty-first Street at Tulane facing west. 
    Forty-first Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
    Forty-first Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Alabama facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Arizona Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Arizona Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Arkansas Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Arkansas Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at California Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at California Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Canary Ansas facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Craig Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Craig Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at David Drive facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at David Drive facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Erlanger Road facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Erlanger Road facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Florida Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Florida Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Illinois Avenue facing north and south. 
    Forty-second Street at Iowa facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Iowa facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Janice facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Janice facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Lake Trail Drive facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Lake Trail Drive facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Rebecca Drive facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Rebecca Drive facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Shamrops facing east. 
    Forty-second Street at Shamrops facing west. 
    Forty-second Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Alabama facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Arizona Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Arizona Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Arkansas Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Arkansas Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at California Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at California Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Colorado Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Colorado Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Connecticut Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Connecticut Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Craig facing east. 
    Forth-third Street at Craig facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at David Drive facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at David Drive facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Delaware Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Delaware Avenue facing west. 
    Forth-third Street at Erlanger Road facing east and west. 
    Forth-third Street at Florida Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Florida Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third at Idaho facing east. 
    Forty-third at Idaho facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Illinois Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Illinois Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Janice Avenue north. 
    Forth-third Street at Janice Avenue south. 
    Forty-third Street at Janice facing east. 
    Forth-third Street at Janice facing west. 
    Forth-third Street at Lake Trail Drive facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Lake Trail Drive facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Rebecca Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-third Street at Rebecca Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Shamrops facing west. 
    Forty-third Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
    Forty-fourth Street at David Drive facing east. 
    Forty-fourth Street at David Drive facing west. 
    Forty-fourth Street at David Drive on the east corner. 
    Forty-fourth Street at David Drive on the west corner. 
    Forty-fourth Street at Erlinger Drive facing east. 
    Forty-fourth Street at Erlinger Drive facing west. 
    Forty-fourth Street at Idaho Avenue facing east. 
    Forty-fourth Street at Idaho Avenue facing west. 
    Forty-fourth Street at Lake Trail Drive facing east. 
    Forty-fourth Street at Lake Trail Drive facing west. 
    Forty-fifth Street at David Drive facing east. 
    Forty-fifth Street at David Drive facing west. 
    Forty-seventh Street at Erlinger Drive facing east. 
(Ord. No. 1093, 11-11-68; Ord. No. 1268, § 2, 1-11-71; Ord. No. 1289, 4-12-71; Ord. No. 1304, 5-13-71; Ord. No. 1313, 6-14-71; Ord. No. 1337, 9-13-71; Ord. No. 1403, 5-8-72; Ord. No. 1468, 11-27-72; Ord. No. 1483, 2-12-72; Ord. No. 1528, 5-29-73; Ord. No. 1603, 1-14-74; Ord. No. 1697, 12-9-74; Ord. No. 1706, 1-27-75; Ord. No. 1709, 2-24-75; Ord. No. 1724, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1734, 6-9-75; Ord. No. 1735, 7-14-75; Ord. No. 1880, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 1968, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 2026, § 1, 4-11-77; Ord. No. 2073, § 1, 6-13-77; Ord. No. 2197, 12-12-77; Ord. No. 2285, 5-1-78; Ord. No. 2296, 5-15-78; Ord. No. 2314, 6-12-78; Ord. No. 2504, 4-16-79; Ord. No. 2559, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 2601, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 2634, 11-26-79; Ord. No. 2659, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2695, 4-21-80; Ord. No. 2738, 7-7-80; Ord. No. 2774, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2785, 9-2-80; Ord. No. 2800, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 2801, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 2808, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 2811, 10-20-80; Ord. No. 2819, 11-3-80; Ord. No. 2827, 11-10-80; Ord. No. 2848, 12-22-80; Ord. No. 2895, 3-5-81; Ord. No. 2928, 4-23-81; Ord. No. 2995, 7-16-81; Ord. No. 3017, 8-17-81; Ord. No. 3121, § 1, 12-10-81; Ord. No. 3314, § 1, 10-21-82; Ord. No. 3315, § 1, 10-21-82; Ord. No. 3563, § 1, 6-16-83; Ord. No. 3602, § 1, 7-21-83; Ord. No. 3646, §§ 1, 2, 9-1-83; Ord. No. 3648, § 1, 9-1-83; Ord. No. 3752, § 1, 11-17-83; Ord. No. 3692, § 1, 10-6-83; Ord. No. 3693, § 1, 10-6-83; Ord. No. 3808, § 1, 1-5-84; Ord. No. 3814, § 1, 1-5-84; Ord. No. 3936, § 1, 4-19-84; Ord. No. 4038, § 1, 6-21-84; Ord. No. 4082, § 1, 7-19-84; Ord. No. 4083, § 1, 7-19-84; Ord. No. 4159, § 1, 9-20-84; Ord. No. 4160, § 1, 9-20-84; Ord. No. 4190, § 1, 10-18-84; Ord. No. 5783, § 1, 11-6-86; Ord. No. 5793, § 1, 11-20-86; Ord. No. 5794, § 1, 11-20-86; Ord. No. 5795, § 1, 11-20-86; Ord. No. 5829, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5830, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5831, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5833, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5834, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5838, § 1, 3-19-87; Ord. No. 5892, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 5893, § 1, 7-23-87; Ord. No. 5937, § 1, 10-1-87; Ord. No. 5943, § 1, 10-15-87; Ord. No. 5946, § 1, 10-15-87; Ord. No. 5951, § 1, 11-5-87; Ord. No. 5960, § 1, 11-19-87; Ord. No. 5972, § 1, 12-17-87; Ord. No. 6025, § 1, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 6030, § 1, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 6031, § 1, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 6076, § 1, 6-2-88; Ord. No. 6077, § 1, 6-2-88; Ord. No. 6078, § 1, 6-2-88; Ord. No. 6080, § 1, 6-2-88; Ord. No. 6092, § 1, 6-16-88; Ord. No. 6109, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6110, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6117, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6118, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6119, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6120, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6121, § 1, 7-21-88; Ord. No. 6139, § 1, 8-18-88; Ord. No. 6140, § 1, 8-18-88; Ord. No. 6142, § 1, 9-1-88; Ord. No. 6149, § 1, 9-15-88; Ord. No. 6156, § 1, 10-6-88; Ord. No. 6157, § 1, 10-6-88; Ord. No. 6186, § 1, 1-5-89; Ord. No. 6187, § 1, 1-5-89; Ord. No. 6191, § 1, 1-5-89; Ord. No. 6210, § 1, 2-2-89; Ord. No. 6222, § 1, 3-2-89; Ord. No. 6223, § 1, 3-2-89; Ord. No. 6224, § 1, 3-2-89; Ord. No. 6226, § 1, 3-2-89; Ord. No. 6230, § 1, 3-16-89; Ord. No. 6235, §§ 1, 2, 4-6-89; Ord. No. 6236, § 1, 4-6-89; Ord. No. 6239, § 1, 4-6-89; Ord. No. 6252, § 1, 5-18-89; Ord. No. 6262, § 1, 6-1-89; Ord. No. 6265, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6266, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6267, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6268, §§ 1, 2, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6271, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6283, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 6284, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 6292, § 1, 7-27-89; Ord. No. 6303, § 1, 8-17-89; Ord. No. 6307, § 1, 8-17-89; Ord. No. 6319, § 1, 9-21-89; Ord. No. 6327, § 1, 10-5-89; Ord. No. 6328, § 1, 10-5-89; Ord. No. 6340, § 1, 10-19-89; Ord. No. 6343, § 1, 10-19-89; Ord. No. 6344, § 1, 10-19-89; Ord. No. 6369, § 1, 1-4-90; Ord. No. 6376, § 1, 1-18-90; Ord. No. 6379, § 1, 2-1-90; Ord. No. 6388, § 1, 3-1-90; Ord. No. 6390, § 1, 3-15-90; Ord. No. 6401, § 1, 4-19-90; Ord. No. 6402, § 1, 4-19-90; Ord. No. 6407, § 1, 5-3-90; Ord. No. 6408, § 1, 5-3-90; Ord. No. 6412, § 1, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 6448, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6452, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6453, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6454, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6466, § 1, 7-26-90; Ord. No. 6473, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-90; Ord. No. 6474, §§ 1, 2, 8-16-90; Ord. No. 6475, § 1, 8-16-90; Ord. No. 6481, § 1, 9-6-90; Ord. No. 6482, § 1, 9-6-90; Ord. No. 6483, § 1, 9-6-90; Ord. No. 6500, § 1, 10-4-90; Ord. No. 6515, § 1, 11-1-90; Ord. No. 6522, § 1, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6523, § 1, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6528, § 1, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6552, § 1, 1-3-91; Ord. No. 6564, § 1, 2-7-91; Ord. No. 6569, § 1, 2-21-91; Ord. No. 6570, § 1, 2-21-91; Ord. No. 6579, § 1, 3-21-91; Ord. No. 6597, § 1, 5-2-91; Ord. No. 6611, § 1, 6-6-91; Ord. No. 6637, § 1, 7-25-91; Ord. No. 6638, § 1, 7-25-91; Ord. No. 6656, § 1, 9-5-91; Ord. No. 6661, § 1, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 6662, § 1, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 6673, § 1, 9-19-91; Ord. No. 6684, § 1, 10-17-91; Ord. No. 6688, § 1, 11-7-91; Ord. No. 6695, § 1, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 6697, § 1, 11-21-91; Ord. No. 6714, § 1, 1-23-92; Ord. No. 6715, § 1, 1-23-92; Ord. No. 6719, § 1, 1-23-92; Ord. No. 6720, § 1, 1-23-92; Ord. No. 6735, § 1, 3-19-92; Ord. No. 6742, § 1, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 6744, § 1, 5-7-92; Ord. No. 6754, § 1, 6-4-92; Ord. No. 6760, §§ 1, 2, 6-18-92; Ord. No. 6764, § 1, 7-2-92; Ord. No. 6791, § 1, 8-20-92; Ord. No. 6797, § 1, 9-3-92; Ord. No. 6818, § 1, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 6819, § 1, 11-19-92; Ord. No. 6829, § 1, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 6830, § 1, 1-7-93; Ord. No. 6845, § 1, 3-4-93; Ord. No. 6854, § 1, 4-15-93; Ord. No. 6857, § 1, 4-15-93; Ord. No. 6858, § 1, 4-15-93; Ord. No. 6884, § 1, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 6885, § 1, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 6914, § 1, 8-19-93; Ord. No. 6944, § 1, 11-4-93; Ord. No. 6952, § 1, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 6954, § 1, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 6955, § 1, 12-2-93; Ord. No. 6971, § 1, 2-3-94; Ord. No. 6997, § 1, 3-17-94; Ord. No. 7021, § 1, 5-19-94; Ord. No. 7096, § 1, 9-15-94; Ord. No. 7097, § 1, 9-15-94; Ord. No. 7122, § 1, 11-17-94; Ord. No. 7123, § 1, 11-17-94; Ord. No. 7124, § 1, 11-17-94; Ord. No. 7126, § 1, 12-1-94; Ord. No. 7127, § 1, 12-1-94; Ord. No. 7166, § 1, 2-9-95; Ord. No. 7167, § 1, 2-9-95; Ord. No. 7235, § 1, 6-15-95; Ord. No. 7247, § 1, 6-15-95; Ord. No. 7261, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 7262, § 1, 7-6-95; Ord. No. 7267, § 1, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 7306, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7307, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7308, § 1, 9-21-95; Ord. No. 7357, § 1, 12-14-95; Ord. No. 7362, § 1, 12-14-95; Ord. No. 7403, § 1, 3-21-96; Ord. No. 7404, § 1, 3-231-96; Ord. No. 7405, § 1, 3-21-96; Ord. No. 7406, § 1, 3-21-96; Ord. No. 7557, § 1, 11-7-96; Ord. No. 7560, § 1, 11-7-96; Ord. No. 7566, § 1, 11-21-96; Ord. No. 7567, § 1, 11-21-96; Ord. No. 7568, § 1, 11-21-96; Ord. No. 7569, § 1, 11-21-96; Ord. No. 7570, § 1, 11-21-96; Ord. No. 7596, § 1, 12-5-96; Ord. No. 7604, § 1, 12-19-96; Ord. No. 7646, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7648, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7649, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7756, § 1, 6-19-97; Ord. No. 7824, § 1, 11-6-97; Ord. No. 7826, § 1, 11-6-97; Ord. No. 7829, § 1, 11-6-97; Ord. No. 7863, § 1, 1-8-98; Ord. No. 7876, 2-5-98; Ord. No. 7900, 4-16-98; Ord. No. 7901, 4-16-98; Ord. No. 7902, 4-16-98; Ord. No. 7911, 4-16-98; Ord. No. 7912, 4-16-98; Ord. No. 7913, 4-16-98; Ord. No. 7965, § 1, 8-6-98; Ord. No. 8018, § 1, 11-19-98; Ord. No. 8020, § 1, 12-3-98; Ord. No. 8021, § 1, 12-3-98; Ord. No. 8022, § 1, 12-3-98; Ord. No. 8023, § 1, 12-3-98; Ord. No. 8059, § 1, 4-1-99; Ord. No. 8060, § 1, 4-1-99; Ord. No. 8064, § 1, 4-1-99; Ord. No. 8112, § 1, 7-1-99; Ord. No. 8113, § 1, 7-1-99; Ord. No. 8117, § 1, 7-1-99; Ord. No. 8118, § 1, 7-1-99; Ord. No. 8119, § 1, 7-1-99; Ord. No. 8120, § 1, 7-1-99; Ord. No. 8138, § 1, 7-15-99; Ord. No. 8140, § 1, 7-15-99; Ord. No. 8141, § 1, 7-15-99; Ord. No. 8143, § 1, 7-15-99; Ord. No. 8215, § 1, 1-6-00; Ord. No. 8236, § 1, 3-2-00; Ord. No. 8237, § 1, 3-2-00; Ord. No. 8238, § 1, 3-2-00; Ord. No. 8239, § 1, 3-2-00; Ord. No. 8324, § 1, 7-20-00; Ord. No. 8325, § 1, 7-20-00; Ord. No. 8327, § 1, 8-3-00; Ord. No. 8354, § 1, 10-5-00; Ord. No. 8375, § 1, 12-1-00; Ord. No. 8401, § 1, 2-1-01; Ord. No. 8402, § 1, 2-1-01; Ord. No. 8511, § 1, 8-16-01; Ord. No. 8512, § 1, 8-16-01; Ord. No. 8547, § 1, 10-4-01; Ord. No. 8548, § 1, 10-4-01; Ord. No. 8549, § 1, 10-4-01; Ord. No. 8550, § 1, 10-4-01; Ord. No. 8557, § 1, 10-18-01; Ord. No. 8558, § 1, 10-18-01; Ord. No. 8559, § 1, 10-18-01; Ord. No. 8560, § 1, 10-18-01; Ord. No. 8700, § 1, 7-18-02; Ord. No. 8701, § 1, 7-18-02; Ord. No. 8776, §§ 1, 2, 1-16-03; Ord. No. 8898, § 1, 8-21-03; Ord. No. 8943, § 1, 11-20-03; Ord. No. 8944, § 1, 11-20-03; Ord. No. 8975, § 1, 2-19-04; Ord. No. 8984, § 1, 3-4-04; Ord. No. 9011, § 1, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 9012, § 1, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 9013, § 1, 5-3-04; Ord. No. 9028, § 1, 5-27-04; Ord. No. 9094, § 1, 11-18-04; Ord. No. 9199, § 1, 8-18-05; Ord. No. 9201, § 1, 8-18-05; Ord. No. 9745, § 2, 7-24-08; Ord. No. 9910, § 2, 5-7-09; Ord. No. 9966, § 2, 8-6-09; Ord. No. 10,052, § 2, 1-2-10; Ord. No. 10,592, § 1, 5-16-13; Ord. No. 11,409, § 1, 5-17-18; Ord. No. 11,459, § 1, 8-23-18) 
Sec. 15-22. - Failure to obey traffic-control signs and devices prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person driving any motor vehicle through or upon the streets of the city in violation of "one-way traffic" signs, "do not enter" signs, and "trucks prohibited" signs, and any and all other traffic-control signs, and any and all other traffic-control signs or devices. 
(Ord. No. 1268, § 3, 1-11-71) 
Sec. 15-23. - Specific traffic-control signs established. 
    The following traffic-control signs are hereby authorized and established and failure to obey such signs is prohibited as provided in section 15-22. 
(a)  Do not enter signs. 
(1)  "Do not enter" sign on Seventh Street at its intersection with Minor Street. 
(2)  "Do not enter" sign on the northeast corner of the intersection of Twenty-sixth Street and Idaho Avenue facing south. 
(3)  "Do not enter" signs on East Louisiana State Drive and Fortieth Street facing south. 
(4)  "Do not enter" sign off of Veterans Memorial Highway on west side of Sizzler Steak House facing south. 
(5)  "Do not enter" sign on Minor at Kenner Avenue facing south from 7:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. on school days. 
(6)  "Do not enter" sign on Minor at Fifth Street facing north from 7:45 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 3:15 p.m. on school days. 
(7)  "Do not enter" sign on Jefferson Parish School Road. 
(8)  Two (2) "do not enter" signs on Roosevelt Boulevard about 200 feet from Veterans Boulevard facing south. 
(9)  "Do not enter" sign on Maryland Avenue at Veterans Boulevard facing south. 
(10)  Two (2) "do not enter" signs on Ernest facing south. 
(11)  "Do not enter" sign at the intersection of Nassau Avenue and Lisa Avenue facing west. 
(12)  "Do not enter" sign on West Esplanade at East Loyola Drive facing west. 
(13)  "Do not enter" sign on West Esplanade at West Loyola Drive facing east. 
(14)  "Do not enter" sign on Barron Lane at Commander facing west. 
(15)  "Do not enter" sign on Crofton Street between East Access Road and Service Road facing east. 
(16)  "Do not enter" sign, which is to be placed during school day (Schneckenberger School in Driftwood Subdivision), on Ernest Street between Gelpi and Amelie. 
(17)  "Do not enter" sign on Sixth Street, between Minor Street and Williams Boulevard, facing west (two (2) signs). 
(18)  Two (2) "Do not enter" signs on Jackson Street at Kenner Avenue facing south. 
(19)  "Do not enter" sign on Medoc Drive at its intersection with Champagne Drive facing south which is to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m. to 8:20 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 3:15 p.m.) at Chateau Estates School. 
(20)  "Do not enter" sign at Thirty-ninth Street and California Avenue facing east which is to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) for Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(21)  "Do not enter" sign on the West Esplanade median approximately two hundred fifty (250) feet east of Chateau Boulevard adjacent to the newly constructed left turn lane/U-turn lane facing south. 
(22)  "Do not enter" sign on Vintage Drive at the Alabama Crossing for northbound Alabama Avenue traffic, facing south. 
(23)  "Do not enter" sign on Vintage Drive at the Alabama Crossing for eastbound Vintage Drive traffic, facing west. 
(24)  "Do not enter" sign on Thirty-eighth Street at its intersection with Arkansas Avenue facing west which is to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) at Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(25)  "Do not enter" sign on Webster Street facing south at its intersection with Kenner Avenue which is to be effective during school hours (8:20 a.m. to 9:05 a.m. and 3:35 p.m. to 4:10 p.m.) at Washington Elementary School. 
(26)  "Do not enter" signs on Tifton Street facing North at its intersection with Thirty-First Street and on Helena Street facing South at its intersection with Thirtieth Street which is to be effective during school hours (7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at G.T. Woods Elementary. 
(27)  Two (2) "do not enter" signs in the southwest quadrant of the intersection of West Esplanade Avenue and Chateau Boulevard in the median near the first driveway west of Chateau Boulevard that allows ingress and egress to the strip shopping center where the Walgreens Drugstore is located. 
(28)  "Do not enter" signs on Thirty-ninth Street at its intersection with California Avenue facing westbound traffic on Thirty-ninth Street to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.) for Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(29)  "Do not enter" signs on Thirty-eighth Street at its intersection with Arkansas Avenue facing eastbound traffic on Thirty-eighth Street to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m. - 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. - 4:00 p.m.) for Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(30)  "Do not enter" sign on Maine Avenue facing south at its intersection with Twenty-fifth Street which is to be effective during school hours (7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(31)  "Do not enter" sign on Twenty-fifth Street facing west at its intersection with Roosevelt Boulevard which is to be effective during school hours (7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(32)  "Do not enter" sign on Twenty-sixth Street facing west at its intersection with Roosevelt Boulevard which is to be effective during school hours (7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(33)  "Do not enter" sign for non-resident vehicles from 12:00 p.m. to 3:10 p.m. on Tavel Drive facing east at its intersection with Chateau Boulevard. 
(34)  "Do not enter" sign for non-resident vehicles from 12:00 p.m. to 3:10 p.m. on Tavel Drive facing west at its intersection with Montrachet Drive. 
(b)  One-way signs. 
(1)  A "one-way" sign on the eastern side of the crossover median one-way north-bound, and a "one-way" sign on the western side of the crossover median one-way south-bound on West Esplanade adjacent to the Avant Garde Condominiums. 
(2)  "One-way" sign on the westside roadway of Power Boulevard between West Esplanade and Vintage Drive facing south. 
(3)  "One-way" sign on northbound Power Boulevard between West Esplanade and Vintage Drive facing north. 
(4)  "One-way" sign at east lane of Driftwood Drive at its intersection with Thirty-fifth Street. 
(5)  "One-way" sign at west lane of Driftwood Drive at its intersection with Thirty-fifth Street. 
(6)  "One-way" sign on northwest corner of Daniel Street and Kenner Avenue. 
(7)  "One-way" sign on Ninth Street from Williams Boulevard to Minor Street, traveling east. 
(8)  "One-way" sign on Tenth Street from Minor Street to Williams Boulevard traveling west. 
(9)  "One-way" signs placed at the intersection of Twenty-seventh Street and Idaho Avenue and at the intersection of Twenty-sixth Street and Idaho Avenue indicating one-way traffic in a southerly direction between Twenty-seventh and Twenty-sixth Streets. 
(10)  Two (2) "one-way" signs on East Loyola Drive at its intersection with Thirty-sixth Street facing north and south. 
(11)  Four "one-way" signs at the intersection of East Loyola Drive and Thirty-fifth Street, facing north, south, east and west. 
(12)  "One-way" signs at intersections with Nineteenth Street (sometimes known as West Metairie Avenue) indicating that the north side (lake side) of Nineteenth Street is one-way for traffic traveling from east to west and that the south side (river side) of Nineteenth Street is one-way for traffic traveling from west to east. 
(13)  "One-way" sign facing north on Ole Miss Drive. 
(14)  "One-way" sign facing north on Ole Miss Drive and East Purdue Place. 
(15)  "One-way" sign facing north on Ole Miss Drive and East Rice Place. 
(16)  "One-way" sign facing north on Thirty-fifth Street and Ole Miss Drive. 
(17)  "One-way" sign facing north on Fortieth Street and Ole Miss Drive. 
(18)  "One-way" sign facing north on Forty-first Street and Ole Miss Drive. 
(19)  "One-way" sign facing north on Forty-second Street and Ole Miss Drive. 
(20)  Two "one-way" signs facing south on East Louisiana State Drive. 
(21)  Two "one-way" signs facing south on East Louisiana State Drive and Forty-first Street. 
(22)  Two "one-way" signs facing south on East Louisiana State Drive and Fortieth Street. 
(23)  Two "one-way" signs facing south on East Louisiana State Drive and East Rice Place. 
(24)  Two "one-way" signs facing south on East Louisiana State Drive and East Purdue Place. 
(25)  Two "one-way" signs facing south on East Louisiana State Drive and East Oglethorpe Place. 
(26)  "One-way" sign facing south on Thirty-fifth Street and East Louisiana State Drive. 
(27)  Two "one-way" signs facing north on Thirty-fifth Street and Ole Miss Drive. 
(28)  "One-way" sign on Crofton Street under U.S. 61 Overpass facing south. 
(29)  "One-way" signs on Crofton Street under U.S. 61 Overpass facing north. 
(30)  "One-way" sign on Ole Miss Drive at East Oglethorpe, facing north. 
(31)  "One-way" sign on East Louisiana State Drive at East Rice facing east. 
(32)  "One-way" sign on East Louisiana State Drive at East Rice facing west. 
(33)  "One-way" sign on Twenty-fourth Street at Williams Boulevard facing north. 
(34)  "One-way" sign on Twenty-fourth Street at Williams Boulevard facing south. 
(35)  "One-way" sign on Twenty-fourth Street at Florida Avenue facing south. 
(36)  "One-way" sign on Oglethorpe Place at East Louisiana State Drive facing east. 
(37)  "One-way" sign on Oglethorpe Place at East Louisiana State Drive facing west. 
(38)  "One-way" sign at the intersection of Roosevelt Boulevard and Veterans Memorial Boulevard indicating one-way traffic in a northerly direction on Roosevelt Boulevard from its intersection with Veterans Memorial Boulevard to its intersection with 29th Street. 
(39)  "One-way" traffic sign on Kentucky Avenue at its intersection with Veterans Memorial Boulevard in a southerly direction on Kentucky Avenue from its intersection with 29th Street to its intersection with Veterans Memorial Boulevard. 
(40)  "One-way" sign on Roosevelt Boulevard about 200 feet from Veterans Boulevard traveling south. 
(41)  "One-way" sign on Roosevelt Boulevard about 400 feet from Veterans Boulevard traveling south. 
(42)  "One-way" sign on Maryland Avenue at Veterans Boulevard traveling south. 
(43)  "One-way" sign on Maine Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing west. 
(44)  "One-way" sign on Maryland Avenue at Twenty-fifth Street facing west. 
(45)  "One-way" sign 100 feet north off Veterans Boulevard on Roosevelt Boulevard facing west. 
(46)  "One-way" sign 50 feet north off Veterans Boulevard on Roosevelt Boulevard facing west. 
(47)  "One-way" sign 150 feet north off Veterans Boulevard on Roosevelt Boulevard facing west. 
(48)  "One-way sign" on Loyola Drive, south side of I-10, facing west. 
(49)  Two "one-way" signs first turn around on Loyola Drive, north of I-10, facing north and south. 
(50)  Two "one-way" signs second turn around on Loyola Drive, north of I-10, facing north and south. 
(51)  "One-way" sign on Clemson Drive and Loyola Drive facing south. 
(52)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, south of I-10 Service Road, facing west. 
(53)  "One-way" sign at the intersection of Nassau Avenue and Gelpi Avenue providing for one-way traffic in an easterly direction on Nassau Avenue. 
(54)  "One-way" sign at the intersection of Nassau Avenue and Lisa Avenue facing west. 
(55)  "One-way" sign on Fortieth Street and East Louisiana State Drive facing north, westward. 
(56)  "One-way" sign on East Louisiana Street and Fortieth Street, facing west going south. 
(57)  "One-way" sign on Ole Miss facing east, going north. 
(58)  "One-way" sign on Nassau, west side of Lisa, facing one south and one north, going east. 
(59)  "One-way" sign on Nassau 15 feet off Gelpi, east side, one facing south, one facing north, east. 
(60)  "One-way sign" on Nassau, east off Gelpi, one facing south, one facing north, going east. 
(61)  "One-way" sign, which is to be placed during school day (Schneckenberger School in Driftwood Subdivision), on Ernest Street between Amelie and Lisa. 
(62)  "One-way" sign on Williams Boulevard, between Eighteenth and Nineteenth Streets, facing north, (two signs). 
(63)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between West Esplanade and Yenni Drive, facing west, (2 signs). 
(64)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between Baroni Drive and east/west intersection Loyola Drive, facing east. 
(65)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between Baroni Drive and Hooper Drive, facing east. 
(66)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between Baroni Drive and Pellerin Drive, facing east. 
(67)  "One-way sign on Loyola Drive, between Pellerin Drive and Bertolino Drive, facing east. 
(68)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between Bertolino Drive and Yenni Drive, facing east. 
(69)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between Bertolino Drive and Yenni Drive, facing west. 
(70)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between Bertolino Drive and Pellerin Drive, facing west. 
(71)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive between Pellerin Drive and east/west intersection Loyola Drive, facing west. 
(72)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between West Esplanade and Yenni Drive, facing east. 
(73)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between West Esplanade and Yenni Drive, facing west. 
(74)  "One-way" sign on Loyola Drive, between Pellerin Drive and east/west intersection Loyola Drive, facing east. 
(75)  "One-way" sign for westerly traffic on the two (2) north side roadway lanes of West Esplanade Avenue Between East Loyola Avenue and Tulane Avenue. 
(76)  "One-way" sign for easterly traffic on the two (2) south side roadway lanes of West Esplanade Avenue between Tulane Avenue and East Loyola Avenue. 
(77)  "One-way" sign Sixth Street between Minor Street and Williams Boulevard, facing north (2 signs). 
(78)  "One-way" sign on Sixth Street between Minor Street and Williams Boulevard, facing south (2 signs). 
(79)  "One-way" sign on Thirty-first Street, between Loyola Drive and Phoenix Street, facing west. 
(80)  "One-way" sign on Kentucky Street at Nineteenth Street directing traffic to flow southbound on Kentucky Street. 
(81)  "One-way" sign on Jackson Street at Airline Highway facing south. 
(82)  "One-way" sign at Jackson Street and Kenner Avenue facing south. 
(83)  Minor Street, one-way south from Fourth Street to Third Street-Two (2) signs facing east and west at Fourth and Minor; two (2) signs facing east and west at Third Street and Minor. 
(84)  Thirty-fourth Street, one-way west bound between Arkansas and Arizona. 
(85)  Arizona Street, one-way northbound between Thirty-fourth and West Esplanade. 
(86)  "One-way" sign along Medoc Drive between Tavel Drive and Champaigne Drive which are to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Chateau Estates Elementary School. 
(87)  "One-way" signs along Thirty-ninth Street between California Avenue and Arkansas Avenue to advise eastbound traffic only on Thirty-ninth Street which are to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) at Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(88)  "One-way" sign on the U-Turn median for Vintage Drive westbound at Williams Boulevard, facing east. 
(89)  "One-way" sign on the U-Turn median for Vintage Drive eastbound at Williams Boulevard, facing west. 
(90)  "One-way" on Vintage Drive on the south side of Canal No. 1 between Alabama Avenue and Power Boulevard indicating one-way traffic in an easterly direction. 
(91)  "One-way" on Vintage Drive on the north side of Canal No. 1 between Power Boulevard and Alabama Avenue indicating one-way traffic in a westerly direction. 
(92)  "One-way" signs on the Alabama Avenue Crossing at Vintage Drive, facing west. 
(93)  "One-way" on Veterans Boulevard on the south side between Loyola Drive and the Duncan Canal indicating one-way traffic in an easterly direction. 
(94)  "One-way" on Veterans Boulevard on the north side between the Duncan Canal and Loyola Drive indicating one-way traffic in a westerly direction. 
(95)  "One-way" signs placed at the intersection of Aberdeen Street and Twenty-seventh Street indicating one-way traffic in a southbound direction on Aberdeen Street between Veterans Boulevard and Twenty-seventh Street facing east and west. 
(96)  "One-way" on East Bainbridge Avenue between Twenty-fifth Street and Veterans Highway indicating one-way traffic in northbound direction. 
(97)  "One-way" on West Bainbridge Avenue between Veterans Highway and Twenty-fifth Street indicating one-way traffic in a southbound direction. 
(98)  "One-way" signs along Thirty-eighth Street between California Avenue and Arkansas Avenue to advise westbound traffic only on Thirty-eighth Street which are to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) at Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(99)  [Reserved.] 
(100)  "One-way" sign south bound on Webster Street from Kenner Avenue to Airline Drive which is to be effective during school hours (8:20 a.m. to 9:05 a.m. and 3:36 p.m. to 4:10 p.m.) at Washington Elementary School. 
(101)  "One-way" sign on Tifton Street from Thirtieth Street to Thirty-First Street and Helena Street Thirty-First Street to Thirtieth Street (7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at G.T. Woods Elementary. 
(c)  Trucks prohibited signs. 
(1)  "Trucks prohibited" sign at the entrance onto Idaho Avenue at Veterans Highway. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  "Trucks prohibited" sign at the entrance onto Driftwood Boulevard at West Esplanade Avenue. 
(4)  "Trucks prohibited" sign at the entrance onto Driftwood Boulevard at Williams Boulevard. 
(5)  "Trucks prohibited" sign at the entrance onto Hans Avenue at 33rd Street. 
(6)  "Trucks prohibited" sign at the entrance onto Hans Avenue at 34th Street. 
(7)  Two (2) "trucks prohibited" signs on Williams Boulevard and Driftwood Boulevard facing west. 
(8)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on West Esplanade and Driftwood Boulevard facing south. 
(9)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Hans Avenue and Thirty-third Street facing south. 
(10)  Two (2) "trucks prohibited" signs on Holly Heights Drive off Thirty-fifth Street facing north. 
(11)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Thirty-fourth Street at Hans Avenue facing west. 
(12)  Two (2) "trucks prohibited" signs on Lake Trail Drive at its intersection with the westbound lanes of West Esplanade Avenue facing south. 
(13)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Lake Trail, between West Esplanade and Thirty-seventh Street, facing south. 
(14)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Lake Trail, 25 feet north of Forty-first Street Canal, facing north. 
(15)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Thirty-first Court from Williams Boulevard to Indiana Avenue. 
(16)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Lake Trail Drive, at Forty-first Street and Canal, facing south. 
(17)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on West Esplanade Avenue and David Drive facing south. 
(18)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on West Esplanade Avenue and Janice facing south. 
(19)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Lake Trail south of Vintage and north of Canal facing north. 
(20)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Delaware Avenue at its intersection with West Esplanade, facing south. 
(21)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Thirty-seventh Street at its intersection with Williams Boulevard, facing east. 
(22)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Eleventh Street from Williams Boulevard to Daniel Street. 
(23)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Minor Street from Fourteenth Street to Tenth Street. 
(24)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Kansas Avenue from Veterans Boulevard to 26th Street, two (2) signs facing south at the corner of Kansas and 26th Street and two (2) signs facing north at the corner of Kansas and Veterans Boulevard. 
(25)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Jackson Avenue between Kenner Avenue and Jefferson Highway, two (2) signs, one at Jackson Avenue and Kenner Avenue, facing north and one at Jackson Avenue and Jefferson Highway facing south. 
(26)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Clay Street between Kenner Avenue and Jefferson Highway, two (2) signs, one at Clay Street and Kenner Avenue facing north and one at Clay Street and Jefferson Highway facing south. 
(27)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Taylor Street between Kenner Avenue and Jefferson Highway, two (2) signs, one at Taylor Street and Kenner Avenue facing north and one at Taylor Street and Jefferson Highway facing south. 
(28)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Webster Street between Kenner Avenue and Jefferson Highway, two (2) signs, one at Webster Street and Kenner Avenue facing north and one at Webster Street and Jefferson Highway facing south. 
(29)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Clay Street between Kenner Avenue and Airline Highway, two (2) signs, one at Clay Street and Kenner Avenue facing north and one at Clay Street and Airline Highway facing south. 
(30)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Florida Avenue at its intersection with Twenty-first Street and at its intersection with Twenty-second Street. 
(31)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Delaware Avenue at its intersection with Twenty-first Street and at its intersection with Twenty-second Street. 
(32)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Connecticut Avenue at its intersection with Twenty-first Street and at its intersection with Twenty-second Street. 
(33)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Colorado Avenue at its intersection with Twenty-first Street and at its intersection with Twenty-second Street. 
(34)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on California, Connecticut, Delaware, Colorado and Florida Avenues, all starting on the south side of West Esplanade Avenue to Interstate 10; Arizona, Arkansas and California Avenues from I-10 to West Esplanade Avenue; California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware and Florida Avenues, all starting on the north side of West Esplanade to the lake. 
(35)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on West Esplanade Avenue intersecting Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut, Delaware and Florida Avenues, all signs facing both north and south side of West Esplanade at the above-mentioned streets. 
(36)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Twenty-fifth Street at its intersection with Williams Boulevard, facing east. 
(37)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Tupelo and Veterans Memorial Boulevard at the entrance to Susan Park Subdivision. 
(38)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on Thirty-fourth Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
(39)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on the north side of Thirty-second at its intersection with Williams Boulevard facing east. 
(40)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on the south side of Thirty-second Street at its intersection with Duncan Canal facing west. 
(41)  "Truck prohibited" signs on Williams Boulevard at its intersection with Airline Highway (LA US61) facing north. 
(42)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on the south side of Thirty-Second Street at its intersection with Williams Boulevard facing west. 
(43)  "Trucks prohibited" signs on the north and south side of Thirty-Second Street at its intersection with Roosevelt Boulevard facing east and west. 
(44)  "Truck prohibited" signs on Albany Street on Veterans Boulevard facing north and at Canal #14 facing south. 
(45)  "Truck prohibited" signs on Twentieth Street at Williams Boulevard facing west and Twentieth Street at Idaho Avenue facing east. 
(46)  "Trucks prohibited" sign on Webster Street at West Metairie facing north and on Webster Street at Airline Highway facing south. 
(47)  "No truck route" signs on Vintage Drive at Williams Boulevard facing east and on Vintage Drive at East Loyola Drive facing west. 
(48)  "No truck route" signs on Twenty-seventh Street at Williams Boulevard facing west and on Twenty-seventh Street at Georgia Avenue facing east. 
(49)  "No truck route" signs on Twenty-seventh Street at Idaho Avenue facing east and on Georgia Avenue at Veterans Memorial Boulevard facing north. 
(50)  "No truck route" sign on Webster Street facing south at its intersection with Airline Highway denoting Webster Street between Airline Highway and West Metairie a "no truck route." 
(51)  "No truck route" signs on Roosevelt Boulevard at its intersection with Airline Highway facing south designating Roosevelt Boulevard a "no truck route" from Airline Highway north to Twenty-sixth Street. 
(52)  "No truck route" signs on Roosevelt Boulevard at its intersection with Twenty-sixth Street facing north designating Roosevelt Boulevard a "no truck route" from Twenty-sixth Street south to Airline Highway. 
(53)  "No truck route" signs on Power Boulevard at its intersection with West Esplanade Avenue facing south and at its intersection with Vintage Drive facing north designating Power Boulevard as a "no truck route" in both northbound and southbound directions. 
(54)  "No truck route" signs strategically placed along Vintage Drive from its western corporate limit to its eastern corporate limit within the City of Kenner designating Vintage Drive a "no truck route" in both eastbound and westbound directions. 
(55)  "No truck route" signs on Clay Street at its intersection with Ninth Street facing south and at its intersection with West Metairie Avenue facing north designating Clay Street as a "no truck route" in both northbound and southbound directions. 
(56)  "No truck route" signs on Twenty-fifth Street at its intersection with Roosevelt Boulevard facing east and on Twenty-fifth Street at its intersection with Williams Boulevard facing west designating Twenty-fifth Street a "no truck route" from Roosevelt Boulevard to Williams Boulevard. 
(57)  "No truck route" signs on West Loyola Drive at its intersection with Loyola Drive facing south and on West Loyola Drive at its intersection with Sunset Boulevard facing north designating West Loyola Drive a "no truck route" from Loyola Drive to Sunset Boulevard. 
(58)  "No truck route" signs on East Loyola Drive at its intersection with Loyola Drive facing south and on East Loyola Drive at its intersection with Sunset Boulevard facing north designating East Loyola Drive a "no truck route" from Loyola Drive to Sunset Boulevard. 
(59)  "No truck route" signs on Tupleo Street at Thirty-first Street facing north. 
(60)  "No truck route" signs on Tupleo Street at Thirtieth Street facing south. 
(61)  "No truck route" signs on Thirty-first Street at Phoenix Street facing west. 
(62)  "No truck route" signs on Twenty-sixth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing east. 
(63)  "No truck route" signs on Twenty-sixth Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
(64)  "No truck route" signs on Twenty-seventh Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing east. 
(65)  "No truck route" signs on Thirtieth Street at Phoenix Street facing west. 
(66)  "No truck route" signs on Eleventh Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
(67)  "No truck route" signs on Filmore Street at Airline Highway facing north. 
(68)  "No truck route" sign on Maine Avenue at Twenty-sixth Street facing north. 
(69)  "No truck route" sign on Twenty-third Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing east. 
(70)  "No truck route" sign on Twenty-third Street at Williams Boulevard facing west. 
(71)  "No truck route" sign on Eleventh Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
(72)  "No truck route" sign on Illinois Avenue at Twenty-first Street facing south. 
(73)  "No truck route" sign on Webster Street at Airline Highway facing north. 
(74)  "No truck route" sign on Clay Street at Airline Highway facing north. 
(75)  "No truck route" sign on Kenner Avenue at Daniel Street facing east. 
(76)  "No truck route" sign on Kenner Avenue at Daniel Street facing west. 
(77)  "No truck route" sign on Daniel Street at Kenner Avenue facing north. 
(78)  "No truck route" sign on Daniel Street at Kenner Avenue facing south. 
(79)  "No truck route" sign on Vouray Drive at Macon Drive facing east. 
(80)  "No truck route" sign on Vouray Drive at Loire Drive facing west. 
(81)  "No truck route" sign on Twenty-sixth Street as Roosevelt Boulevard facing east. 
(82)  "No truck route" signs on Twenty-sixth Street at Idaho Avenue facing west. 
(83)  "No truck route" sign on Twenty-fourth Street at Roosevelt Boulevard facing west. 
(84)  "No truck route" sign on Kentucky Avenue at Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
(85)  "No truck route" sign on Daniel Street at Kenner Avenue facing north. 
(86)  "No truck route" sign on Daniel Street at Kenner Avenue facing south. 
(87)  "No truck route" sign on Twenty-seventh Street at Tifton Street facing east. 
(88)  "No truck route" sign on Loyola Drive at Thirty-first Street facing south. 
(89)  "No truck route" sign on Loyola Drive at West Esplanade Avenue facing north. 
(90)  Two "trucks prohibited" signs on the corner of Chateau Boulevard, at the intersection of Chateau Mouton and Chateau Rothchild, facing east. 
(91)  "No Truck Route" signs on Driftwood Boulevard at West Esplanade Avenue and Williams Boulevard. 
(d)  Keep right signs. 
(1)  "Keep right" sign on Driftwood Drive at its intersection with West Esplanade facing north. 
(2)  "Keep right" sign on Roosevelt Boulevard at Thirty-third Street facing north. 
(3)  "Keep right" sign on Antonine Wattigny Boulevard facing south. 
(4)  "Keep right" sign on Forty-first Street and Magdelaine Drive facing south. 
(5)  "Keep right" sign on Forty-first Street and Monte Carlo Drive facing north. 
(e)  No through traffic signs. 
(1)  "No through traffic" sign on Idaho from West Metairie from traffic going north, sign facing south. 
(2)  "No through traffic" sign on Minor Street, 100 feet of Airline Highway facing south. 
(3)  "No through traffic" sign on Daniel Street at Airline Highway facing south. 
(4)  "No through traffic" sign on Oxley Street at Airline Highway facing south. 
(5)  "No through traffic" sign on Maria Street at Airline Highway facing south. 
(6)  "No through traffic" sign on Compromise Street at Airline Highway facing south. 
(7)  "No through traffic" sign on Clay Street, 50 feet off Airline Highway facing south. 
(8)  "No through traffic" sign on Hudson Street, 50 feet off Airline Highway facing south. 
(9)  "No through traffic" sign on Aberdeen at Veterans Boulevard facing north. 
(10)  "No through traffic" sign on Forty-second Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
(11)  "No through traffic" sign on Thirty-third Street at Williams Boulevard facing east. 
(12)  "No through traffic" sign on Lake Trail, 25 feet north of the Forty-first Street Canal facing north. 
(13)  "No through traffic" sign on Lake Trail, 25 feet north of West Esplanade facing south. 
(14)  "No through traffic" sign on Florida Avenue at its intersection with the east bound lanes of West Esplanade Avenue. 
(15)  "No through traffic" sign on Florida Avenue, between West Esplanade and Thirty-fourth Street, facing north. 
(16)  "No through traffic" sign on Lake Trail, at its intersection with Vintage Drive facing south. 
(17)  "No through traffic" sign on Chateau Rothchild at Chateau Boulevard facing east. 
(18)  "No through traffic" sign on Sharon Street at its intersection with Veterans Boulevard facing north. 
(19)  "No through traffic" sign on Veterans Boulevard at its intersection with Loyola Drive facing east. 
(f)  No right turn signs. 
(1)  On California Avenue at its intersection with Thirty-ninth Street facing southbound traffic on California Avenue to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) at Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(2)  On Florida Avenue, between West Esplanade Avenue and Thirty-fourth Street, facing north-"No right turn" between 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 a.m. 
(3)  On West Esplanade Avenue westbound at Janice Avenue-"No right turn 4:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m." 
(4)  On Arkansas Avenue at its intersection with Thirty-eighth Street facing northbound traffic on Arkansas Avenue to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) at Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(5)  "No right turn" sign on Roosevelt Boulevard at its intersection with Twenty-fifth Street facing northbound traffic on Roosevelt Boulevard to be effective during school hours (7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(6)  "No right turn" sign on Roosevelt Boulevard at its intersection with Twenty-sixth Street facing northbound traffic on Roosevelt Boulevard to be effective during school hours (7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(7)  "No right turn" sign on Massachusetts Ave. at its intersection with Twenty-sixth Street facing southbound traffic on Massachusetts Ave. to be effective during school hours (7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(g)  No left turn signs. 
(1)  "No left turn" sign facing east for eastbound traffic at the newly constructed signalized intersection for the Pavillion Shopping Center. 
(2)  West Loyola Drive approaches to Millsaps, between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:30 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. and 4:00 p.m. 
(3)  Loyola Drive, northbound at its intersection with the Duke Drive median-"No left turn" between 4:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. 
(4)  "No left turn" on Alabama Avenue at westbound Vintage Drive, facing north. 
(5)  "No left turn" on Alabama Avenue at eastbound Vintage Drive, facing south. 
(6)  On West Esplanade Avenue in the median facing west in advance of Continental Drive between 7 and 9 a.m. and 3 and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(7)  On West Esplanade Avenue facing west at the southeast quadrant in advance of Continental Drive between 7 and 9 a.m. and 3 and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday. 
(8)  On Arkansas Avenue at its intersection with Thirty-eighth Street facing southbound traffic on Arkansas Avenue to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) at Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(9)  On California Avenue at its intersection with Thirty-ninth Street facing northbound traffic on California Avenue to be effective during school hours (7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m. and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m.) at Greenlawn Terrace Elementary School. 
(10)  "No left turn" sign on Roosevelt Boulevard at is intersection with Twenty-fifth Street facing southbound traffic on Roosevelt Boulevard to be effective during school hours (7:00 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(11)  "No left turn" sign on Roosevelt Boulevard at its intersection with Twenty-sixth Street facing southbound traffic on Roosevelt Boulevard to be effective during school hours (7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(12)  "No left turn" sign on Maine Ave. across the street from the exit of the horseshoe drop-off/pickup effective during school hours (7:30 a.m. to 8:30 a.m. and 2:45 p.m. to 4:00 p.m.) at the Kenner Discovery Elementary School. 
(13)  "No left turn" sign on Medoc Drive facing north at the intersection with Vintage Drive. 
(h)  No U-Turn signs. 
(1)  "No U-Turn" signs on the media at the intersection of West Esplanade Avenue and Antoine Wattigny Boulevard facing east and west. 
(2)  "No U-Turn" sign facing east on the median crossing fronting the Relais Esplanade Apartments on West Esplanade Avenue for westbound traffic. 
(3)  "No U-Turn" sign facing east on the median crossing fronting Avant Garde Apartments on West Esplanade Avenue for westbound traffic. 
(i)  Yield sign. 
(1)  "Yield" sign on the new U-turn lane between Thirty-ninth Street and Vintage Drive facing east. 
(2)  "Yield" sign on the new U-turn lane between Thirty-seventh Street and West Esplanade facing west. 
(3)  "Yield" sign for the southbound Alabama Crossing traffic to eastbound Vintage Drive traffic, facing north. 
(4)  "Yield" sign for the southbound Alabama Crossing traffic to westbound Vintage Drive traffic facing north. 
(5)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane west side of Williams Boulevard at Vintage Drive facing south. 
(6)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane west side of Williams Boulevard at Vintage Drive facing north. 
(7)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Bessemer Street and Gadsden Street facing east. 
(8)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Bessemer Street and Gadsen Street facing east. 
(9)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Phoenix Street and Panama Street facing west. 
(10)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Phoenix Street and Panama Street facing east. 
(11)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Huntsville Street and Jasper Street facing east. 
(12)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Tupelo Street and Acron Street facing east. 
(13)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Tupelo Street and Acron Street facing west. 
(14)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Albany Street and Dawson Street facing east. 
(15)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Dawson Street and Augusta Street facing east. 
(16)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Helena Street and Tifton Street facing east. 
(17)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Helena Street and Tifton Street facing west. 
(18)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of westbound Veterans Boulevard at Marietta Street facing east. 
(19)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Lexington Street and West Bainbridge Avenue facing west. 
(20)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard at Virginia Avenue facing east. 
(21)  "Yield" sign on the U-Turn lane of Veterans Boulevard between Virginia Avenue and the Duncan Canal facing west. 
(j)  Right turn only signs. 
(1)  "Right turn only" sign at the first driveway west of Chateau Boulevard that allows ingress and egress to the strip shopping center where the Walgreens Drugstore is located. 
(Ord. No. 1080, § 1, 8-12-68; Ord. No. 1289, 4-12-71; Ord. No. 1304, 5-13-71; Ord. No. 1337, 9-13-71; Ord. No. 1403, 5-8-72; Ord. No. 1468, 11-27-72; Ord. No. 1483, 2-12-73; Ord. No. 1528, 5-29-73; Ord. No. 1603, 1-14-74; Ord. No. 1616, 2-25-74; Ord. No. 1668, 9-9-74; Ord. No. 1697, 12-9-74; Ord. No. 1724, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1734, 6-9-75; Ord. No. 1807, 12-8-75; Ord. No. 1880, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 1968, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 2026, § 2, 4-11-77; Ord. No. 2177, 10-17-77; Ord. No. 2197, 12-12-77; Ord. No. 2285, 5-1-78; Ord. No. 2314, 6-12-78; Ord. No. 2504, 4-16-79; Ord. No. 2559, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 2659, 1-14-80; Ord. No. 2661, 1-21-80; Ord. No. 2721, 6-2-80; Ord. No. 2773, 8-18-80; Ord. No. 2862, 1-8-81; Ord. No. 2870, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 3202, 4-15-82; Ord. No. 3217, 5-20-82; Ord. No. 3290, § 1, 9-2-82; Ord. No. 3313, § 1, 10-21-81; Ord. No. 3496, § 1, 5-5-83; Ord. No. 3582, § 1, 7-7-83; Ord. No. 3753, § 1, 11-17-83; Ord. No. 3762, § 1, 12-1-83; Ord. No. 3811, § 1, 1-5-84; Ord. No. 3812, § 1, 1-5-84; Ord. No. 3945, § 1, 5-3-84; Ord. No. 5319, §§ 1, 2, 3-7-85; Ord. No. 5340, § 1, 3-21-85; Ord. No. 5377, § 1, 5-2-85; Ord. No. 5506, § 1, 9-5-85; Ord. No. 5566, § 1, 10-17-85; Ord. No. 5736, § 1, 8-7-86; Ord. No. 5745, § 1, 8-21-86; Ord. No. 5827, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5828, § 1, 3-5-87; Ord. No. 5944, § 1, 10-15-87; Ord. No. 5946, § 2, 10-15-87; Ord. No. 6032, § 1, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 6100, § 1, 6-16-88; Ord. No. 6189, § 1, 1-5-89; Ord. No. 6190, § 1, 1-5-89; Ord. No. 6220, § 1, 2-16-89; Ord. No. 6269, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6270, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6273, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6274, § 1, 6-15-89; Ord. No. 6286, § 1, 7-13-89; Ord. No. 6302, § 1, 8-17-89; Ord. No. 6375, § 1, 1-18-90; Ord. No. 6387, § 1, 3-1-90; Ord. No. 6417, § 1, 5-17-90; Ord. No. 6441, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6442, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6443, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6444, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6445, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6446, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6447, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6449, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6450, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6455, § 1, 7-12-90; Ord. No. 6526, § 1, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6529, § 1, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6530, § 1, 11-15-90; Ord. No. 6602, § 1, 5-16-91; Ord. No. 6792, § 1, 8-20-92; Ord. No. 6796, § 1, 9-3-92; Ord. No. 6835, § 1, 2-4-93; Ord. No. 6853, § 1, 4-15-93; Ord. No. 6855, § 1, 4-15-93; Ord. No. 6882, § 1, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 6883, § 1, 6-17-93; Ord. No. 6901, § 1, 7-1-93; Ord. No. 6912, § 1, 8-19-93; Ord. No. 6973, § 1, 2-3-94; Ord. No. 6974, § 1, 2-3-94; Ord. No. 7070, § 1, 8-4-94; Ord. No. 7071, § 1, 8-4-94; Ord. No. 7073, § 1, 8-4-94; Ord. No. 7095, § 1, 9-15-94; Ord. No. 7234, § 1, 6-15-95; Ord. No. 7264, § 1, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 7265, § 1, 7-20-95; Ord. No. 7538, § 1, 12-14-95; Ord. No. 7365, § 1, 12-14-95; Ord. No. 7366, § 1, 12-14-95; Ord. No. 7372, § 1, 1-4-96; Ord. No. 7370, § 1, 1-4-96; Ord. No. 7374, § 1, 1-18-96; Ord. No. 7397, § 1, 3-7-96; Ord. No. 7398, § 1, 3-7-96; Ord. No. 7407, § 1, 3-21-96; Ord. No. 7475, § 1, 6-20-96; Ord. No. 7637, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7638, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7639, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7640, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7641, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7642, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7643, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7644, § 1, 3-6-97; Ord. No. 7823, § 1, 11-6-97; Ord. No. 7825, § 1, 11-6-97; Ord. No. 7837, § 1, 11-20-97; Ord. No. 7838, § 1, 11-20-97; Ord. No. 7854, § 1, 12-4-97; Ord. No. 7853, § 1, 12-4-97; Ord. No. 7987, § 1, 9-17-98; Ord. No. 8032, § 1, 12-17-98; Ord. No. 8603, § 1, 1-3-02; Ord. No. 8662, § 1, 7-10-03; Ord. No. 9625, § 1, 2-14-08; Ord. No. 9734, § 1, 7-10-08; Ord. No. 10,144, § 1, 8-19-10; Ord. No. 10,208, §§ 1, 2, 2-17-11; Ord. No. 10,314, §§ 1-4, 11-3-11; Ord. No. 10,690, §§ 1-4, 11-21-13; Ord. No. 10,807, §§ 1-4, 8-21-14; Ord. No. 11,341, § 2, 10-19-17; Ord. No. 11,509, § 1, 1-18-19) 
Sec. 15-23.1. - Temporary traffic-control signs. 
    The city police chief may establish and post temporary traffic-control signs for up to fifteen (15) days in relation to special events. Notice of a temporary traffic-control sign must be posted at least forty-eight (48) hours before the start of the temporary traffic-control period. 
(Ord. No. 11,364, § 1, 12-21-17) 
Sec. 15-24. - Traffic prohibited on canal banks and dedicated but unimproved streets. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor-driven vehicle of any description, including but not limited to motorcycles, motor-driven cycles or motor scooters upon any canal bank except where an improved roadway for vehicular travel has been provided by the appropriate governing agency or where authorized to park by the appropriate governing agency. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor-driven vehicle of any description, including but not limited to motorcycles, motor-driven cycles or motor scooters upon any dedicated but unimproved roadways or streets within the City of Kenner. 
    No person shall operate and no owner shall give permission for the operation of any "off-road motor vehicle" (as defined in R.S. 47:301 (17)), or all terrain motor vehicle, including but not limited to dirt bikes, three-wheelers or four-wheelers on any canal bank, public street, or private property within one thousand (1,000) feet of any residence. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to authorized employees of the City of Kenner or any other public agency while in the performance of official duties, or to private contractors engaged in legitimate business activities that require vehicles to use such canal banks or dedicated but unimproved roadways or streets. 
(d)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated, any of the provisions of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 2037, § 1, 4-25-77; Ord. No. 5737, § 1, 8-7-86) 
Sec. 15-25. - Streets designated as one-way at certain times and during the parish school year. 
    Between the hours of 2:00 p.m. and 3:15 p.m., Monday through Friday, during the months and days that coincide with the regular session of the Jefferson Parish school year, the following streets are designated as one-way: 
    Medoc Drive between the Tavel Drive and Vintage Drive is designated a one-way street in a southerly direction. 
    Tavel Drive between Chateau Boulevard and Cognac Drive is designated a one-way street in a westerly direction. 
(Ord. No. 7072, §§ 1, 2, 8-4-94) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7072, adopted Aug. 4, 1994, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, inclusion of §§ 1 and 2 of such ordinance as § 15-25 was at the discretion of the discretion. 
Sec. 15-26. - Traffic regulation in Williams Boulevard Recreation Complex Area. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any traffic control device, sign, striping, or posted traffic instruction within or upon the area commonly known as the Williams Boulevard Recreation Complex, being all of the land area lying north of the East Jefferson Levee District right-of-way at the extension of Williams Boulevard. 
(Ord. No. 7293, § 2, 9-7-95) 
Sec. 15-27. - Parking or stopping in designated school zones. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park a motorized vehicle outside of a schools' "designated drop off or pick up zones" and/or within the "school zone" during such times as existing school zone traffic regulations are in effect for the purpose of avoiding the policies of such schools regarding picking up or dropping off children. 
(b)  For the purpose of this legislation, "school zone" is defined as per section 15-18(6), which designates school zone areas as "on streets abutting schools and for a distance of three hundred (300) feet on either side thereof during the following time limits: 7:45 a.m.-9:00 a.m.; 11:45 a.m.-1:30 p.m.; and 2:30 p.m.-4:00 p.m." 
(c)  Any person who violates or causes to be violated, any of the provisions of this section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 10,284, 9-1-11) 
Secs. 15-28-15-33. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Motor vehicle inspection, R.S. 32:1301 et seq. 

Sec. 15-34. - Vehicle inspection required. 
(a)  All vehicles registered in the City of Kenner shall be presented to the department of inspection and code enforcement motor vehicle inspection station at least once every other year, except as may be otherwise provided in this section. 
(b)  Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less are eligible for a two-year inspection certificate only if the vehicle age is ten (10) years or less. For purposes of this article, the term "vehicle age" shall be determined based on the vehicle's model year, and a "year" shall be measured through the last day of that respective calendar year (for example, a vehicle with a model year of 2000 shall have a vehicle age of one (1) year as of January 1, 2001). 
(c)  Vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand and one (10,001) pounds or greater shall be presented to the department of inspection and code enforcement motor vehicle inspection station on an annual basis and shall not be entitled to a two-year inspection certificate. 
(d)  The annual inspection period shall begin on January 1 of each year; the reinspection month shall be determined by the month and year indicated on each particular vehicle's previous inspection certificate. 
(e)  Inspection certificates with a validity period of two (2) years may not be issued prior to January 1, 2017. 
(f)  Implementation schedule: Beginning January 1, 2017 any vehicle with an inspection certificate which expires in an odd numbered month (January, March, May, July, September, and November) and which meets the eligibility requirements herein may obtain a two-year inspection certificate and sticker. Any vehicle which does not have an inspection certificate issued by the City of Kenner, or has an inspection certificate which expires in an even month, shall be eligible for a one-year inspection certificate. 
(g)  Effective January 1, 2018 a two-year inspection certificate and sticker may be issued to any vehicle which meets the eligibility requirements for a biennial certificate and passes the inspection. 
(Ord. No. 511, § I, 1-10-58; Ord. No. 1520, 5-14-73; Ord. No. 6919, § 1, 9-2-93; Ord. No. 10,070, § 4, 4-8-10; Ord. No. 11,102, § 1, 6-2-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,102, § 1, adopted June 2, 2016, changed the title of § 15-34 from "Required" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 15-35. - Operation of vehicle without certificate prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person residing and/or located in the city to operate any motor vehicle on the public streets, roads, and thoroughfares of the city without first having obtained the certificate of mechanical inspection as herein provided. 
(Ord. No. 511, § II, 11-10-58) 
Sec. 15-36. - Requirements for issuance of certificate. 
    No certificate of mechanical inspection for inspection required by this article shall be issued for any motor vehicle unless the following requirements are satisfactorily fulfilled and complied with: 
(1)  Owner. The owner is a bona fide resident of and/or is located within the city. 
(2)  Licenses. The vehicle license plate shall be displayed in the intended lawful manner, fastened and in no way mutilated. 
(3)  Windshield. Every vehicle originally equipped with a windshield shall be so equipped. It shall be free of discoloration, posters, stickers and compounded or multiple breaks or cracks that will impair driver's vision, except that identification or inspection stickers are permissible in upper right-hand and either lower corner. Every vehicle originally equipped with approved safety glass shall not be altered in this respect. 
(4)  Windshield wiper. Every vehicle having a windshield shall be equipped with at least one (1) windshield wiper on the driver's side and controlled by driver, in good working order. 
(5)  Mirror. Every vehicle shall be equipped with a rear view mirror, with proper mounting for reflecting surface and unobstructed rear view of highway. 
(6)  Horn. Every vehicle shall be equipped with a horn that gives an audible signal. 
(7)  Rear and side glass. Every vehicle originally equipped with rear and side glass shall be so equipped. Glass shall be free of discoloration, posters, stickers, and compounded or multiple breaks or cracks that will impair driver's vision. 
(8)  Fenders and bumpers. Every vehicle originally equipped with fenders and bumpers shall have same securely fastened and shall not have cracks or tears that protrude dangerously. 
(9)  Taillights. Every vehicle shall have at least one taillight on rear, mounted at center or left side, emitting a red signal. Also a white light illuminating the rear license plate, both plainly visible. 
(10)  Stop lights. Every vehicle shall have at least one stop light on rear, mounted at center or left side, that presents a red signal upon application of foot brakes. It shall be plainly visible. 
(11)  Turn signals. Every motor truck or bus shall be equipped with turn signals if its body construction does not allow full view of one-half (1/2) of the driver's arm during signals. 
(12)  Steering (wheel) alignment. Front wheels shall not drag sideways more than thirty (30) feet per mile. 
(13)  Steering assembly. Front wheels when free of the ground shall have no more than one-half (1/2) inch free movement in or out, at top or bottom. There shall be no undue looseness at gear box to frame, dray links, tie rod ends, shackle bolts, suspension bolts or bushings; nor any broken main or secondary springs, nor any unusual condition that would cause difficult or uncertain steering. Steering wheel looseness shall not exceed three (3) inch free play at wheel rim. 
(14)  Tires. Vehicle tires shall be free of plainly visible exposed fabric or bulges which indicates a dangerous condition. 
(15)  Exhaust system. Every vehicle shall have an exhaust system free of leaks and shall be equipped with a muffler of original or standard design that prevents excessive or unusual noise. 
(16)  Headlights. Every automobile, truck and bus shall be equipped with two (2) headlights that burn on both high and low beam. All reflectors, lenses, bulbs and units shall comply with approved requirements and be correctly installed. They shall not be discolored, cracked, or broken. All headlights, high beams, shall have a minimum of five thousand (5,000) candlepower and the center of the high beam shall be aimed not more than eight (8) inches to the left or eight (8) inches to the right of straight ahead and not higher than level nor more than eight (8) inches below level at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet in front of the vehicle. 
(17)  Auxiliary lights. Vehicles may be equipped with no more than two (2) auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front. They shall be adjusted so that they will not blind oncoming drivers. 
(18)  Emergency (parking) brakes. Every vehicle shall be equipped with an emergency brake in good working order, capable of holding the vehicle on an incline. 
(19)  Brake pedal. Every vehicle shall be equipped with a braking system in good working order with a pedal reserve of at least two (2) inches. 
(20)  Foot (service) brakes. Every vehicle having brakes on all wheels shall be capable of producing a total braking effort of not less than fifty-four (54) per cent of total weight (corresponding to a stopping distance of twenty-five (25) feet from twenty (20) m.p.h.). Every vehicle not having brakes on all wheels shall be capable of producing a total braking effort of not less than thirty (30) per cent of total weight (corresponding to a stopping distance of forty-five (45) feet from twenty (20) m.p.h.). All vehicles originally equipped with brakes onall wheels shall not be altered in this respect. The braking effort of either front wheel shall not be less than sixty-four (64) percent of the other front wheel (equal within thirty-six (36) percent). The braking effort of either rear wheel shall not be less than sixty-four (64) percent of the other rear wheel (equal within thirty-six (36) percent). The braking effort of the rear wheels shall not be less than twenty (20) percent of the front wheels or vice versa. 
(21)  Insurance. No motor vehicle inspection tag shall be issued to any person or any motor vehicle until written proof has been shown to the Motor Vehicle Inspection Office of the owner's compliance with the Louisiana Compulsory Motor Vehicle Liability Security Act, LSA R.S. 33-861 et seq. in the form of one of the following: 
(a)  An identification card issued by an insurer to its insured which shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the insurance company; 
(2)  The insurance policy number; 
(3)  A description of the motor vehicle insured under the policy; and 
(4)  The effective date and the expiration date of the policy. 
(b)  A motor vehicle liability insurance policy or duplicate original thereof. 
(c)  A motor vehicle liability insurance policy binder or a duplicate original thereof. 
(d)  A duplicate original of a motor vehicle liability bond which complies with the definition of R.S. 32:861(B). 
(e)  A certificate of the state treasurer stating that cash or securities have been deposited with said treasurer as provided for under the provisions of R.S. 32:861 (C). 
(f)  A certificate of self-insurance issued by the secretary under the provisions of R.S. 32:1042 qualifying the owner of the vehicle as a self insurer. 
(Ord. No. 511, § III, 11-10-58; Ord. No. 5751, § 2, 9-4-86) 
Sec. 15-37. - Contents of certificate; who may issue. 
    The certificate of mechanical inspection for inspection required by this article shall be issued in the name of the city and shall be of such design and type as may be prescribed by the mayor and shall be procured from the department of inspection and code enforcement motor vehicle inspection station. 
(Ord. No. 511, § IV, 11-10-58; Ord. No. 11,102, § 2, 6-2-16) 
Sec. 15-38. - Fee; keeping of register required; penalty for late inspections. 
(a)  A fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) and an additional two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) collected on behalf of the city police department for use in traffic law enforcement shall be collected for each certificate of inspection issued upon the provisions of this article for each noncommercial passenger vehicle for a total inspection fee of ten dollars ($10.00), and a fee of thirteen dollars and fifty cents ($13.50) and an additional two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) collected on behalf of the city police department for use in traffic law enforcement for a total inspection fee of sixteen dollars ($16.00) for all commercial vehicles not inspected on the premises of the inspection station and an inspection register shall be kept setting forth the name of the owner of the vehicle, its make and model, license number, date inspected and certificate number issued. 
(b)  Any owner of a vehicle subject to the provisions of this article, failing to procure the certificate of inspection within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of the purchase of said vehicle, when said date is subsequent to the current inspection date herein provided, shall pay over and above the fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for said inspection certificate, the additional sum of four dollars ($4.00), as a delinquent penalty or fee. Nothing herein provided shall be construed as in any manner, waiving, or lessening the criminal penalties provided in section 15-40 for the violation of this article. 
(c)  The above listed fees seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for passenger vehicles and thirteen dollars and fifty cents ($13.50) for fleet vehicles not inspected on the premises of the inspection station do not include fees which the city collects on behalf of the city police department for use in traffic law enforcement. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (a), (b), and (c) above, the fee of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) for the certificate of inspection is hereby waived for persons holding the status of a disabled veteran or a Purple Heart or Congressional Medal of Honor recipient. Such person shall produce adequate proof of their status at the time of application for the certificate, and shall be entitled to the waiver for no more than one (1) vehicle. Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of the delinquent penalty provided in subsection (b), however, nor shall any waiver be applicable to commercial or fleet vehicles. 
(e)  For inspection certificates providing two (2) years of validity as set forth in this chapter, the fee for such certificates shall be equivalent to the fee required for two (2) annual inspections. 
(Ord. No. 544, § I, 6-8-59; Ord. No. 1520, 5-14-73; Ord. No. 3267, § 1, 8-5-82; Ord. No. 6509, § 1, 11-1-90; Ord. No. 7622, § 1, 2-6-97; Ord. No. 8619, § 1, 2-21-02; Ord. No. 9944, § 1, 6-18-09; Ord. No. 10,070, § 4, 4-8-10; Ord. No. 11,102, § 3, 6-2-16) 
Sec. 15-39. - Attachment of certificate to vehicle; right to inspect certificate. 
    The certificate of inspection, as provided for in this article, shall, at all times, be attached to the motor vehicle, in a conspicuous place and shall be subject to inspection by any police officer and/or authorized agent. 
(Ord. No. 511, § VI, 11-10-58) 
Sec. 15-40. - Penalty for article violation. 
    Any person who violates, or causes to be violated, any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 511, § VI, 11-10-58) 
Sec. 15-41. - Vehicle inspection; delinquent penalty or fee. 
    All vehicles subject to the provisions of this article are required to be inspected at least once every other year. The inspection period shall begin January 1 of each year. The inspection month and day shall be determined by the month and day indicated on each vehicle's previous inspection certificate. A delinquent penalty of four dollars ($4.00) shall be charged for any vehicle presented for inspection on which the required inspection date has been exceeded by seven (7) days or more. 
(Ord. No. 10,070, § 4, 4-8-10; Ord. No. 11,102, § 4, 6-2-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,102, § 4, adopted June 2, 2016, changed the title of § 15-41 from "Annual inspection; delinquent penalty or fee" to read as herein set out. 
Sec. 15-42. - Change of ownership. 
    Change of ownership shall not affect the renewal date of certificates of inspection issued in accordance with this article as amended herein. 
(Ord. No. 1520, 5-14-73) 
Secs. 15-43-15-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARKING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Special littering provisions for abandoned vehicles on private property, § 1; parking in areas designated as fire lanes, § 8-33; parking of other vehicles at taxicab stands prohibited, § 16-52. 
State Law reference- Abandoned automobiles; sale by municipalities; procedure, R.S. 32:476; regulation of abandoned automobiles by municipalities, R.S. 33:4876. 

Sec. 15-51. - Impoundment of vehicles abandoned, illegally parked or obstructing traffic; procedure for release; procedure for disposal. 
(a)  Members of the department of police or their agents may remove a vehicle from a street or highway or fire lane to the department pound or other place of safety under the circumstances hereinafter enumerated which conduct is hereby declared to be unlawful: 
(1)  When any vehicle is left unattended on any bridge, viaduct or causeway or in any tube or tunnel where such vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic; 
(2)  When a vehicle upon a highway or street is so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic or the person in charge of the vehicle is, by reason of physical injury, incapacitated to such an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal; and, 
(3)  When any vehicle is parked illegally in the following manner: 
a.  Parked in the area within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection; 
b.  Parked in areas within fifteen (15) feet on either side of a fire hydrant; 
c.  Parked or stationed upon or across any public sidewalk or passageway within the city; 
d.  Parked on any neutral ground or median strip dividing traffic lanes on any streets within the City of Kenner; 
e.  Parked in a designated tow-away zone. 
f.  Parked in a designated fire lane. 
(b)  Any unoccupied vehicle of whatever kind or description found in violation of subsection (a) of this section shall be immediately removed and impounded by the chief of police, any police officer or authorized person, and such vehicle shall be surrendered only to the duly authorized owner thereof upon: 
(1)  Such person depositing with the department of police his chauffeur's or operator's license validly issued to him under Section 411 of Title 32 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes; or 
(2)  Such person depositing with the department of police a cash or surety bond in the sum of thirty dollars ($30.00); or 
(3)  Such person (but only if he is the same person charged with the violation) signing and executing a form prepared by the department of law for the purpose of waiving trial, entering a plea of guilty to the offense charged, agreeing to and paying the applicable fine(s), towing fee and storage fees incurred for the period of impoundment prior to the release of the vehicle from impoundment. 
(4)  In the event the person whose vehicle has been impounded deposits his driver's license or deposits a bond, pursuant to the provisions of subparagraph (b)(1) or (2) hereof, then and in that event such person shall be issued a summons to appear for trial in accordance with the traffic code of the City of Kenner in the same manner and under the same procedures employed for any other traffic violation. 
(5)  Any person found guilty of any violation of this section by a court of competent jurisdiction shall, upon conviction thereof, be assessed a towing fee of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), and, a storage fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each day or portion of day that the vehicle involved was impounded, together with such fine as may be imposed by the court in accordance with law. 
(6)  If the vehicle impounded has not been reclaimed within twenty-four (24) hours of the time of its impoundment, the Kenner Police Department shall notify by certified mail the vehicle's last owner of record (as determined by the license tags thereon) of the place of impoundment of the vehicle. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to abandon any motor vehicle upon a public way in the City of Kenner. The term "public way" is hereby defined to include the street and any part of the street between the curb on the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, dedicated and designed for public use or any other thoroughfare open to the public as a matter of right for purposes of travel. 
(d)  A vehicle will be presumed to be abandoned when: 
(1)  Said vehicle is in such a state of disrepair as to be incapable of being driven in its present condition. 
(2)  Said vehicle has not been moved or used for more than seven (7) consecutive days and is apparently deserted. 
(e)  Abandoned vehicles may be impounded by the department of police or their authorized agents in the manner hereinafter provided: 
(1)  The officer shall place on the vehicle, in a prominent place, a sticker, provided by the department of law, notifying the owner that his vehicle is considered abandoned and will be towed. 
(2)  The department of police shall, by certified mail, contact the last registered owner of the automobile in question, if such registration is available. Said letter shall inform the owner of the date and time of a hearing, to be held no sooner than seven (7) days from the posting of said letter, which hearing will be conducted for the purpose of determining whether said vehicle has been truly abandoned. 
(3)  If at the hearing authorized above, the owner of the vehicle in question is found guilty of abandoning said vehicle, or does not appear to contest the finding of abandonment, but in no case before ten (10) days has elapsed from the date of the placing of the sticker mentioned in subparagraph (1) of this subsection, the department of police shall impound such vehicle if it has not been removed from the public way. 
(f)  Upon impoundment, the owner of a vehicle judged abandoned may retrieve his vehicle in the following manner: 
(1)  Such person depositing with the department of police, pending appeal of the finding of abandonment, his chauffeur's or operator's license validly issued to him under Section 411 of Title 32 of the Revised Statutes; or, 
(2)  Such person depositing with the department of police, pending appeal of the finding of abandonment, a cash or surety bond of thirty dollars ($30.00); or, 
(3)  Such person paying the applicable towing and storage charges and the applicable fine for the offense of abandoning his vehicle in a public way. 
(g)  Vehicles impounded pursuant to the provisions of this section may be disposed of in the following manner: 
(1)  After said vehicle has been impounded and unclaimed for six (6) months, the department of police shall send a certified letter to the last known owner of said vehicle, warning of the impending sale of said vehicle to the highest bidder unless said vehicle is claimed and the applicable fines and charges are paid. Copies of this letter shall be sent to those holding mortgages or liens on said vehicle. 
(2)  If said vehicle remains unclaimed for ten (10) days following the posting of the letter as provided for in subparagraph (g)(1), the department of police shall have an appraisal of said vehicle made, and shall publish a notice of the proposed sale of said vehicle in the official journal of the City of Kenner two (2) times within ten (10) days before the sale of said vehicle. This notice shall contain the time and place of the sale and a list of the vehicles to be sold and stipulations as to whether such vehicles are to be sold singly or as a unit, which decision may be made at the discretion of the department of police. 
(3)  Monies collected pursuant to the public sale aforementioned are to be deposited in the Treasury, City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64; Ord. No. 1093, § 3, 11-11-68; Ord. No. 1556, 8-27-73; Ord. No. 2042, §§ 1-7, 5-9-77; Ord. No. 2507, § 1, 4-23-79; Ord. No. 3176, § 1, 3-4-82; Ord. No. 6905, § 2, 7-15-93) 
Sec. 15-51.1. - Parking of large trucks, other large vehicles on streets prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any commercial vehicle or motor vehicle, licensed or required to be licensed with license plates exceeding fourteen thousand (14,000) pounds gross weight, or having a license prefix of "B," "C," "M," or "P," or trailers of any kind, tractor trailers, cargo containers, vehicles containing three (3) or more axles, boat or boat trailers or school or private buses on any street, including any part of the street between the curb, or the lateral line of the roadway and the adjacent property line, dedicated and designed for public use within the city. Commercial vehicles are vehicles operated for transportation of persons or property in the furtherance of a commercial enterprise or carried out for pecuniary gain. This definition does not include a commuter van, a vehicle used for ride-sharing, or a recreational vehicle that is not being used commercially. 
    This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties, nor shall such provision apply to persons actually engaged in repairing or otherwise improving the street with the authority of the City of Kenner, nor shall such provision apply to such vehicles that may be parked for the purpose of delivering or picking up materials or merchandise to any residential establishment for the actual time necessary to accomplish said delivery or pick up, nor shall such provision apply to such vehicles owned by any governmental agencies or its agents acting on its behalf. 
    This provision shall also not be deemed to apply to any small family passenger vans having a total passenger capacity of thirteen (13) persons or less regardless of the prefix on the license plate on such vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1556, 8-27-73; Ord. No. 6639, § 1, 7-25-91; Ord. No. 10,467, § 2, 10-18-12) 
Sec. 15-52. - Parking near intersection restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle in the area within twenty-five (25) feet of any intersection. 
(Ord. No. 274, 12-1-50; Ord. No. 1093, § 3, 11-11-68) 
Sec. 15-52.1. - Parking, stopping or standing near driveways restricted. 
    Parking, stopping or standing is prohibited in front of or within three (3) feet of the curb return in a public or private driveway. 
(Ord. No. 5399, 1, 5-16-85) 
Sec. 15-53. - Parking near fire hydrants restricted. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park in areas within fifteen (15) feet on either side of a fire hydrant. 
(Ord. No. 274, 12-1-50; Ord. No. 1093, § 3, 11-11-68) 
Sec. 15-54. - Maximum time period for parking. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, station, or abandon any motor vehicle continuously for more than forty-eight (48) hours on the street or other areas designed for public use within the city. 
(Ord. No. 277, 2-2-51; Ord. No. 772, § 7, 6-1-64; Ord. No. 1093, § 3, 11-11-68) 
Sec. 15-55. - Parking on sidewalks or passageways prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park, station or cause to be parked or stationed, any motor vehicle upon or across any public sidewalk or passageway within the city. 
(Ord. No. 326, § I, 8-6-54) 
Sec. 15-55.1. - Parking on neutral grounds and medians prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in any neutral ground or median strip diving traffic lanes on any streets within the City of Kenner. 
(Ord. No. 1968, 1-10-77) 
Sec. 15-55.2. - Mobility impaired parking designation; use restrictions: penalties for violations. 
(a)  The director of the department of code enforcement shall establish the minimum number required parking spaces for the mobility impaired under the specifications established by the American[s with] Disabilities Act accessibility guidelines (ADAAG) for all public property which is open to the public. 
(b)  Handicapped parking zones shall be established in all other areas of the city as the director of the department of code enforcement deems necessary to become compliant with the state statutes and the American[s with] Disabilities Act accessibility guidelines (ADAAG). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to park for any period of time in a handicapped zone unless that person has visibly displayed on the vehicle a license plate, hang tag or special parking card for the mobility impaired issued pursuant to R.S. 47:463.4 or 47:463.4.1. The Kenner police department and the department of code enforcement shall have joint responsibility for enforcing handicapped parking restrictions by ticketing any such illegally parked vehicle. 
(d)  Violations of this section shall be punished by a fine of two hundred and seventy five dollars ($275.00) for the first violation, plus court costs and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any subsequent violations plus court costs. 
(e)  If the violation is other than an individual, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed plus court costs. 
(f)  In addition to all fines, fees, and costs, the court shall also impose an additional twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each such violation to be forwarded to the state treasurer for the disability affairs trust fund in accordance with R.S. 46:2583. 
(g)  No fine issued pursuant to this section shall be reduced or suspended as required by R.S. 40:1742.B(7). 
(h)  When a law enforcement officer issues a citation for an alleged violation of this section, it shall be personally served upon the owner or operator of the vehicle. If the owner or operator is not present or refuses to accept the citation, personal service may be accomplished by affixing the parking citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place thereon. 
(i)  When a citation is issued for an alleged violation of this section and is affixed to the vehicle that does not have a mobility impaired license plate, a mobility impaired parking card or a hang tag, there shall be a rebuttal presumption that the person in whose name the vehicle is registered was operator of the vehicle when the alleged violation was committed. Additionally, any operator of a vehicle who is not the registered owner, but who uses or operates the vehicle with the permission of the owner, expressed or implied, shall be considered the agent of the owner to receive the citation required to be served upon the operator or registered owner of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 5640, §§ 2-5, 2-20-86; Ord. No. 8524, §§ 1, 2, 9-6-01) 
Sec. 15-55.3. - Unauthorized parking on private property. 
(a)  If signs are posted as provided, in (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to park or abandon any motor vehicle on private property without the consent of the owner, lessee or any other person in control of the private property, or their agent. For the purposes of this section, unauthorized parking on private property shall include, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Leaving an unattended vehicle with a "for sale" or similar sign on if for any period of time in any parking lot or vacant property: 
(2)  Leaving a vehicle in an apartment complex, retail or commercial parking lot for a period in excess of forty-eight (48) hours after the property owner notifies the vehicle owner by registered letter to their last registered address that the vehicle must be moved or it may be ticketed and/or towed: 
(3)  Parking a truck or other vehicle with sleeping area in it for any period of time to allow the driver and/or occupant to sleep. 
(4)  Parking in a commercial parking lot at which the driver or occupant is not shopping, or visiting the provider of services, provided that the owner or lessee of the property posts signs at conspicuous locations that the parking lot is for the customers or clients only. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the owner or lessee from having the unauthorized vehicle towed if the owner or lessee of the property has posted signs that are legible, twelve (12) inches in width and eighteen (18) inches in height, must reference "Kenner Code of Ordinances Section 15-55.3", and must be posted in conspicuous locations that parking is for authorized vehicles only, and that unauthorized vehicles are subject to being towed, if the vehicle, or its owner or driver, has been issued a certain in violation of this section. If a vehicle is towed, then the appropriate provisions of the Louisiana Towing and Storage Act, LA. R.S. 32:1;711, et. Seq., regarding owner notification storage, sale or disposal of the vehicle shall be followed. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, motor vehicles shall include any car, truck, boat, trailer, camper, recreational vehicle, or any part of thereof. 
(d)  Anyone in violation of this section shall be subject to a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 8148, § I, 8-5-99; Ord. No. 9735, § 1, 7-10-08) 
Sec. 15-56. - No parking zones established. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle in the areas designated as "no parking" established by this section, when signs are posted indicating such zones. No parking zones are established as follows: 
    Aberdeen Street. 2100, 2200, 2300, and 2400 blocks, between the 25th Street Canal and 22nd Street, on the east side (four (4) signs). 
    Airline Highway. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the shoulders of the New Orleans-Baton Rouge Airline Highway, within the right-of-way owned by the state, within the municipal limits of the city. This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties, nor shall such provisions apply to persons actually engaged in repairing or otherwise improving of the highway under the authority of the department of highways for the state. 
    Airline Highway. Between Duncan and Maria Streets, facing east (two (2) signs). 
    Airline Highway. Between Duncan and Maria Streets, facing west (two (2) signs). 
    Arizona Avenue. West side, beginning at the southern property line of 3519 Arizona Avenue southward to the intersection of Arizona Avenue and West Esplanade Avenue. 
    Bessemer Street. Between Twenty-seventh Street and Veterans Boulevard, facing north. 
    Bruin Drive. Between Maryland Avenue and Maine Avenue, facing west. 
    Bruin Drive. Between Maryland Avenue and Roosevelt Boulevard, facing west. 
    California Avenue. Between Twentieth and Nineteenth Streets, facing north. 
    California Avenue. Between Twentieth and Nineteenth Streets, facing south. 
    Carroll Street. Between Bainbridge and Virginia Streets, facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Carroll Street. South side, between Bainbridge and Virginia Streets. 
    Cattlefarm Road. Between West Esplanade Avenue and Irish Bend Road, west side. 
    Centanni Lane. Between Jefferson Highway (Third Street) and Mississippi River levee, facing east. 
    Chateau Boulevard. Three (3) signs facing south and one (1) sign facing north on east side of Chateau Boulevard at race track. 
    Chateau Boulevard. Three (3) signs facing north on east side of Chateau Boulevard at race track. 
    Chateau Boulevard. Three (3) signs facing north on west side of Chateau Boulevard at race track. 
    Chateau Boulevard. Beginning at the southwest corner of Chateau Boulevard at its intersection with Vintage Drive extending south for one hundred (100) feet. 
    City Annex Building. Three (3) facing north. 
    Clay Street. 300 Clay Street. 
    Clay Street. 643 Clay Street facing east. 
    Clay Street. 1713 Clay Street facing north. 
    Compromise Street. Between Fifteenth Street and Sixteenth Street, facing north. 
    Continental Drive. Between West Esplanade and Mayfair Street, facing north and south. 
    Daniel Street. Two hundred (200) feet off Airline Highway facing west. 
    Daniel Street. Between Airline Highway and Sixth Street, facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Daniel Street. Between Airline Highway and Sixth Street, facing south (two (2) signs). 
    Decatur Street. Between Third Street and Fourth Street, facing south. 
    Decatur Street. Between Twenty-seventh Street and Veterans Boulevard, facing north. 
    Decatur Street. Between Twenty-seventh Street and Veterans Boulevard, facing south. 
    Delaware. South of Veterans Highway, one facing south, one facing north. 
    Delaware Avenue. East side of Delaware Avenue, one hundred (100) feet south of its intersection with Thirty-sixth Street facing north and south. 
    Delaware and Twenty-fourth Street. One facing south, one facing north. 
    Delaware and North Twenty-fifth Street. One facing south, one facing north. 
    Delaware and South Twenty-fifth Street. One facing north, one facing south. 
    Delaware and North Twenty-sixth Street. One facing south, one facing north. 
    Delaware and South Twenty-sixth Street. One facing south, one facing north. 
    Delaware and North Twenty-seventh Street. One facing south, one facing north. 
    Delaware and South Twenty-seven Street. One facing south, one facing north. 
    Driftwood Boulevard. Along the north and south side of Driftwood Boulevard at its intersection with Williams Boulevard to the easterly property line of Don Carter's Bowling Lanes. 
    Ernest. Between Gelpi and Lisa, facing north (three (3) signs). 
    East Loyola. East Loyola and Playground (neutral ground), facing north and south. 
    East Loyola Drive. East Loyola Drive and Playground, facing east and west. 
    East Loyola Drive. 3548 East Loyola Drive, facing south. 
    East Loyola Drive. 3551 East Loyola Drive, facing north. 
    East Loyola Drive. Front of 3632 East Loyola Drive on neutral ground, facing south. 
    East Loyola Drive. East Loyola Drive and West Loyola Drive neutral ground. 
    101 Emerson. Facing east. 
    101 Emerson. Facing west. 
    Florida Avenue. In front of 2231 and 2235 Florida Avenue. 
    Florida Avenue. Between West Esplanade and Thirty-sixth Street, facing north. 
    Florida Avenue. Between West Esplanade and Thirty-sixth Street, facing south. 
    Florida Avenue. Along the frontage of two (2) vacant lots located in the 2200 block of Florida Avenue. 
    Florida Street. No Parking-Here to Corner signs twenty-five (25) feet from the intersection on each approach to that intersection at the corner of 38th Street and Florida Street. 
    Forty-second Street. North and south sides between Florida Avenue to Connecticut Avenue. 
    Georgia Avenue. Three (3) signs facing south on Georgia Avenue north of Veterans Boulevard. 
    Georgia Avenue. Two (2) signs facing north on Georgia Avenue north of Veterans Boulevard. 
    Grandlake Boulevard. Along the west side of Grandlake Boulevard from West Esplanade Avenue to Verret Court. 
    Hans Street. East side of Hans Street, twenty-five (25) feet from its intersection with Thirty-fourth Street, to its intersection with Thirty-fourth Street. 
    Hanson Place. One no parking sign on Hanson Place, facing north. 
    Helena Street. East side between Twenty third Street and Twenty-fourth Street. 
    Helena Street. Between Twenty-seventh Street and Veterans Boulevard, facing north. 
    Hollandey Street. Between Third Street and Fourth Street, facing south. 
    Hollandey Street. Between Third Street and the Levee, facing west. 
    Holly Heights Drive. From West Esplanade Avenue to the rear property line of Avant Garde Complex west side, all signs facing north. 
    Hudson Street. Along west side of Hudson Street, between Airline Highway and Tenth Street. 
    Idaho Avenue. Between Twenty-third Street and Twenty-fifth Street, east side, no parking between 9:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m., except Saturdays, Sundays and holidays. 
    Idaho Avenue. Between Twenty-third Street and Twenty-fifth Street, west side, no parking at any time. 
    Jackson Street. About 700 Jackson Street, facing north. 
    Jackson Street. About 700 Jackson Street, facing south. 
    Jackson Street. 714 Jackson Street, facing east. 
    Jackson Street. 719 Jackson Street, facing east. 
    Jackson Street. Two (2) no parking signs on Jackson Street facing south and north. 
    Kansas Avenue. Along the frontage of 1911 Kansas Avenue. 
    Kentucky Avenue. Kentucky Avenue at Nineteenth Street facing south. 
    Kenner Avenue. North side between 2314 and 2326 Kenner Avenue. 
    Kenner Avenue. Between Warren and Farrar Streets, facing east. 
    Kenner Avenue. Between Warren and Farrar Streets, facing west. 
    Kenner Avenue. Between Williams Boulevard and Minor Street on the south side of Kenner Avenue. Monday-Friday between 2:00 p.m.-4:00 p.m. 
    Kenner Juvenile Building. One south, two (2) east. 
    Lot City Hall Center. Eight (8) facing four (4) east and four (4) west. 
    Loyola Drive. On Loyola Drive from its intersection with East and West Loyola to its intersection with West Esplanade Avenue, facing north. 
    Loyola Drive. On Loyola Drive between its intersection with East and West Loyola to its intersection with West Esplanade Avenue facing south. 
    Loyola Drive. On Loyola Drive in rear of Fire Station, four (4) signs, two (2) facing east and two (2) facing west. 
    Loyola Drive. On south side Loyola Drive and Service Road to I-10, facing south. 
    Loyola Drive. Between Veterans Boulevard and I-10, on northbound shoulders. 
    Loyola Drive. Between Veterans Boulevard and I-10, southbound shoulders. 
    Maine Avenue. At St. Lawrence Convent entry, both sides, one sign facing south and two (2) signs facing north. 
    Maine Street. 3300 Maine Street, facing south. 
    Maria Street. Between Ninth Street and Airline Highway, facing north. 
    Maria Street. Between Ninth Street and Airline Highway, facing south. 
    Maryland Avenue. Between Bruin Drive and Thirty-second Street facing north and south. 
    Maryland Avenue. Maryland Avenue at Thirtieth Street, facing north. 
    Maryland Avenue. 3128 Maryland Avenue, facing south. 
    Medoc Drive (Southside). Between Cognac Drive and Medoc Drive, Monday though Friday, between 2:45 p.m. and 3:45 p.m. when school is in session. 
    Minden Avenue. Between Airline Highway and the end of Lot K on the east side (two (2) signs). 
    Minor Street. Four (4) signs. 
    Minor Street. Between Sixth and Seventh Streets, facing north. 
    Minor Street. Between Sixth and Seventh Streets, facing south. 
    Moisant Street. Along the frontage of 1601 Moisant, taking as a point of beginning the property line of 1601 Moisant as delineated by the fence line, and ending at the intersection of Moisant and Sixteenth Streets. 
    Near City Jail. Two (2) facing east, one facing west. 
    Newport Street. Intersection of Newport Street and Delaware Street to a point approximately one hundred twenty-five (125) feet west on the north side of Newport Street. 
    Oakland Street. One sign facing east at 186 Oakland Street at end of street. 
    Oxley Street. East side one hundred fifty (150) feet south of the intersection of Oxley and Fourth Streets for a distance of fifty (50) feet and terminating one hundred fifty (150) feet north of the intersection of Oxley and Third Streets, two (2) signs facing south. 
    Parking Lot at City Hall. Three (3) signs facing south. 
    Police Parking Area. "Police Parking Area-No Parking Beyond This Point-Police Cars Only" at: 
Jackson and Milnor. First gate, two (2) signs, one facing north and one facing south. 
Jackson and Milnor. Second gate, two (2) signs, one facing north and one facing south. 
    Pollock Street. Between Third Street and the levee, facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Pollock Street. Between Third Street and the levee, facing south (two (2) signs). 
    Rear of City Hall. Three (3) facing west. 
    Sequoia Street. Between the entrance of the Woodlake Country Club parking lot and Platt Drive on both the north and south sides of the street. 
    Sharon Street. Between Twenty-sixth Street and Sussex Street, facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Sharon Street. Between Twenty-sixth Street and Twenty-seventh Street, facing south (three (3) signs). 
    St. Julien Drive. Along the south side of St. Julien Drive between Paradis Lane and Chateau Boulevard. 
    Sunset Boulevard. In the vicinity of Jefferson Downs Racetrack on both eastbound and westbound shoulders. 
    Sussex Avenue. North side of Sussex Avenue beginning at the dead end and terminating at a point directly across from the farthest property line of the Master Automotive Warehouse property line. 
    Taylor Street. Between Kenner Avenue and Third Street, facing north. 
    Taylor Street. Between Kenner Avenue and Third Street, facing south. 
    Taylor Street. Taylor Street, west side, in front of municipal address, 411 Taylor Street. 
    Taylor Street side from the Tower Co. to West Metairie. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the right-of-way of the Taylor Street side from the Tower Co. to West Metairie. This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties. 
    Tifton Street. Between Thirtieth and Thirty-first adjacent to G.T. Woods Elementary School. 
    Twenty-first Street from Williams Boulevard to Florida Avenue. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the right-of-way of Twenty-first Street from William Boulevard to Florida Avenue. This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties (four (4) signs). 
    Twenty-second Street from Maine Avenue to Roosevelt Boulevard. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle on the right-of-way of Twenty-second Street from Maine Avenue to Roosevelt Boulevard. This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties. 
    Utah Street. Beginning at the northeast corner of Utah Street at its intersection with Thirty-first Street extending northward for two hundred (200) feet. 
    Veterans Highway. Notwithstanding any lawful agreement or ordinance to the contrary, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle that is licensed or should be licensed in accordance with the laws of the State of Louisiana on the shoulders, servitudes, neutral grounds, medians, and/or on the rights-of-way, including the right-of-way owned by the State of Louisiana, along Veterans Highway, within the municipal limits of the city, except where permitted by the appropriate city department, which permission shall be indicated by the erection of appropriate signs in the area. This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties, nor shall such provisions apply to persons actually engaged in repairing or otherwise improving of the highway under the authority of the department of highways for the state. 
    Warren Street. Between Airline Highway and I.C.G. Railroad, facing north. 
    Warren Street. Between Airline Highway and I.C.G. Railroad, facing south. 
    Warren Street. The east side of Warren Street from Airline Highway approximately three hundred (300) feet south. 
    West Esplanade Avenue. Between the entrance and exit gates of Alexander Elementary School. 
    West Loyola Drive. No parking 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and 3:15 p.m. to 4:45 p.m., between the Wentwood Playground gate and the front entrance of Audubon Elementary School. Two (2) signs. 
    West Metairie. West Metairie and Roosevelt Boulevard, facing east. 
    Williams Boulevard. Williams Boulevard between Twenty-second and Twenty-third Streets on both north and southbound shoulders. 
    Williams Boulevard. One no parking sign on Williams Boulevard at Ninth Street, facing east. 
    Williams Boulevard. "Captain Only," Central Station, Williams Boulevard, on building. 
    Williams Boulevard. "Fire Chief Only," Central Station, Williams Boulevard on building. 
    Williams Boulevard. "Fire Personnel Only," three (3) at Central Station, Williams Boulevard, on building. 
    Williams Boulevard. At post office, facing south. 
    Williams Boulevard. At Twenty-third Street Canal, facing south. 
    Williams Boulevard. At Twenty-fourth Street, facing south. 
    Williams Boulevard. At the Williams Boulevard Recreational Complex in all areas other than those specifically indicated as automobile parking and/or handicapped parking areas. 
    Williams Boulevard. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle that is licensed or should be licensed in accordance with the laws of the State of Louisiana on the shoulders, servitudes, neutral grounds, medians, and/or on the rights-of-way, including any right-of-way owned by the State of Louisiana, along Williams Boulevard, within the municipal limits of the city, except where permitted by the appropriate city department, which permission shall be indicated by the erection of appropriate signs in the area. This provision shall not apply to emergency vehicles while the driver thereof is engaged in the performance of emergency duties, nor shall such provisions apply to persons actually engaged in repairing or otherwise improving of the highway under the authority of the department of highways for the state. 
    Worth Street. The 200 block between Third Street and the Mississippi River Levee, two (2) signs facing north. 
    Worth Street. The 200 block between Third Street and the Mississippi River Levee, two (2) signs facing west. 
    Third Street. Between Decatur and the entrance of Maclom Favor Apartments and on the southeast corner of the intersection of Third Street and Decatur Street. 
    Third Street. Between Hudson and Taylor Streets, facing west. 
    Fifth Street. At its intersection with George Street along the north side of the roadway. 
    Sixth Street. Between Williams Boulevard and Compromise Street, facing west. 
    Tenth Street. Two (2) signs in front of 2016 Tenth Street. 
    Tenth Street. Along the south side of Tenth Street between Williams Boulevard and minor street adjacent to the Payless Budget Car Rental Business. 
    Fifteenth Street. Between Compromise and Williams Boulevard, facing east. 
    Fifteenth Street. Between Compromise and Williams Boulevard, facing west. 
    Fifteenth Street. Between Williams Boulevard and Compromise Street, facing east, 
    Fifteenth Street. Between Williams Boulevard and Compromise Street, facing west. 
    Eighteenth Street. Between Minor Street and Williams Boulevard, facing east. 
    Twentieth Street. Off Williams Boulevard, facing east. 
    Twenty-first Street. Between Roosevelt Boulevard and Kentucky Avenue, westbound and eastbound. 
    Twenty-fourth Street. Driveway at sewerage plant on Twenty-fourth Street facing north. 
    Twenty-fourth Street. Between Idaho Street and Illinois, two (2) on left, two (2) on right. 
    Twenty-fourth Street. Between Idaho Avenue and Williams Boulevard on both eastbound and westbound shoulders. 
    Twenty-fifth Street. Twenty-fifth Street between Maryland Avenue and Maine Avenue on both east and westbound shoulders. 
    Twenty-fifth Street. Fifty (50) feet off Roosevelt Boulevard, facing east. 
    Twenty-fifth Street. Fifty (50) feet off Roosevelt Boulevard, facing west. 
    Twenty-sixth Street. Between Sharon Street and Crestview Street, facing east (three (3) signs). 
    Twenty-sixth Street. Between Sharon Street and Crestview Street, facing west (three (3) signs). 
    Twenty-sixth Street. Two (2) parking signs on Twenty-sixth Street adjoining the Westgate playground facing east and west. 
    Thirtieth Street. Between Maryland Avenue and Maine Avenue facing east and west. 
    Thirty-first Street. Along the frontage of 1442 thirty-first Street. 
    Thirty-second Street. Between Williams Boulevard and the Esplanade Shopping Mall's Ring Road. 
    Thirty-third Street. The north side of Thirty-third Street from Kentucky Avenue westward to a point fifty-five (55) feet east of the intersection of Thirty-third Street and Iowa Avenue. 
    Thirty-third Street. Along the south side of Thirty-third Street between Iowa Avenue and Maine Avenue. 
    Thirty-third Street. Off Iowa Avenue, facing west. 
    Thirty-third Street. Fifty-five (55) feet off Iowa Avenue, facing west. 
    Thirty-third Street. Twenty (20) feet off Kentucky Avenue, facing east. 
    Thirty-third Street. Off Kentucky Avenue, facing west. 
    Thirty-fourth Street. Between Arkansas and Arizona Avenues, facing north (two (2) signs). 
    Thirty-fourth Street. North side, between Arizona Avenue and Arkansas Avenue. 
    Thirty-fourth Street. South side, between Arkansas Avenue and California Avenue. 
    Thirty-fourth Street. Two (2) signs on Thirty-fourth Street at Florida Avenue, facing west. 
    Thirty-fourth Street. "Fire Personnel Only," two (2) at No. 3 Station on building, Thirty-fourth Street. 
    Thirty-fourth Street and Williams Boulevard. At No. 3 Fire Station, Thirty-fourth Street and Williams Boulevard, four (4) signs between gym and station. 
    Thirty-fifth Street. Three (3) no parking signs on Thirty-fifth Street adjoining the Redwood Apartments, facing west. 
    Thirty-sixth Street. East of Delaware Avenue, one sign facing west and two (2) signs facing east. 
    Thirty-eighth Street. Between Williams Boulevard and Florida Avenue, facing east. 
    Thirty-eighth Street. Between Williams Boulevard and Florida Avenue, facing west. 
    Forty-third Street. North side, between Georgia Avenue and Idaho Avenue. 
    Fortieth Street. Between Williams Boulevard and Delaware Avenue on both sides of the street. 
(b)  No parking-Ambulance only: 
    Florida Avenue. North side of Greenlawn Gym, two (2) signs, facing north (west of Williams Boulevard). 
(c)  No parking-8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.: 
    Ernest Street. Between Amelie and Gelpi, facing south. 
    Ernest Street. Between Lisa and Amelie, facing north. 
    Ernest Street. Between Lisa and Amelie, facing south. 
(d)  No parking-Freight zone: 
    Taylor Street. East side adjacent to Sherwin-Williams Paint Store. 
(Ord. No. 558, §§ I, III, 9-15-59; Ord. No. 1268, § 1, 1-11-71; Ord. No. 1289, 4-12-71; Ord. No. 1337, 9-13-71; Ord. No. 1528, 5-29-73; Ord. No. 1690, 11-11-74; Ord. No. 1697, 12-9-74; Ord. No. 1706, 1-27-75; Ord. No. 1709, 2-24-75; Ord. No. 1724, 4-28-75; Ord. No. 1734, 6-9-75; Ord. No. 1752, 8-11-75; Ord. No. 1880, 7-12-76; Ord. No. 1968, 1-10-77; Ord. No. 2052, 5-9-77; Ord. No. 2314, 6-12-78; Ord. No. 2410, 10-23-78; Ord. No. 2420, 11-20-78; Ord. No. 2559, 7-16-79; Ord. No. 2608, 10-10-79; Ord. No. 2700, 5-12-80; Ord. No. 2744, 7-21-80; Ord. No. 2781, 8-25-80; Ord. No. 2875, 2-5-81; Ord. No. 2885, 2-19-81; Ord. No. 2918, 4-9-81; Ord. No. 2948, 5-28-81; Ord. No. 3200, § 1, 4-15-82; Ord. No. 3543, § 1, 6-2-83; Ord. No. 3545, § 1, 6-2-83; Ord. No. 3601, § 1, 7-21-83; Ord. No. 3613, § 1, 8-4-83; Ord. No. 3647, § 1, 9-1-83; Ord. No. 3809, § 1, 1-5-84; Ord. No. 3810, § 1, 1-5-84; Ord. No. 3815, § 1, 1-5-84; Ord. No. 3842, § 1, 2-2-84; Ord. No. 3933, § 1, 4-19-84; Ord. No. 4191, § 1, 10-18-84; Ord. No. 5299, § 1, 2-7-85; Ord. No. 5316, § 1, 3-7-85; Ord. No. 5319, § 3, 3-7-85; Ord. No. 5441, § 1, 6-20-85; Ord. No. 5452, § 1, 7-9-85; Ord. No. 5505, § 1, 9-5-85; Ord. No. 5507, § 1, 9-5-85; Ord. No. 5564, § 1, 10-17-85; Ord. No. 5567, § 1, 10-17-85; Ord. No. 5568, § 1, 10-17-85; Ord. No. 5576, § 1, 11-7-85; Ord. No. 5860, § 1, 5-21-87; Ord. No. 5945, § 1, 10-15-87; Ord. No. 5946, § 3, 10-15-87; Ord. No. 5959, § 1, 11-19-87; Ord. No. 5973, § 1, 12-17-87; Ord. No. 6033, § 1, 2-18-88; Ord. No. 6035, § 1, 3-3-88; Ord. No. 6038, § 1, 3-3-88; Ord. No. 6079, § 1, 6-2-88; Ord. No. 6169, § 1, 11-3-88; Ord. No. 6192, § 1, 1-5-89; Ord. No. 6290, § 1, 7-27-89; Ord. No. 6350, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 6389, § 1, 3-15-90; Ord. No. 6404, § 1, 4-19-90; Ord. No. 6647, § 1, 8-1-91; Ord. No. 6834, § 1, 1-28-93; Ord. No. 6920, § 1, 9-2-93; Ord. No. 7236, § 1, 6-15-95; Ord. No. 7371, § 1, 1-4-96; Ord. No. 7395, § 1, 3-7-96; Ord. No. 7396, § 1, 3-7-96; Ord. No. 7559, § 1, 11-7-96; Ord. No. 8061, § 1, 4-1-99; Ord. No. 8360, § 1, 10-19-00; Ord. No. 9257, § 1, 2-2-06; Ord. No. 9471, § 1, 4-12-07; Ord. No. 9512, § 1, 6-7-07; Ord. No. 9736, § 1, 7-10-08; Ord. No. 9967, § 1, 8-6-09; Ord. No. 10,083, § 1, 4-22-10; Ord. No. 10,215, § 1, 3-3-11; Ord. No. 10,313, § 1, 11-3-11; Ord. No. 10,354, § 1, 2-16-12; Ord. No. 11,341, § 2, 10-19-17; Ord. No. 11,436, § 1, 7-12-18) 
Sec. 15-56.1. - Temporary no parking zones. 
    The city police chief may establish temporary no parking zones and post temporary signs for up to fifteen (15) days in relation to special events. Notice of a temporary no parking zone must be posted at least forty-eight (48) hours before the start of the no parking period. 
(Ord. No. 11,364, § 2, 12-21-17) 
Sec. 15-57. - Penalty for article violation. 
    Any person who violates or causes to be violated, any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction by any court of competent jurisdiction shall be subject to a penalty as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 1556, 8-27-73) 
Secs. 15-58-15-74. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOOTING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Section No. 3 of Ord. No. 9179, adopted Nov. 2, 2000, numbered the sections in Art. V, Booting Vehicles on Private Property, as §§ 15-75.1-15-75.18. In order to maintain alpha-numeric consistency these sections have been renumbered by the editor. For ease of furture supplementation the original section numbers have been maintained in the history notes following each section. 

Sec. 15-75. - Definitions. 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle that is inoperable and is left unattended on public property for more than three (3) days, or a motor vehicle that has remained illegally on public property for a period of more than three (3) days, or a motor vehicle that has remained on private property without the consent of the owner or person in control of the property for more than three (3) days. 
    Boot or booting means the act of placing on a parked motor vehicle a mechanical device that is designed to be attached to the wheel or tire or other part of such vehicle so as to prohibit its usual manner of movement. 
    Booting service business or booting service operator means the business by an individual, partnership, corporation, association, firm or other business entity of providing booting service as part of its operations. 
    Motor vehicle means any motor vehicle designed to be self-propelled and subject to state registration. 
    Private property means real estate, including all improvements, not owned or controlled by the city, State of Louisiana or United States of America near or contiguous to: 
(a)  Premises having one (1) or more stores or establishments which is used for the parking of motor vehicles of customers or patrons or any one (1) who frequents such stores and business establishments; or 
(b)  Premises having one (1) or more multiple dwellings which is used for the parking of motor vehicles for the occupants and guests of the residents. 
    Vehicle owner or motorist means the actual owner of the vehicle booted or any driver of the vehicle who reasonably appears to have authority to operate the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.1), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-76. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of sections 15-75-15-92 shall, upon conviction, be fined twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.2), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-77. - Towing or booting by owner. 
(a)  In addition to the removal procedure provided in section 15-55.3(b), the owner, lessee or person in control of any private property shall have the right to have any unauthorized vehicle, which is parked or abandoned on private property, booted or towed away at his own expense. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, all such towing, and storage shall be the responsibility of said owner, lessee or person in control of private property. 
(b)  In lieu of the procedure having an unauthorized vehicle removed in accordance with the provisions of section 15-55.3(b), the owner, lessee or person in control of any private property shall have the right to have any unauthorized vehicle which is parked or abandoned on private property booted by a duly licensed booting service operator in accordance with this article, with the cost of booting, as established in this article, being borne by the owner or operator of the unauthorized vehicle. In all cases when this procedure is utilized the motorist shall have a right to challenge the imposition of the fee by filing an action against the booting service operator in the justice of the peace court or other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, when an owner, lessee or person in control of a multiple family dwelling, commercial establishment or anyone conducting business with the public desires to regulate or restrict parking on his property, notice of such regulations or restrictions shall be made known to the public by signs posted on said property, including a warning that violating vehicles or unauthorized vehicles are subject to being booted or towed away by a private booting or towing service operator pursuant to the provisions of this section. 
(d)  The signs required by this section shall be of sufficient number and conspicuously posted and maintained by the owner of the property in the form, manner and location prescribed by the department of inspection and code enforcement and this section. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, "unauthorized parking", prohibited in section 15-55.3, shall also include the unauthorized parking in any specially marked or reserved parking space, or designated aisle, garbage dumpster area, or other designated "no parking" area in the parking areas, provided such areas or parking spaces are posted with additional appropriate signs giving notice of the aforementioned restrictions. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.3), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-78. - Regulations regarding booting by private operators for unauthorized parking on private property. 
(a)  No motor vehicle shall be booted on private property unless a sufficient number of signs are posted and maintained in accordance with section 15-77(c) and paragraph (b) of this section. In addition to any other requirements, such signs shall be yellow and shall contain such information as the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement ("director") shall prescribe in such rule including, but not limited to, the word "warning", and the phrase, "Parking only for customers, guests (or similar appropriate wording); all others will be booted," plus the name, business telephone number of the booting service operator(s) authorized by the private property owner to boot the unauthorized vehicle, and the fee for removal of the boot. The word "warning" and the amount of the removal fee on such signs shall be in letters not less than three (3) inches high and shall be in the color red. All other lettering on such signs shall be in letters not less than one and one half (11/2) inches high and shall be in the color black. 
(b)  "Sufficient number" of signs, as required by this section, shall be as follows: 
(1)  One (1) sign shall be posted on private property at each entrance to the parking area as well as the entrance on each level of a multi-level parking facility, and by the entrance door to each building facing the parking area and at least one (1) sign shall be clearly visible from each parking space. 
(2)  One (1) additional sign shall be posted in the parking area as follows: 
1-20 parking spaces 2 signs 21-40 parking spaces 4 signs 41-60 parking spaces 6 signs 61-80 parking spaces 8 signs 81 or more parking 
spaces 1 additional sign for each 10 additional parking spaces  
(c)  No motor vehicle shall be booted unless: 
(1)  The booting service business has a written contract with the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in control of the premises that is served by the parking (private property) on which the motor vehicle is parked; and 
(2)  The said owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in control of the business issues to patrons a time and date stamped receipt or hand written acknowledgment for goods or services provided by said business and has a sign in his establishment offering such a receipt or acknowledgment; or 
(3)  Said dwelling owner or manager provides authorized tenants or visitors parking passes or other proof indicating the authority to park. 
(d)  Booting in the parking area of a business or facility (e.g., an office or apartment building) shall be allowed only during the hours of operation of a business or facility owned, leased or managed by a person or an entity with which the booting service business has a written contract. However, if notices are posted as required in paragraph (a) of this subsection, the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in control of the premises that is served by the parking (private property) may block the entrance(s) to such private property by gates or other appropriate devices to indicate that entry is not authorized. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.4), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-79. - Required procedure for the installation and removal of the booting device. 
(a)  At all times, whether the business served by the parking lot is open or closed for business, only the owner, lessee, managing agent or other person in control of the premises under contract with the immobilization service operator, or their agent or employee, (excluding the booting service or its employees), shall be the individual to determine that the motor vehicle is unauthorized to park and subject to being booted. Under no circumstances shall the booting service or any of its employees or agents determine which motor vehicle is unauthorized to park and subject to being booted. 
(b)  Immediately after the motor vehicle is booted, the booting service operator shall affix at the rear most portion of the window adjacent to the driver's seat of such vehicle, a sticker measuring eight and one half inches by eleven inches (81/2 x 11) containing a warning that any attempt to move the vehicle may result in damage to the vehicle, that the booting service operator may file a damage suit against the motorist for any damage to the booting device, and stating the time and date the vehicle was booted, the fee as well and the availability of the right to institute legal proceedings to contest the payment of the fee, and the name, business address and the business telephone number which will facilitate the dispatch of personnel responsible for removing the booting device. 
(c)  The booting service operator shall have telephone contact available twenty-four (24) hour/seven (7) days a week by which a motorist can request the release of a booting device. 
(d)  The booting device shall be yellow in color and shall have the name and telephone number of the immobilization service business painted in no less than one (1) inch black lettering on the booting device. Each boot shall have its own specific identification number printed in such a fashion that it can be seen when the boot is placed on the motor vehicle. 
(e)  The person placing or removing the booting device must wear a company uniform and a picture identification badge displaying the name of the booting service, the name of the person and his employee number. Both the uniform and badge must clearly indicate the company by which he is employed. 
(f)  All vehicles employed to place or remove a booting device or otherwise shall display on each front door in no less than two (2) inch lettering, the business name, address and telephone number. Magnetic signs are not permitted. The booting service business shall notify the director by certified mail within three (3) days of any change of address. 
(g)  The booting service operator shall release the immobilized motor vehicle within thirty (30) minutes of receiving a request for such vehicle's release: provided, however, that the motorist pays a maximum, all inclusive fee of not more than seventy dollars ($70.00) for the removal of the booting device. Such payment may be by cash, check or credit card, and there shall be no additional amount collected for the boot removal if payment is made by check or credit card. 
(h)  Each booting service operator shall maintain records stating the date and time of all transactions involving the installation and release of boots and a copy of all acknowledgments and receipts issued for the removal fees of the booting devices shall be kept for a minimum of five (5) years, and shall be made available to city inspectors upon request. The booting service business shall maintain a time stamp method of recording all calls pertaining to release of vehicles. For the purposes of this paragraph, "transactions" shall include the time stamped dated records, as well as a time and date log, showing the receipt of all requests for boot removal. 
(i)  Upon receipt of payment, the booting service operator shall provide the motorist a copy of the receipt for payment of the boot removal fee along with the time and date the boot was placed and time and date the booting device was released, the name and address of the place of business involved, the name of the individual who determined that the motor vehicle was not authorized to park and designated it for booting, and the name of the individual who installed and/or removed the booting device, the business address and business telephone number of the booting service business. 
    The availability of the right to institute legal proceedings to contest the payment of the fee shall be contained on the front of the receipt in legible print. The director may, by administrative rule, set additional regulations on the wording and size of print that the booting service operators use. 
(j)  The booting service personnel shall release an immobilized motor vehicle without charge or further detention to a motor vehicle owner or operator who presents to said personnel a time and dated receipt or acknowledgment which indicates that goods or services were purchased at or the motorist was inside, a place of business associated with the parking area within two (2) hours prior to the placement of the booting device or otherwise presents a written acknowledgment from the owner or manager of the business that the motorist was authorized to park at the location in question. The booting service personnel shall release an immobilized motor vehicle without charge or further detention to a motor vehicle owner or operator who presents to said personnel a written acknowledgment from the owner or manager of a multi-family dwelling that the motorist was authorized to park at the location in question. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.5), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-80. - Boot removal fee refund. 
    If a motorist challenges the imposition of the fee by filing an action against the immobilization service operator, pursuant to section 15-77(b), the booting company shall have the burden of proof that probable cause existed for the installation of the booting device. Upon a judgment in favor of the motorist, the booting service operator shall refund to the said motorist the sum paid for the removal of the booting device plus all court costs and interest. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.6), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-81. - Vehicles and areas exempt from booting. 
    No person authorized to install booting devices pursuant to this article shall boot any vehicle: 
(a)  Parked or abandoned in a fire lane or otherwise obstructing a fire lane or parked within fifteen (15) feet on either side of a fire hydrant in violation of subsections 15-51(a)(3)b. and f.; 
(b)  Parked, standing or abandoned in a mobility impaired parking space; 
(c)  Parked or standing while it is occupied by one (1) or more persons; or 
(d)  Belonging to any law enforcement agency, fire department, ambulance or medical transport provider, or other governmental agency, or any motor vehicle displaying a tax exempt license plate. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.7), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-82. - Booting service contracts. 
(a)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the provisions of a contract between a booting service business or operator and the owner, lessee or person in control of private property from containing provisions for the payment of additional sums over and above the amounts received from the owners or operators of the unauthorized vehicles as consideration for the services rendered by the booting service. 
(b)  However, there shall be no payment of any kind by the booting service business to anyone associated with the business, store or establishment being provided booting service. Any such payment shall constitute a violation of this article, and all licenses and permits of both parties shall be revoked for a minimum of one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.8), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-83. - Suits for damages. 
(a)  If the booting service company charges an excessive removal fee, the motorist or owner of the vehicle or other person paying the removal fee shall have a right and cause of action to recover the amount of the excess fee, plus reasonable attorney fees, and all costs of court. A motorist's claim for any other damages related to the booting may be filed within the applicable state statute of limitations in the appropriate court of jurisdiction according to the nature of the claim. All parties to the booting service contract shall be jointly liable for any damages. 
(b)  The booting service operator may make a claim in a civil suit against a motorist for damage to the booting device, but such a claim for damages shall not be included in the fee to the motorist for the removal of any booting device. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall prohibit the owner, lessee or person in control of any private property from filing a civil suit against a motorist for civil damages for the unauthorized parking on private property. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.9), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-84. - Licenses, permits and certificates, generally. 
(a)  No person or company, either as owner, agent or otherwise, shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain, advertise or otherwise engage in or profess to engage in providing booting services in the city unless that person or company holds a currently valid license issued by the director. 
(b)  No person shall operate a booting service vehicle unless that vehicle has been issued a valid permit by the director. 
(c)  No person shall act or attempt to act as a booting service vehicle attendant unless that person has the appropriate certificate issued by the director. 
(d)  The following definitions shall govern in the use and interpretation of this division unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: 
    Certificate means any authorization issued by the department of inspection and code enforcement, pursuant to this chapter, to a person to act as booting service vehicle attendant. 
    License means any authorization issued by the department of inspection and code enforcement to any person or company to provide booting services in the city. 
    Permit means any authorization issued by the department pursuant to this chapter for a vehicle used in the operation as a booting service vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.10), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-85. - License and application procedures. 
(a)  The application to the department for a license under this article shall include: 
(1)  The name and business address of the operator and owner of the booting service. 
(2)  The name under which the applicant will operate, which must be a unique name and clearly distinguishable from any other licensed booting services. 
(3)  A list of names and addresses of all officers, directors and/or shareholders if incorporated, or, if the organization is an unincorporated association, a list of the names and addresses of all officers and directors. The applicant shall provide fingerprints of each owner, general partner, officer, principal director and stockholder owning ten (10) percent or more of the business. 
(4)  A description of each vehicle to be used, including the make, model, year of the vehicle, milage, motor and chassis number, size and gross weight of each vehicle, state registration number where, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics to be used to designate the applicant's vehicles. 
(5)  The location and description of the place or places from which the booting service will operate. The applicant shall maintain a business office in the City of Kenner, be qualified to do and doing business in the State of Louisiana, and be registered with the Louisiana Secretary of State's Office and shall include in the application the name and address of its current agent for service of process. 
(6)  A statement reasonably describing the geographic area or areas to be served by applicant. 
(7)  Such other information as the department deems reasonable and necessary. 
(b)  The department shall issue a license for operation within thirty (30) days of the filing of the application to an applicant complying with the following requirements: 
(1)  The applicant has paid the fees required by the established fee schedule. 
(2)  The vehicle(s) attendants and services meet the requirements of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has furnished evidence of adequate insurance coverage as provided in section 15-88 for claims arising out of injury or death of persons or damages to the property of others resulting from any cause for which the owner of the business or service would be liable, as defined in this article. 
(c)  Licenses are valid for a period of not more than one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(d)  In order for licenses to remain valid, all requirements must be maintained during the license period. 
(e)  Licenses shall be renewed only if the holder meets the prescribed standards at the time of renewal. 
(f)  The annual license fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.11), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-86. - Permits and application procedures. 
(a)  A permit for a booting service vehicle shall only be issued if it complies with the standards that the department may, by rule, require. 
(b)  Only vehicles which have been issued current and valid permits under the provisions of this article shall be permitted to operate as a booting service vehicle as a normal course of business. 
(c)  Each vehicle shall bear the company name and unit number in letters not less than three (3) inches in height on the exterior on both sides. 
(d)  A permit for a booting service vehicle shall only be issued if it complies with the standards that the department may, by rule, require. 
(e)  Permits are valid for a period of not more than one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(f)  In order for permits to remain valid, all requirements must be maintained during the license period. 
(g)  Permits shall be reviewed only if the holder meets the prescribed standards at the time of renewal. 
(h)  The annual permit fee for each vehicle shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.12), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-87. - Certificates; application procedures and standards for personnel. 
(a)  No person shall act or attempt to act as a booting vehicle attendant unless that person holds a currently valid certificate issued by the department of inspection and code enforcement. 
(b)  Any person desiring certification as a booting vehicle attendant shall make application to the department of inspection and code enforcement on forms provided by the department. The department shall determine whether the applicant meets the prescribed qualifications as set forth in this article. 
(c)  An applicant for booting vehicle attendant certificate must: 
(1)  Be free from addiction to alcohol or any narcotic drug. 
(2)  Be free from any physical or mental defect or disease which might impair the applicant's ability to perform as booting vehicle attendant. 
(3)  Not have been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, this state, or any other state. 
(4)  Provide his fingerprints at the time of application. 
(5)  Be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(d)  Booting vehicle attendant certificates are valid for a period of not more than one (1) year from the date of issuance. 
(e)  In order for certificates to remain valid, all requirements must be maintained during the certification period. 
(f)  Certificates shall be renewed only if the holder meets the prescribed standards at the time of renewal. 
(g)  The certificate fee for each employee shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.13), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-88. - Required insurance coverage and bond. 
(a)  No business or vehicle regulated by this article shall operate in this city unless the following insurance coverages are in effect. 
(1)  For injury to or death of individuals resulting from any cause to which the owner of the business or vehicle would be liable, regardless of whether the vehicle was being driven by the owner or his/her agent, and for damages to the property of another in the amounts specified in this article. 
(2)  The applicant shall provide insurance for not less than the following limits of liability: for each accident causing bodily injury (including death at any time resulting therefrom), two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) for each person; five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for each accident; and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage sustained in any one (1) accident. 
(b)  No insurance coverage shall be satisfactory unless issued by an insurance company authorized to write such coverage in the state. 
(c)  The applicant shall provide a surety bond in the minimum amount of one hundred fifty thousand dollars ($150,000.00) to the director for any liability under section 15-80. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.14), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-89. - Inspections and investigations. 
(a)  The department of inspection and code enforcement shall make all investigations and inspections necessary for the enforcement of this article. 
(b)  These inspections may be made of any person or company providing booting services and may include all their personnel, vehicles, facilities, and communications equipment. Inspections and investigations may be made on a regular or special basis and at such times and places as the department of inspection and code enforcement deem necessary. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.15), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-90. - Contract inspection. 
(a)  The department of inspection and code enforcement shall, upon request, be immediately furnished a copy of any booting service contract required by section 15-82. 
(b)  Upon written request to the booting service company, any aggrieved motorist whose vehicle was booted shall, within seventy-two (72) hours of such request, be furnished a copy of the booting service contract required by section 15-82 for the location where his vehicle was booted. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.16), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-91. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to pay or be paid a commission, or a per vehicle fee, for booting or identifying or designating vehicles to be booted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or have installed a booting device on any vehicle on private property except in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.17), 11-2-00) 
Sec. 15-92. - Suspension, revocation of license, permits and certificates. 
    In addition to any other penalty prescribed by law for violating the provisions of this article, the city may suspend or revoke the license, certificate, or permit of any booting service operator, booting service vehicle attendant, or vehicle that is in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 8368, § 3(15-75.18), 11-2-00) 
Chapter 16 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,294, §§ 1, 2, adopted June 15, 2017, repealed the former ch. 16, arts. I-VI, and enacted a new ch. 16 as set out herein. The former ch. 16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10,578, § 1, adopted May 2, 2013; Ord. No. 10,941, § 2, adopted July 9, 2015; Ord. No. 10,981, § 1, adopted Sept. 17, 2015; and Ord. No. 11,062, § 9, adopted Mar. 17, 2016. 
Cross reference- Traffic and motor vehicles, ch. 15. 

ARTICLE I. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 16-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    The legislature of the state pursuant to statute R.S. 33:4792 has delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to protect the public health, safety, and welfare by licensing, controlling, and regulating by ordinance or resolution each private passenger for hire vehicle, however propelled, providing transportation services operated within the jurisdiction of the municipality or other local governing authority. Therefore, the city does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-2. - Findings of fact. 
    The city finds as follows: 
(1)  Private for hire vehicles, especially taxicabs and transportation network companies, provide an essential component of the transportation options available to citizens of, and visitors to, the city. 
(2)  Private for hire vehicles, including but not limited to taxicabs and transportation network companies, are operated by private companies or individuals and utilize public streets, roads, and other rights-of-way in providing their services. 
(3)  It is important to protect the public health, safety, and welfare without restraining, burdening, or over-regulating the taxicab industry or the transportation network industry. 
(4)  The protection of the public health, safety, and welfare shall be paramount in the enforcement and interpretation of these private for hire vehicle regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the principal purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare for the citizens and the traveling public as well as to minimize burdens on the transportation industry by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Ensure that private for hire vehicles provide a safe means of transportation. 
(2)  Drivers of vehicles for hire are trustworthy and competent to carry out their duties in a safe and efficient manner. 
(3)  Owners of private for hire vehicles carry adequate liability insurance on their vehicles. 
(4)  Foster good will and a cooperative spirit among the transportation industry, especially taxicabs, transportation network companies, the government, the hospitality industry, and the public. 
(5)  Provide reasonable access to wheelchair accessible taxicabs. 
(6)  Issue rules and establish policies which shall promote operators of private for hire vehicles, especially taxicabs, continued access to the ownership of their vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-4. - Separate occupational business license requirements. 
    Any transportation network company desiring to operate within the corporate boundaries of the city shall make written application for and obtain an occupational business license, issued from the jurisdiction within the state which is the domicile of that individual or business entity, which license shall be maintained in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-5. - Applicability to all companies, drivers and vehicles. 
(a)  The requirements of chapter 16, along with any penalties that may be assessed for violations of chapter 16, apply to all private for hire transportation companies, vehicles, and drivers whether legally and validly permitted or not. 
(b)  It is not a defense to any action, including penalties and fines, to assert that the city cannot act because the driver, company or vehicle does not possess a valid city-issued CPNC, TNC permit, private for hire driver permit, or inspection decal. 
(c)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to vehicles operated by local transit service over a definite and fixed route or to any vehicles operating under franchises or indeterminate permits issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-6. - Operation and solicitation. 
    In order to operate any motor vehicle for the purpose of providing for hire private passenger services and/or the solicitation of passengers anywhere within the city, including but not limited to at the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport, a person shall obtain a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. However, no passengers transported to or from the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport shall be charged rates in excess of those provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-7. - Good conduct required of certificate or permit holders. 
    No person to whom a certificate or permit has been issued under the provisions of this chapter shall interfere with, impede, obstruct the legal operation of, or intentionally damage any vehicle (and/or its equipment) authorized to operate under the provisions of this chapter; nor shall any such person threaten, abuse, insult, provoke, interfere with, impede or obstruct any other such person, any passenger, prospective passenger or any other person in connection with operations under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-8. - Vehicles to be operated in manner prescribed by law. 
    Every private for hire vehicle shall be operated in accordance with the laws of the state and the laws of this city, and with due regard for the safety, comfort and convenience of passengers and for the safe and careful transportation of property and for the safety of the general public. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-9. - Severability. 
    If a court of law finds any provision of this chapter invalid or unenforceable as to any person, business or circumstance, then that provision is considered severed from this chapter. The severed provision has no effect on the remainder of the chapter or its application to other persons, businesses and circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-10. - CPNCs, TNC permits, vehicle permits and driver permits deemed privileges. 
    The operating of private vehicles for hire in the city is a privilege and not a right granted by this governing authority. Moreover, any costs associated with the requirements of the application and renewal of a CPNC, TNC permit, or driver permit are the responsibility of the applicant or permittee and are not refundable. Thus, subject to the review of the council in accordance with the hearing and appeal provisions of this chapter, the director, or his/her designee, is vested with administrative power to determine whether a driver permit, TNC permit or CPNC shall be issued. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-11. - Use of permit fees. 
    All permit fees generated from the permitting of private vehicles for hire shall only be used for the administration of this chapter, the enforcement of this chapter and/or the assistance in the maintenance of the city's infrastructure that will be negatively impacted by the rights granted to any person or firm granted a permit pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-12-16-15. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 16-16. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory. Words used throughout this chapter, but not defined herein, shall have their plain, ordinary, and common meaning. 
    Airport means the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport. 
    Applicant means any person making application for a CPNC, TNC permit, vehicle permit, or driver permit, or the renewal thereof: 
(1)  To own or lease a private for hire vehicle; 
(2)  To own, lease, and/or operate a private for hire vehicle business; or 
(3)  To operate or drive a private for hire vehicle. 
    Branded vehicle (aka "reconstructed vehicle") means any vehicle that has been purchased by an insurance company because the vehicle has been severely damaged typically due to collision, fire or flood damage, and the value of the vehicle is considered less than the cost to repair the vehicle, or which has been issued the title class of either "salvage," "rebuilt," "total loss," "reconditioned" or any equivalent classification in any jurisdiction. 
    Certificate of public necessity and convenience or certificate or CPNC means a certificate issued by the taxicab division, authorizing the holder to conduct a private for hire business in the city. 
    City includes all the area within the municipal limits of the City of Kenner, including but not limited to the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport. 
    Cruising means the driving of a private for hire vehicle on the streets, alleys, or public places of the city in search of or soliciting prospective passengers for hire. 
    Customer means a person who purchases for hire transportation service from a for hire transportation service provider that is permitted or should be permitted by the city. The customer may or may not also be a passenger. 
    Day means a business day and not a calendar day unless specifically stated otherwise. 
    Department means the department of inspection and code enforcement or the designated department of the city responsible for regulating private for hire vehicles. 
    Director means the director of the inspection and code enforcement or the head of the designated department of the city responsible for regulating private for hire vehicles. 
    Domicile means a true, fixed, and permanent home and principal establishment whether residential or business, with the present intention of making the same a permanent home or business place for an unlimited or indefinite period. 
    Driver means a for hire transportation driver, including taxi drivers, LPT drivers, and TNC drivers. 
    Driver permit means the permit issued to a private for hire transportation driver under the terms of this chapter. 
    Executive sedan means a large expensive passenger sedan or full-sized sports utility vehicle (SUV) commonly recognized by the limousine industry as an executive vehicle, used to provide ongoing luxury transportation, and designed or constructed to accommodate and transport passengers for hire, that does not have an extended wheel base or an expanded seating capacity designed for the transport of persons. The vehicle will have no additional rear seating capacity, area or comforts; shall be designed to transport not more than five (5) passengers, exclusive of the driver, and the principal operation of which is confined to the area within the corporate limits of the City and suburban territory to the city, not operated on a fixed route or schedule, does not have a meter and not permitted to accept street hails from prospective passengers. 
    Fare means money or other value paid for transportation of a person or passenger. 
    Inspection decal means a decal that is approved, authorized, and issued by the taxicab division that demonstrates that the private for hire vehicle passed inspection. 
    Insurance means an automobile liability policy for each licensed private for hire vehicle written by an insurer authorized by the state to write insurance policies, and continuously in force for the full term of each driver permit. 
    Limited passenger transportation (LPT) means providing for hire transportation services with non-motorized or motorized vehicles other than taxicabs and TNC vehicles that do not have a meter and are not permitted to accept street hails from prospective passengers. LPTs include, but are not limited to, executive sedans, limousines, transportation services and shuttles. 
    Limited passenger transportation company (LPT company) means a for hire transportation company other than a taxi company and a transportation network company. 
    Limousine means any motor vehicle except a taxicab or executive sedan with a seating capacity for not more than twelve (12) people, excluding the driver, and has a chassis and wheelbase that has been stretched, or is a sedan that the manufacturer promotes as a luxury automobile and which is commonly recognized by the limousine industry as a "limousine", with three (3) or more doors, other than a taxicab, coach, or wheelchair accessible van, which does not have a meter and not permitted to accept street hails from prospective passengers in the street. A limousine does not include a bus, a pickup truck, station wagon, taxicab, truck, van, or multipurpose vehicle. 
    Limousine service means a service that is for hire, is provided in a limousine, stretch limousine, or executive sedan, is not provided on a regular route, provides only prearranged pickup and charges more than a taxicab for a comparable trip. 
    Meter rates means the rates according to a taximeter installed and operated in a taxicab. 
    Operator means any person who drives or who is in actual physical control of any taxicab, or any person who drives or who is in actual physical control of any vehicle used as a taxicab. 
    Owner means any person owning one (1) or more private for hire vehicles and operating said vehicles in the city. 
    Passenger means, for the purposes of this chapter, a person who is a member of the public who hires, employs, directs, or otherwise engages a private for hire vehicle to transport a passenger between two (2) points, as directed by the passenger and is not the operator of that vehicle. 
    Permit means any CPNC, TNC permit, vehicle permit and/or driver permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
    Permittee means a person or business entity that has been issued a CPNC, TNC permit, or a driver permit under the terms of this chapter. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, joint venture, association, club, trust, estate, corporation, or other form of business organization recognized by state law, regardless of its nature or type. 
    Prearranged means that the customer, passenger or passenger's agent has personally asked the driver of a validly permitted for hire vehicle or a validly permitted for hire transportation company for transportation services, regardless of the communication format used. 
    Private for hire transportation company means a person or legal entity in the business of employing or contracting with drivers to provide vehicle-for-hire services in accordance with this chapter. The term private for hire transportation company includes, but is not limited to: limited passenger transportation companies, taxicab companies, and transportation network companies. 
    Private for hire transportation means providing vehicular, horse-drawn carriage or pedi cab transportation for compensation of any kind within the city limits. However, it does not include transportation provided by a public or governmental entity, transportation that is regulated entirely by the state or the federal government. 
    Private for hire vehicle means motorized or non-motorized vehicle used to transport persons for hire or other consideration and which is not exclusively regulated by the state. The term private for hire vehicle includes, but is not limited to: limousines, taxis, executive sedans, shuttles, pedicels, TNC vehicles, and horse-drawn carriages. 
    Rate card means a card to be displayed in each taxicab showing the rates of fare in force. 
    Revocation means that the CPNC, TNC permit, driver permit, vehicle permit and/or inspection decal are no longer valid and cannot be renewed without approval by the director. 
    Shuttle means any motor vehicle designed or constructed to accommodate and transport passengers for hire, not more than twenty (20) in number, exclusive of the driver, and the principal operation of which is confined to the area within the corporate limits of cities and suburban territory adjacent to the cities, and operated on a fixed route or schedule. 
    Shuttle service means the transport of passengers as a group, picking up groups of passengers at one (1) or more points of origin, with a common purpose and one (1) or more points of destination, and returning to the same points of origin, usually on contract whereby there is a fixed charge for the vehicle or service and charges less than a taxicab for a comparable trip. 
    Suspension means that the CPNC, TNC permit, driver permit, vehicle permit and/or inspection decal are temporarily invalid and that the holder of that CPNC, TNC permit, driver permit, vehicle permit and/or inspection decal may not engage in any for hire transportation activity under the authority granted to that suspended CPNC, TNC permit, driver permit, vehicle permit and/or inspection decal. 
    Taxicab or taxi "taxi" means every motor vehicle, except a LPT vehicle or a TNC vehicle, capable of carrying one (1) or more passengers or parcels, fitted with taximeters or using or having some other device, method or system to indicate and determine the passenger fare charged for distance traveled, that carries passengers between points and over such route as may be directed by a passenger, that is available for hails or through a dispatch service, that does not require prearranged appointments, and that is not operated on a fixed route, or a vehicle that is held out to the public as a taxicab. 
    Taxicab committee means the committee of the city council to which responsibility for regulation for private for hire vehicles services may be assigned. 
    Taxicab company means any entity operating taxicabs that leases, owns, operates, or controls one (1) or more taxicab vehicles. 
    Taxicab division is that division created by this chapter to administer and regulate the provisions of this chapter relating to private for hire vehicles. 
    Taxicab driver means any person operating taxicabs as a driver for any taxicab company regardless of whether the vehicles so operated are owned by the company, leased, or owned by individual members of the company. 
    Taxicab stand means a place alongside a street, or elsewhere, which has been designated and limited to taxicabs licensed under the provisions of this chapter to stand while waiting for passengers. 
    Taximeter is an instrument or device attached to a taxicab to mechanically or electronically measure the distance driven, the waiting time, and any other basis upon which the fare is calculated. 
    Top light means a lighted display device permanently attached to the center front of a taxicab vehicle's exterior roof that is illuminated when the taximeter is deactivated, the illumination of which is sufficient to be clearly seen at night. 
    Transportation facility means a railroad station, bus terminal, cruise terminal, airport, or other mass transportation facility. 
    Transportation network company (TNC) means a person or organization, whether a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity, that connects passengers with drivers using a TNC vehicle for purposes of providing for-hire transportation services by means of a TNC network. 
    Transportation network company network (TNC network) means any online-enabled application, website, or system offered or utilized by a TNC that enables the prearrangement of rides with TNC drivers. 
    Transportation network company driver (TNC driver) means a person who uses a TNC vehicle to provide for-hire transportation services for passengers matched through a TNC network. A TNC driver need not be an employee of a TNC. 
    Transportation network company permit (TNC permit) means a permit issued to transportation network company which authorizes the transportation network company to operate within the city. 
    Transportation network company services (TNC services) means the transportation of a passenger between points chosen by the passenger and prearranged in connection with a TNC using a TNC network. TNC Services commence from the moment a TNC driver logs onto a TNC network and ceases when the driver logs off the TNC network. 
    Transportation network company vehicle (TNC vehicle) means any motor vehicle being used to provide TNC services through a TNC by a TNC driver. 
    Vehicle for hire means a private for hire vehicle, as defined above. 
    Vehicle permit means the permit issued to the owner of a private for hire vehicle which in conjunction with the other permits required by this chapter authorizes the taxicab or other vehicle for hire to pick up passengers within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Waiting time means the time when a taxicab is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger to the time of discharge, but such term does not include any time that the taxicab is not in motion if due to any cause other than the request, acts or fault of a passenger. 
    Week means the seven-day period from Monday through Sunday. 
    Wheelchair accessible taxi or WAT means a for hire transportation vehicle that is equipped with a hydraulic lift or ramps designed for the purpose of transporting wheelchair users or others using mobility devices, or which contains any other physical device or alteration designed to permit access to and enable the transportation of physically handicapped persons engaged in the transportation of a passenger or parcel. WATs are identified as a minivan or similar vehicle specially adapted with rear or side access ramps for wheelchair users, which is also equipped with a taximeter, and which prioritizes requests for service from people with disabilities and/or wheelchair users for purposes of transportation over and along the public streets, not over a defined route but, as to the route and destination, in accordance with and under the direction of the passenger or person hiring such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-17-16-22. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 16-23. - Authority of department. 
(a)  The city taxicab division, hereinafter called "taxicab division" under the supervision of the director shall have exclusive jurisdiction of the licensing and permitting of private for hire transportation companies, drivers and private for hire vehicles within the city. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the department and/or the taxicab division to see that all applications to own and/or operate private for hire vehicles conform to all requirements established by this chapter where applicable; and to certify that such requirements have been met; to execute all policies established; and carry out duties as may be assigned from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-24. - Responsibility of the department-Record keeping. 
    A record of the issuance of permits issued pursuant to this chapter is to be kept at all times in the office of the taxicab division and/or the department of code enforcement, and the names of the holders of permits are to be listed thereon. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-25. - Authority over permittees. 
    Permittees are to answer all notices, telephone calls, communications and summons received from the taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-26. - Notice requirements. 
    Notice of violations of this chapter or other communications required by this chapter to permittees shall be given by either hand delivering or by United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the permittee's address as on file with the taxicab division of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-27. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the department and designated agents, under the supervision of the director and/or the city chief of police and/or his officers, to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter relative to private for hire vehicles by either filing complaints with the supervisor of the taxicab division for appropriate administrative action or by arrest or filing proper charges against the offender. All prosecutions shall be before the mayor's court. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-28. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person, who shall knowingly permit another to operate or who shall knowingly operate or offer to operate for hire any vehicle as a private for hire vehicle in the city, without first having obtained an appropriate certificate or permit required by this chapter, shall be guilty of a violation hereof, and upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-9, for the first offense. 
(1)  Enhanced penalties. For the second offense, the penalty shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(2)  For the third offense, the penalty shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding fifteen hundred dollars ($1,500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than sixty (60) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(b)  Any person, not having been duly designated as a driver, or any person whose driver permit has expired, been revoked or suspended, and who, during the time of such revocation or suspension, drives or operates a private for hire vehicle in the city shall be guilty of a violation hereof, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 16-28(a). 
(c)  The penalties as prescribed in subsections (a) and (b) hereinabove are in addition to the other unlawful practices, suspensions and revocations as elsewhere provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-29. - Authority to establish additional regulations. 
    The department is authorized and directed to make such additional rules and regulations, not in conflict with the provisions of this chapter, to regulate the operation of private for hire vehicles under a permit issued under this chapter; provided that no regulation shall be made or enforced in conflict with this chapter or any other city ordinance. Owners and drivers of private for hire vehicles shall comply with all rules and regulations as prescribed, from time to time, by the taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-30. - Evidence of attempt to bribe. 
(a)  In order to obtain or maintain a driver permit, company permit, TNC permit, or CPNC, the applicant, driver, company, or CPNC holder (or someone acting on his/her behalf) must not offer or give any gift or gratuity to any employee, representative, public servant, or member of the department. 
(b)  An applicant must immediately report to the director of the department of safety and permits if any employee, representative, public servant, or member of the department makes a request or demand for any gift of gratuity. 
(c)  The director and/or designee may deny or revoke a driver permit, company permit, TNC permit, vehicle permit, or CPNC for the reasons specified in this section. If the director and/or designee identifies that the applicant meets the criteria in this section, the director and/or designee will deny or revoke the driver permit, company permit, TNC permit, vehicle permit, and/or CPNC and no application fees will be refunded. 
(d)  Any person violating this section will be banned from reapplying for a CPNC, TNC permit, vehicle permit, or driver permit for a period of ten (10) years. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-31. - Unlawful use of vehicles for hire by businesses and their employees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any agent or employee of any entity required to have an occupation tax license pursuant to section 10-53 et seq., to direct patrons to any unlicensed and/or un-permitted vehicle for hire, or for any entity required to have an occupation tax license pursuant to Section 10-53 et seq., to knowingly permit or allow any of its agents or employees to direct patrons to any unlicensed and/or unpermitted vehicle for hire. 
(b)  In addition, it shall be unlawful for any agent or employee of any entity required to have an occupation tax license pursuant to section 10-53 et seq., to allow a vehicle, which is not pre-arranged, to stage. For purposes of this section, stage shall mean to stop, park, or otherwise place a vehicle for hire, other than a taxicab, in the loading or curbside area of any business required to have an occupation tax license pursuant to section 10-53 et seq., when the vehicle is not engaged in a pre-arranged round trip or one-way fare. Prearrangement, as required by this subsection, shall be via a communicated contract prior to pick-up, evidenced by a properly completed trip sheet. The trip sheet shall include, but not be limited to, the guest's name, number of passengers to be picked up, time of pick up, final destination, hotel room number, if applicable, and a valid contact phone number. Vehicle for hire operators shall make said trip sheets available for verification by employees of the pickup location, as well as all law enforcement agencies. In addition, said trip sheets shall be completed prior to arrival at the pickup location. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any agent or employee of any entity required to have an occupational tax license pursuant to section 10-53 et seq., to request, demand, or accept any gratuity from a for hire operator in order to procure a fare, whether prearranged or not. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a CPNC, TNC permit, taxicab, or driver to offer a gratuity, tip, or any other compensation, in order to procure a fare, whether pre-arranged or not. 
(e)  Any person violating this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-32-16-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERMITS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO ALL CPNCS, TNC PERMITS, VEHICLE PERMITS AND DRIVER PERMITS 

Sec. 16-36. - Transfer of CPNCs, TNC permits, vehicle permits and driver permits prohibited. 
    CPNCs, TNC permits, vehicle permits and driver permits and any other permit or certificate issued pursuant to this chapter may not be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-37. - CPNC and TNC permit holder driver registry. 
(a)  All holders of CPNCs and TNC permits shall maintain a registry of all drivers that are employed, contracted, or operating for the permittee. The registry shall include the following information for every employed, contracted, or operating driver: 
(1)  Full name; 
(2)  Date of birth; 
(3)  Louisiana driver's license number; 
(4)  Louisiana motor vehicle registration number or the state license plate number of the vehicle to be used to provide private for hire transportation services; and 
(5)  Active dates of employment, contracts, or operation. 
(b)  A holder of a CPNC or TNC permit shall update its registry, in the manner designated by the department of inspection and code enforcement, with the department of inspection and code enforcement on the first day of each quarter and upon request. Registries must be furnished to the department of inspection and code enforcement within twenty-four (24) hours of such request. Failure to provide such information or updates shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a CPNC or TNC permit. 
(c)  A holder of a CPNC or TNC permit shall not permit a driver to operate within the city unless and until said driver is on the registry required by this section. 
(d)  A holder of a CPNC permit shall prohibit any driver whose vehicle does not have a city vehicle permit from providing services in the city, except that such driver shall be permitted to transport passengers from such other jurisdiction or political subdivision to or through the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-38. - Ability to contact. 
(a)  Every holder of a CPNC or TNC permit shall maintain a current, valid address and telephone number, located within the greater New Orleans area, which shall be answered by the permittee during the hours the taxicab division is in operation. 
(b)  This telephone number shall be provided to the taxicab division, and shall be updated in writing by the permittee within forty-eight (48) hours of any change. 
(c)  The telephone number may be answered by a voicemail system, answering service, or competent person who takes a message; provided that the permittee shall return every message left by the department or the taxicab division within twenty-four (24) hours of the time such message is left. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-39. - Private for hire transportation company website requirements. 
    If a private for hire transportation company maintains a website, then the website shall contain at least the following information: 
(a)  Customer service telephone number, email address and/or hyperlink for the permittee; 
(b)  A statement of the permittee's zero tolerance policy and how to report any driver whom passengers suspect has violated the zero tolerance policy as set forth in section 16-40 of this chapter; 
(c)  The permittee's method and rate calculation formula; 
(d)  Procedures for reporting a complaint about a driver; and 
(e)  Complaint telephone and email address for the department of inspection and code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-40. - Zero tolerance policy. 
    Every private for hire transportation company shall establish and maintain a zero tolerance policy on the use of drugs or alcohol by its drivers while providing private for hire transportation services. Immediately upon receiving a credible passenger complaint, the private for hire transportation company shall suspend the driver and conduct an investigation into the allegation. The suspension shall remain in place throughout the duration of the investigation. Within twenty-four (24) hours, a private for hire transportation company shall notify the department of inspection and code enforcement of any credible passenger complaints lodged against any driver accused of violating the private for hire transportation company's zero tolerance policy, as well as the results of such investigation. Any driver found to have violated the private for hire transportation company's zero tolerance policy shall be prohibited from operating as a driver within the city for a period of no less than one (1) year from the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-41. - Private for hire transportation company's liability. 
    A private for hire transportation company shall be liable for its violations of this chapter and those committed by a driver driving for the private for hire transportation company upon a showing that the private for hire transportation company knew or should have known about such violations by the driver. Such a showing shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of any permit or permits issued to the private for hire transportation company. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-42. - Trip sheets and records. 
    Every holder of a CPNC or TNC permit shall keep daily records including all trip requests, complaints, accepted trip requests, daily application sign-in and sign-out logs, vehicle collision reports, service response time reports, reports of crime against drivers and passengers, lost property reports, and vehicle identification information. Such records may be maintained electronically and shall be preserved for a period of not less than three (3) years and be available for examination by the director of inspection and code enforcement within twenty-four (24) hours of request. Failure to maintain such records or to timely provide them shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a CPNC or TNC permit. 
    Falsifying any records outlined in this article shall be grounds for suspension and/or revocation of a CPNC and/or TNC permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-43. - Privacy protections. 
    A holder of a CPNC or TNC permit shall not disclose to a third party any personally identifiable information concerning a passenger unless: 
(a)  The holder of a CPNC or TNC permit obtains the passenger's consent for release of such information; 
(b)  The disclosure is necessary to comply with a legal obligation; or 
(c)  The disclosure is necessary to protect or defend the terms and conditions for use of the service or to investigate violations of the terms and conditions. 
    This limitation of disclosure does not apply to the disclosure of aggregated passenger data and other information about the passenger that is not personally identifiable. Violations of this section shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a CPNC or TNC permit. The city shall have the right to file suit in a court of competent jurisdiction to seek appropriate remedies for any violations of this provision. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-44. - Accessibility. 
    As condition of the issuance of any permit or certificate pursuant to this chapter, all holders of a CPNC or TNC permit shall insure that: 
(a)  All drivers comply with all applicable laws relating to accommodation of service animals. 
(b)  Permitees shall not impose additional charges for providing services to persons with physical disabilities because of those disabilities. 
(c)  Any holder of a CPNC or TNC permit that has at least fifty (50) vehicles operating shall provide that: 
(1)  No less than three (3) percent of all of the vehicles, operating for said holder of a CPNC or TNC permit, shall comply with vehicle guidelines set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) with the average time available per week for such vehicles being reasonably within the average time available per week of all vehicles; 
(2)  No less than three (3) percent of the total time available per week of all vehicles in operation for a holder of a CPNC or TNC permit shall be achieved by vehicles that comply with vehicle guidelines set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA); or 
(3)  Any TNC shall make its TNC network available to all WAT taxicabs to allow passengers to book rides on the TNC network with accessible taxicabs. The TNC shall make available the same or substantially the same software TNC network functionality as it provides for TNC vehicles, but is not required to accept payment through the TNC network. The TNC shall provide this service to accessible taxicabs at its own expense. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-45. - Owners to require drivers to have valid permit. 
    No owner of any vehicle regulated by this chapter shall employ or permit by agreement of any nature any person to drive said vehicle unless said driver has a valid driver permit required by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-46. - Vehicle permit. 
(a)  Any holder of a CPNC permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be entitled to the number of vehicle permits that its CPNC permit provides for at no additional cost except for the vehicle inspection fee in section 16-137. 
(b)  Except for an entity operating under a TNC permit, any entity, that is not otherwise regulated elsewhere in this chapter, that has a CPNC, or other permit for the transportation of passengers for hire, issued from a jurisdiction within the state and desires to pick-up passengers within the city, shall obtain a vehicle permit from the department for each vehicle that it desires to use to pick-up passengers within the city. This permit shall be valid for one (1) calendar year and must be renewed each year. The cost of the vehicle permit shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(c)  In order for an entity to qualify to obtain a vehicle permit from the city pursuant to paragraph (b) above, the jurisdiction within the state from whom the entity currently has a current CPNC, or other permit for the transportation of passengers for hire, must provide a similar opportunity to city CPNC permit holders to pick-up passengers within that jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17; Ord. No. 11,338, § 1, 10-5-17) 
Sec. 16-47. - Hearing and appeal procedures; city council action. 
(a)  Hearing and appeal procedures when application is denied, suspended and/or revoked. 
(1)  The taxicab division shall report its findings and recommendations to the applicant or permittee of the proposed action by hand delivery or U.S. Mail, postage paid, to the last address provided by the applicant or permittee. 
(2)  The applicant or permittee may appeal in writing within ten (10) days after receipt of such proposed action for a hearing to the council whereupon the applicant or permittee shall be given a notice of the proposed action to be taken, including day, time and place of said hearing. 
(3)  If no written appeal is received within the time frame stated above, the proposed action is deemed final. 
(4)  The hearing may be held by the council in regular, special, or executive session. At said hearing, the applicant shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(5)  The council's review is de novo, but it will consider the director's determination and the factors found in this subsection in determining whether to uphold the decision of the director. 
(b)  At the close of the hearing, the council will issue its order either upholding or reversing the action of the department. 
(c)  If the council reverses the action of the department any such order may contain such terms or conditions as the council deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-48-16-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC NECESSITY AND CONVENIENCE 

Sec. 16-53. - CPNC required. 
    Except for TNCs whose permit is provided for in section 16-77 et seq., and those vehicles regulated in section 16-46(b) above, no person shall solicit passengers or operate or permit a private for hire vehicle owned or controlled by him to be operated as a vehicle for hire within the city without having first applied for and obtained a certificate of public necessity and convenience in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17; Ord. No. 11338, § 2, 10-5-17) 
Sec. 16-54. - Limitation on number of certificates. 
    There shall be no limit on the number of CPNCs issued by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-55. - Application. 
(a)  Each application for a certificate of public necessity and convenience to operate a taxicab as an owner shall contain the following: 
(1)  The name and form of business under which the service will be operated; 
(2)  The name, phone number, mailing address, and street address of the applicant's agent for service of process; 
(3)  Proof of registration to conduct business in the state; 
(4)  Proof of current insurance coverage as required by this chapter; 
(5)  Proof of a current city occupational license as required by section 16-4; 
(6)  Proof that the applicant maintains a registered agent for service of process and a principal place of business in the greater New Orleans area; 
(7)  Proof that if the applicant maintains a website, that website includes the information required by section 16-39; 
(8)  Proof that the company has established a uniform logo, insignia, decal, or trade dress required by section 16-132; 
(9)  The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant; 
(10)  Description of vehicle or vehicles including the following: 
a.  The model and make of said vehicle, and seating capacity; 
b.  Type, make and number of taximeter, if applicable, meeting the requirements of this chapter; 
c.  A certificate that the applicant is the actual, sole and registered owner of the vehicle or vehicles to be used, including certificate of title number or numbers or if the registered owner is a person other than the permittee, a written notarized affidavit is required from the registered owner; and 
(11)  Any additional information as requested by the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement for administration of this section. 
(b)  No CPNC shall be issued until all the fees required by this chapter are paid. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17; Ord. No. 11,338, § 3, 10-5-17) 
Sec. 16-56. - Fees. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance or renewal of a CPNC, each applicant shall pay either an annual license fee of: 
(1)  Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per authorized vehicle or 
(2)  Ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) for unlimited authorized vehicles. 
(b)  Any person issued a CPNC based on a per vehicle fee, may at any time remit additional payments to the city to add additional authorized vehicles to that person's permit. Each additional vehicle to be authorized shall be subject to the full per authorized vehicle fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). In all cases, all such additional vehicle authorizations shall expire upon the next occurring expiration of the permit, regardless of date(s) of additional vehicle authorization(s) and irrespective of date(s) of payment(s). 
(c)  The fee for a duplicate vehicle permit shall be seventy dollars ($70.00). 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-57. - Issuance or denial of an application for a CPNC. 
    After receiving a completed application form and upon successful completion of all the requirements of this section, the director is hereby authorized to issue, without delay, a CPNC, in his/her discretion, if he finds the applicant to be qualified or he may deny the application if he finds the applicant not to be qualified. An applicant must submit all documents required by the application process within thirty (30) days of the submittal of an application to the taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-58. - Hearing and appeal when application or renewal is denied, suspended or revoked. 
    All hearings and/or appeals requested by a permittee, as a result of an action of the department, shall be administered pursuant to section 16-47. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-59. - Replacement of vehicles. 
    The owner of any private for hire vehicle for which a certificate has been issued under the terms of this chapter may replace such vehicle upon application to the taxicab division, and by obtaining the necessary revised certificate as prescribed by this chapter. If the private for hire vehicle is governed by vehicle age restrictions, no such application shall be considered unless the age of the replacement vehicle meets the requirements of this chapter. 
    The certificate or permit issued for the vehicle to be taken out of operation shall be returned to the taxicab division, and the taxicab division shall issue a new certificate containing revised information. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-60. - Renewal. 
(a)  Every certificate issued under this chapter in good standing shall be renewable from January 1 through February 28, upon application and payment of a renewal fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A grace period of fifteen (15) days following the date of expiration shall be granted, within which said fifteen-day grace period a certificate shall be renewable upon application and payment of the two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) certificate fee, plus the payment of a ten dollar ($10.00) penalty. 
(b)  The grace period hereinabove provided is merely a provision pertaining to renewal of an expired certificate, and is not to be construed to mean an extension of the expiration date of said certificate. Any certificate found to be in use after the expiration date of February 28, even though the fifteen-day grace period has not expired, shall be subjected to suspension, revocation or punishment as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-61. - Failure to renew. 
    A certificate issued under this chapter not renewed prior to or on March 15 shall be considered abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-62. - Abandonment. 
    Certificates of public necessity and convenience shall be withdrawn from the holder thereof and surrendered to the taxicab division when: 
(1)  The holder thereof fails to operate the applicable vehicle in the public use for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or fails to place vehicle in public use within thirty (30) days after a granting of a certificate of public necessity and convenience, except for extenuating circumstances reported to and approved by the supervisor of the taxicab division prior to the end of said thirty-day period of nonservice. If said vehicle has been involved in an accident, there shall be a ninety-day period allowed for repair. 
(2)  The vehicle for which the certificate was issued is sold, transferred or otherwise disposed of without substitution of equipment within thirty (30) days of the date of disposition. Any surrendered certificate of public necessity and convenience may be reissued only pursuant to the requirements applicable to the issuance of a new certificate of public necessity and convenience. 
(3)  The holder of a certificate shall be ordered by the taxicab division to replace his private for hire vehicle where the taxicab no longer meets with the age requirements as required by this chapter or the reasonable standards of safe operation prescribed by the taxicab division. Upon failure of the owner to comply with any such order within sixty (60) days after service thereof, the certificate shall be deemed to have been abandoned by nonuse. 
(4)  The holder of the certificate fails to return within thirty (30) days to the taxicab division after an inspection deficiency has been given to the permittee to correct or fail to complete the CPNC renewal after filing such with the taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-63. - Suspension and revocation. 
(a)  Any holder of a certificate issued under this chapter who has committed three (3) or more violations of this chapter within any twelve-month period shall have his certificate revoked. 
(b)  Additionally, certificates issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked or suspended by the taxicab division if the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this chapter, discontinued operations for more than thirty (30) consecutive days, has violated any city or state laws, or the violations of which reflect unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
(c)  The department shall use the following process to effect any such suspension or revocation: 
(1)  The taxicab division shall report its findings and recommendations to the owner and/or driver of the proposed action by hand delivery or certified U.S. Mail, postage paid, to the last address provided by the owner and/or driver. 
(2)  The owner may appeal in writing within ten (10) days after receipt of such proposed action for a hearing on the suspension or revocation to the council whereupon the holder of subject certificate shall be given a notice of the proposed action to be taken, including day, time and place of said hearing. 
(3)  If no written appeal is received within the time frame stated above, the proposed action shall become final. 
(4)  The hearing may be held by the council in regular, special, or executive session. At said hearing, the holder of subject certificate shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(5)  The council's review is de novo, but it will consider the director's determination and the factors found in this chapter in determining whether the suspension or revocation is justified in the exercise of its reasonable and sound discretion. 
(6)  If, in the opinion of the director, the continued operation of a private for hire vehicle would be against the public interest or create hazards to the general public, then, in such case, the director may immediately suspend subject certificate pending a hearing before the council. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-64. - Unlawful to operate or permit operation of vehicle when certificate is suspended or revoked. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or permit the operation of any vehicle on the streets or public places of the city when the CPNC for that vehicle has been cancelled or revoked or during any period of suspension thereof, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-65. - Use by other than holder prohibited. 
    Owners are not to permit another person to use his certificate issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-66. - Sole proprietor. 
    Any holder of a CPNC who is a sole proprietor, single member limited liability company, or a sole shareholder of a corporation shall be entitled to obtain a single driver's permit, provided that all of the requirements of a driver permit are met, at no cost. 
(Ord. No. 11,320, § 1, 8-17-17) 
Secs. 16-67-16-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIMITED PASSENGER TRANSPORTATION 

Sec. 16-71. - LPT-Application process and requirements. 
    No motorized or non-motorized LPT vehicle may be used as a for hire transportation vehicle without a valid and unobstructed CPNC issued by the city under section 16-53 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-72. - Limousine and executive sedan transportation must be prearranged; exceptions. 
(a)  All limousine and executive sedan service must be provided on a prearranged basis. 
(b)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), limousine and executive sedan transportation providers may operate "on demand" at the Louis Armstrong International Airport if permitted to do so by the New Orleans Aviation Board. 
(c)  Notwithstanding subsection (a), limousine and executive sedan transportation providers may operate "on demand" provided that the limousine or executive sedan company has a written contract with a major hotel, or an airline company, in which case the limousine or executive sedan company is considered "on call" for such service requests. 
(d)  If a limousine or executive sedan company wishes to be considered "on demand" as provided in subsection (c), the company must comply with the following conditions: 
(1)  File with the taxicab division all such contracts indicating the contracting party's name along with the beginning and ending contracted dates, and a minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) to the airport from the downtown is required; 
(2)  Provide the director and/or taxicab division with a brief description of the service provided under the contract including the specific basis for reimbursement and schedule of fees/fares; 
(3)  Provide the director and/or taxicab division with notarized signatures from all contracting parties stating that the contract is currently effective and listing the end date; and 
(4)  Transportation provided by a third party company as part of the contract must be prearranged. 
(e)  If a penalty is issued to a limousine or executive sedan company or driver because service was provided without the requisite prearranged reservation, it is no defense to assert that a valid and current contract existed at the time of the penalty but was simply not filed with the city. Limousine and executive sedan companies must file all contracts with the city prior to the acceptance of any fare "on demand". A failure to file a contract with the city is prima facie evidence that "on demand" service does not exist with that contracting party. 
(f)  If a limousine or executive sedan service provider is in a marked hotel zone or loading/unloading zone, it is a rebuttable presumption that it is providing for hire transportation services that require a reservation. 
(g)  Hotels are liable for a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per occurrence for every instance in which a hotel employee, agent or independent contractor allows a hotel guest to obtain limousine or executive sedan transportation services without the required sixty-minute reservation. This subsection does not apply if the limousine or executive sedan service provider has complied with the conditions found in subsections (c) and (d). 
(h)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (g) any person violating this section shall be guilty of a violation thereof, and upon conviction shall be punished as provided in section 1-9. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-73-16-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TRANSPORTATION NETWORK SERVICES 

Sec. 16-77. - TNC permit. 
    No TNC shall operate within the city without first having applied for and received a TNC permit in the manner provided in this article. Any person or entity found operating a TNC without a TNC permit shall be subject to a fine of no less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense and shall be prohibited from obtaining a TNC permit for one (1) calendar year from the date of the offense. For second or subsequent offenses violators shall be subject to the maximum fine allowed by law and shall be permanently prohibited from obtaining a TNC permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-78. - TNC permit application and renewal. 
(a)  An application for a TNC permit shall be submitted to the department of inspection and code enforcement on forms furnished by the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement and the applicant shall furnish the following information with each application: 
(1)  The name and form of business under which the service will be operated; 
(2)  The name, phone number, mailing address, and street address of the applicant's agent for service of process; 
(3)  Proof of registration to conduct business in the state; 
(4)  Proof of current insurance coverage as required by this article; 
(5)  Proof of a current occupational license as required by section 16-4; 
(6)  Proof that the TNC maintains a registered agent and a principal place of business in the greater New Orleans area; 
(7)  Proof that the TNC maintains a website that includes the information required by section 16-39; 
(8)  Proof that the company has established a uniform logo, insignia, decal, or trade dress required by section 16-82; 
(9)  A certification under penalty of perjury that the TNC has complied with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to the registration requirements for TNC driver; 
(10)  A general description of the means and methodology used to charge passengers and the standard rates for for-hire vehicle transportation services rendered; and 
(11)  Any additional information as requested by the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement for administration of this section. 
(b)  TNC permits are valid for the calendar year in which they are issued and must be renewed each year. 
(c)  A TNC permit application renewal shall be submitted to the department of inspection and code enforcement thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the existing TNC permit and shall include all the information required in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-79. - Issuance or denial of an application for a TNC permit; hearing and appeal procedures; city council action. 
    After receiving a completed application form and upon successful completion of all the requirements of this section, the director, in his/her discretion, is hereby authorized to either issue a TNC permit, if he finds the applicant to be qualified, or he may deny the application. The department shall not issue the TNC permit until the applicant pays all applicable fees as required by this chapter. All hearings and/or appeals requested by a TNC, as a result of an action of the department, shall be administered pursuant to section 16-47. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-80. - TNC permit fees. 
    The city, through the department of inspection and code enforcement shall charge an annual TNC permit fee of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The TNC shall also remit quarterly payments to city through the department of inspection and code enforcement in an amount equal to fifty cents ($.50) per trip originating in the city each quarter. These fees shall be assessed in addition to any other fees charged in any other provision of this chapter. Fees and assessments under this article may be reviewed, increased, or decreased at any time by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-81. - Requirements for transportation network driver. 
    A transportation network driver shall: 
(1)  Exclusively accept rides booked through a TNC's digital platform and shall not solicit or accept street-hails; 
(2)  Use the required logo, insignia, or trade dress in accordance with the standards established pursuant to section 16-82, at any time that the operator uses his or her motor vehicle to provide transportation network services; 
(3)  Possess the valid driver's license; 
(4)  Possess proof of registration for the motor vehicle used for transportation network services; 
(5)  Possess proof of motor vehicle insurance as required by LSA-R.S. 45:201.9; and 
(6)  Be at least twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-82. - TNC vehicle identification. 
    All TNC vehicles shall be identified by consistent trade dress (i.e. distinctive signage or display on the vehicle) when providing TNC services that is sufficiently large and color contrasted as to be readable during daylight hours at a distance of at least fifty (50) feet. The trade dress shall be sufficient to allow a passenger, government official, or member of the public to associate a vehicle with a particular TNC. The TNC shall provide the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement or the director's designee a copy of its then current trade dress and update that copy anytime there is a change to the trade dress. Acceptable forms of trade dress include, but are not limited to, symbols or signs on vehicle doors, roofs, or grills. Magnetic or removable trade dress is acceptable. TNCs shall file a photograph or digital image of their trade dress with the department of inspection and code enforcement. A TNC permit holder shall be liable for violations of this section upon a showing that the TNC knew or should have known about such violations. Such a showing shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a TNC permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-83. - TNC driver background checks. 
(a)  A TNC shall not allow a TNC driver to perform TNC services unless and until the TNC has performed or caused to be performed background checks on TNC driver applicants and TNC drivers and determined that the TNC driver is not subject to disqualification according to the factors in part (e) of this section and that the TNC driver background is in accord with the policies and regulations of the department of inspection and code enforcement implementing such standards. Background checks performed pursuant to this section shall be paid for by a TNC or a TNC driver, and in no case shall the same be billed to or paid for by the city. 
(b)  The methodology shall include a local and national criminal background check for each applicant which shall include: 
(1)  Nationwide database criminal history record check to determine if a person has been arrested for and/or convicted of a crime with validation (primary source search), which shall include a social security trace or other similar identification check to identify additional relevant information about applicants, including first name, last name, middle name or initial, aliases, maiden name, alternate spellings, nicknames, date of birth, Social Security number, any known addresses; and 
(2)  Any records search which bases jurisdictional criminal record searches on identified places of residence shall additionally require identical records searches for Orleans, Jefferson, St. Bernard, St. Tammany, Tangipahoa, Plaquemines, and St. Charles Parishes; and, 
(3)  Results or findings of such a search must be confirmed with the jurisdiction or court system to determine disposition of proceedings; and 
(4)  The Dru Sjodin National Sex Offender public website; and 
(5)  A driving record check to verify compliance with section 16-83(f) of this chapter; and 
(c)  The details of the background check methodology to be used by a TNC in the certification of their TNC drivers shall be provided to the department of inspection and code enforcement at the time of application to operate as a TNC within the city. This detailed methodology must be presented in writing and shall meet or exceed the standards provided in subsection (b), above. Further, the TNC must notify the department of inspection and code enforcement of any changes to its methodology and receive prior approval before implementing such changes. 
(d)  These background checks shall be conducted at least once every two (2) years for the duration that an individual operates under the TNC. 
(e)  Criteria used in evaluating criminal records shall be consistent across all individuals operating under the TNC. Differing criteria may not be applied to evaluation of background check results based upon race, color, religion, sex (including pregnancy), national origin, age, disability, or sexual orientation. 
(f)  A TNC shall disqualify an applicant when: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted anywhere under the laws of this state or any other state or of the United States and/or of this city or any other city, of an offense or offenses equivalent to homicide, aggravated battery, aggravated rape, simple rape, aggravated kidnapping, simple kidnapping, aggravated burglary, simple burglary, armed robbery, simple robbery. Any such conviction shall subject the applicant to permanent disqualification; or 
(2)  The applicant has a felony conviction of pandering, prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, or illegal possession or sale or use of narcotics, or illegal possession, sale or use of any barbituric acid derivation, or any central nervous system stimulant of any kind within the ten (10) years preceding the application or renewal thereof; or 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of any other felony besides those enumerated in this subsection (1) or (2) against the criminal laws of this or any other state or the United States within five (5) years of the date of the submission of the application; or 
(4)  The applicant has a felony charge pending for any of the felony offenses listed in subsections (1) and (2) above; or 
(5)  During the five-year period preceding the application or renewal processing, the applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense involving: 
a.  Any misdemeanor involving theft, identity theft, robbery, burglary, assault, sex crimes, drugs, pandering, prostitution, or weapons; or 
b.  Any serious traffic crime, including but not limited to: reckless driving, attempt to elude a police officer, or leaving the scene of an injury accident; or 
(6)  The applicant has a license restriction, suspension or revocation; or 
(7)  The applicant is less than twenty-one (21) years old; or 
(8)  The applicant has one (1) driving-while-intoxicated conviction within the past twelve (12) months or two (2) such convictions within the past five (5) years; or 
(9)  Is a match in the Dru Sjodin National Sex Offender public website; or 
(10)  Upon review of the applicant's criminal and motor vehicle background check, and other information deemed pertinent to the application, it is determined that information contained in the application is false or incomplete; or 
(11)  Review of the applicant's traffic and criminal record, and other information the director deems pertinent, is reasonable grounds for the determination that the public safety would not be served by the issuance of a driver permit to the applicant. 
(g)  A TNC shall maintain records of all criminal background and driving record checks performed on all employed or contracted TNC drivers operating in the city for a period of no less than two (2) years. If the director of the department of inspection and code enforcement or a city police department official requests access to such records, the TNC, or its designee, must provide the records to either entity within twenty-four (24) hours of the request. Such records may only be accessed when a complaint number has been generated by the department of inspection and code enforcement or the city police department, said complaint may originate from the code director or the city police chief. Failure to conduct criminal background and driving record checks or failure to maintain such criminal background check and driving records check records or provide them upon request in accordance with this section shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a TNC permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-84. - TNC driver drug testing. 
(a)  Every quarter, the department of inspection and code enforcement is authorized to send to any TNC a list of up to twenty-five (25) TNC drivers for random drug testing. Within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving the list, the TNC shall advise such drivers that they must obtain a drug test from a department of inspection and code enforcement approved testing facility. The driver shall obtain the drug test within twenty-four (24) hours of receiving the notice from the TNC. 
(b)  A TNC shall require a TNC driver involved in a traffic accident while providing TNC services to submit to a drug test within twenty-four (24) hours of the accident. 
(c)  TNC drivers must sign a waiver to allow approved facilities to send drug test results directly to the TNC and the department of inspection and code enforcement. 
(d)  Any TNC driver who fails to timely to submit to drug testing or refuses to comply with the instructions and/or testing protocol of the drug testing facility shall be prohibited from operating as a TNC driver for a period of one (1) year. Further, the TNC shall prevent the driver from accessing the TNC's network for a period of one (1) year. 
(e)  Any TNC driver whose test results indicate that the TNC driver tested positive for any controlled substance listed in R.S. 40:961, et seq., or any combination thereof, shall be permanently barred from operating as a TNC driver. Further, the TNC shall prevent the driver from accessing the TNC's network. 
(f)  If a person testing positive for a controlled dangerous substance has a valid and legal prescription for the medication for which he tested positive, such person may continue as a TNC driver under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The prescription must be issued by a licensed physician; 
(2)  The prescription must be accompanied by a written certification from the physician that: 
a.  The medication was prescribed prior to the drug test; 
b.  The physician is familiar with the person's medical history including drug and alcohol use and other medications; 
c.  The person has not been diagnosed with any substance abuse issue, and that the prescribed drug will not adversely affect that applicant's ability to operate a motor vehicle safely; and 
d.  The medication was not prescribed as permitted by R.S. 40:1046. 
(g)  Drug tests performed pursuant to this section shall be paid for by a TNC or TNC driver, and in no case shall the same be billed to or paid for by the city. 
(h)  Failure of the TNC to comply with these provisions shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a TNC permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-85. - Maximum age of TNC vehicles. 
    No vehicle having a vehicle age greater than eight (8) years may be used to provide TNC services in the city. For purposes of this article, the term "vehicle age" shall be determined based on the vehicle's model year, and a "year" shall be measured through the last day of that respective calendar year. (For example, a vehicle with a model year of 2000 shall have a vehicle age of one (1) year as of January 1, 2001). If a vehicle owner can demonstrate that the odometer had less than six hundred (600) miles on it at the time of purchase, the vehicle age shall be measured from the date the vehicle was purchased. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-86. - TNC vehicle inspection. 
    A TNC shall certify that all motor vehicles providing TNC services through its TNC network have been inspected by a state-certified mechanic or garage prior to allowing them provide such services in the city. A TNC shall require and certify that an annual re-inspection has been performed on all motor vehicles providing TNC services through its TNC network. TNCs must keep all vehicle services records for a period of no less than two (2) years and make them available to the department of inspection and code enforcement upon request. Failure to have a TNC vehicle inspected or failure to maintain vehicle inspection records or provide them upon request shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a TNC permit. A state brake tag shall satisfy the inspection requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-87. - Nonscheduled TNC vehicle inspections. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions in this article, the department of inspection and code enforcement shall have the power and authority to require periodic inspections of any motor vehicles currently registered as TNC vehicles while providing TNC services. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-88. - TNC driver operating hours. 
    TNC drivers shall not provide TNC services for more than twelve (12) hours in any 24-hour period. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-89. - Prohibition against street hailing. 
    TNC drivers shall not provide TNC services unless a TNC has matched the driver to a passenger through a TNC network. A TNC driver shall not accept on-demand rides from persons on the street. TNC drivers shall provide immediate electronic proof that any ride in progress has been prearranged through a TNC upon demand by the department of inspection and code enforcement or law enforcement personnel. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-90. - Prohibition against using taxicab stands. 
    TNC drivers shall not pick up or discharge a passenger in any designated taxicab stand areas. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-91. - Refusal to carry passengers. 
    Transportation network companies shall reasonably ensure adequate and non-discriminatory pick up and drop off service to and from all areas in the geographic boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-92. - Operating at Louis Armstrong International Airport. 
    No TNC shall operate and no TNC driver shall pick up passengers at the Louis Armstrong International Airport unless specifically authorized to do so by the New Orleans Aviation Board and the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-93. - Passenger match information. 
    Prior to passenger entering a TNC vehicle, the TNC shall provide a passenger with the following information: 
(1)  TNC driver's first name; 
(2)  A photograph clearly identifying the TNC driver; and 
(3)  Make, model, and license plate number of the TNC driver's vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-94. - Penalties for violations by TNC's. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in this article, for violations of this chapter, a TNC shall be subject to a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense and/or possible suspension or revocation of its TNC permit; for subsequent offenses a TNC shall be subject to a fine up to the maximum amount allowable in the mayor's court for the city and/or possible suspension or revocation of its TNC permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-95. - Penalties for violations by TNC drivers. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in this article, for violations of this chapter, a TNC driver shall be subject to immobilization and/or impoundment of the TNC vehicle and a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a first offense; for subsequent offenses drivers shall be subject to immobilization and/or impoundment of the TNC vehicle and a fine of up to the maximum amount allowable in the mayor's court for the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-96-16-101. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SHUTTLE SERVICES, SIGHTSEEING AND TOUR VEHICLES 

Sec. 16-102. - Shuttle service-Points of origin and destination required. 
    Any person desiring to provide shuttle services within the city shall submit all points of origin and destinations to the taxicab division for approval, upon forms provided by the department and/or taxicab division, prior to the shuttle operating the route. Applications to modify or change any authorized routes may be submitted at any time to the taxi inspector for approval, upon forms provided by the department and/or taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-103. - Records. 
    Shuttles services must maintain a complete and accurate log in either electronic or written form in which a record of every trip is kept upon a daily trip sheet. The following information is required for each trip: 
(a)  The time and place of origin and destination of the trip; 
(b)  The number of passengers carried; 
(c)  The mileage; and 
(d)  The amount of fare collected. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-104. - Sightseeing and touring vehicles. 
    Operators of sightseeing and touring vehicles are required to comply with all of the requirements for a CPNC except as modified below: 
(a)  The term "sightseeing vehicle" means any motor or horse drawn vehicle regardless of seating capacity, which is used on regularly conducted sightseeing trips to destinations and over routes not controlled by the passenger or passengers transported therein. 
(1)  The term "peddle powered vehicle" means an open-air vehicle with three (3) wheels which is powered by foot and is used to ferry passengers from one (1) point to another and not specifically over designated routes. These vehicles shall only be licensed to operate in that area known as "Rivertown." 
(b)  All circulars, leaflets, posters, pamphlets, or any other advertising matter describing any trip, tour, or excursion, must receive the approval of the city taxicab division prior to display or distribution to the public. 
(c)  A schedule of rates of fare for each type of trip or tour shall be filed with the taxicab division. 
(d)  A schedule of rates charged for each trip or tour shall be conspicuously displayed at the starting point upon a sign attached to the bus as near to the entrance as practical, during the time the passengers are entering such vehicles and shall remain thereon until it departs. 
(1)  Sightseeing vehicles and buses. Sightseeing vehicles must post the rate for each tour offered to the public or provide to the prospective passenger in advance of the tour an information sheet or folder outlining the points of interest to be visited and the cost of the tour. 
(e)  The owner, his agent, operator, sightseeing guide or lecturer shall not charge nor attempt to charge any passenger a sum greater than that set forth in the rate schedule. 
(f)  A sightseeing bus shall operate on a prescribed route when one is so designated. 
(g)  The owner or agent shall keep a permanent daily record of each trip, tour or excursion made. This record shall be available to the taxicab division at all times and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  Date and time of the start and termination of the trip, tour or excursion. 
(2)  Name of the person who contracted or solicited the passengers or who contracted for the specific trip, tour or excursion. 
(3)  The name of the person acting as the guide or lecturer during the trip, tour or excursion. 
(4)  The name and taxicab division driver permit number of the operator of the vehicle. 
(5)  The sightseeing vehicle's permit number and state license plate number. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-105-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - DRIVER PERMIT 

Sec. 16-110. - Individuals that are exempted from driver permit. 
    TNC drivers are exempt from the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-111. - Driver permit required; possession by driver. 
    No person shall operate a private for hire vehicle within the city without having first applied for and obtained a valid driver permit issued under the provisions of this chapter. Any costs associated with the requirements of the application for and renewal of the driver permit are the responsibility of the applicant or permittee and are not refundable. Drivers shall have their driver permit in their possession at all times while operating a private for hire vehicle and shall be displayed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. Any private for hire vehicle cruising the city shall be deemed to be operating as a vehicle for hire. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-112. - Required Louisiana driver's license. 
    No person shall be issued a driver permit under the provisions of this chapter to operate a private for hire vehicle within the city without possessing a valid state driver's license. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17; Ord. No. 11320, § 2, 8-17-17) 
Sec. 16-113. - Application. 
(a)  All applicants for a permit to operate a private for hire vehicle shall make application to the taxicab division on forms provided by the department and shall meet the requirements listed in this article and shall verify that he/she meets all of said requirements. No permit shall be granted unless the applicant shall meet the requirements of this chapter or if the applicant has furnished false, misleading, and/or incomplete information in the application. A permit issued on basis of false, misleading and/or incomplete information furnished by the applicant may be revoked by the department as herein provided. 
(b)  Applications shall contain, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  The applicant's name, address, telephone number, date of birth, and Social Security number; 
(2)  Name and address of the holder of a CPNC permit for whom the applicant shall be providing driving services; 
(3)  The applicant's motor vehicle violations records; 
(4)  The applicant's state driver's license number; 
(5)  A copy of the applicant's state driver's license, as required by section 16-112; 
(6)  Submittal of the results from the criminal background check required in section 16-114 and the drug screen required by section 16-115; and 
(7)  Each applicant for a permit under this chapter shall submit four (4) prints of a passport size photograph of himself taken within thirty (30) days prior to application. 
(8)  A release authorizing the release of the results of the criminal history background check, required by section 16-114, and the results of any drug test, required by section 16-115, to the department of code enforcement. 
(9)  Such other information as required by the department of code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17; Ord. No. 11,320, § 3, 8-17-17) 
Sec. 16-114. - Criminal history background check. 
(a)  Each application for a driver permit shall be accompanied by a criminal background check conducted by any of the vendors approved by the department. The cost for the criminal background check shall be paid by the applicant. 
(b)  The methodology of driver background checks shall include a local and national criminal background check for each driver applicant, which shall include: 
(1)  Multi-state/multi-jurisdictional criminal records locator or other similar nationwide database criminal history record check to determine if a person has been arrested for and/or convicted of a crime with validation (primary source search), which shall include a social security trace or other similar identification check-such as a fingerprint check by the Federal Bureau of Investigation (F.B.I.)-to identify additional relevant information about applicants, including: first name, last name, middle name or initial, aliases, maiden name, alternate spellings, and nicknames; date of birth; Social Security number; and any known addresses; 
(2)  Any records search which bases jurisdictional criminal record searches on identified places of residence shall additionally require identical records searches for Jefferson, Orleans, St. Bernard, St. Tammany, Tangipahoa, Plaquemines, and St. Charles Parishes; 
(3)  Results or findings of such a search must be confirmed with the jurisdiction or court system to determine disposition of proceedings; 
(4)  The Dru Sjodin National Sex Offender public website; and 
(5)  A driving record check to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-115. - Drug screen and drug testing. 
(a)  Every quarter, the department of inspection and code enforcement is authorized to randomly select up to twenty-five (25) drivers from the list of all drivers that have driver's permits for random drug testing. Within twenty-four (24) hours of being notified, the driver must obtain a drug test from a department of inspection and code enforcement approved testing facility. 
(b)  A holder of a CPNC permit shall require a driver involved in a traffic accident while providing driving services to submit to a drug test within twenty-four (24) hours. 
Drivers must sign a waiver to allow approved facilities to send drug test results directly to the holder of a CPNC permit and to the department of inspection and code enforcement. 
(c)  Any driver who fails to timely to submit to drug testing or refuses to comply with the instructions and/or testing protocol of the drug testing facility shall be prohibited from operating as a driver for a period of one (1) year. Further, no holder of a CPNC permit shall allow any driver to provide any driving services as long as the driving permit is suspended. 
(d)  Any driver whose test results indicate that the driver tested positive for any controlled substance listed in R.S. 40:961, et seq., or any combination thereof, shall have his or her driving permit revoked and shall be permanently barred from obtaining another driver's permit. 
(e)  If a person testing positive for a controlled dangerous substance has a valid and legal prescription for the medication for which he tested positive, such person may continue as a driver under the following circumstances: 
(1)  The prescription must be issued by a licensed physician; 
(2)  The prescription must be accompanied by a written certification from the physician that: 
a.  The medication was prescribed prior to the drug test; 
b.  The physician is familiar with the person's medical history including drug and alcohol use and other medications; 
c.  The person has not been diagnosed with any substance abuse issue, and that the prescribed drug will not adversely affect that applicant's ability to operate a motor vehicle safely; and 
d.  The medication was not prescribed as permitted by R.S. 40:1046. 
(f)  Drug tests performed pursuant to this section shall be paid for by the holder of a CPNC permit or the driver, and in no case shall the same be billed to or paid for by the city. 
(g)  Failure of holder of a CPNC permit to comply with these provisions shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of a CPNC permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17; Ord. No. 11,320, § 4, 8-17-17) 
Sec. 16-116. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,320, § 5, adopted Aug. 17, 2017, repealed § 16-116, which pertained to physician's certificate required for application and renewal and derived from Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, adopted June 15, 2017. 
Sec. 16-117. - Fees; expiration date. 
    Every applicant for a driver permit under this chapter, or renewal thereof, shall pay a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00), which shall be the cost thereof, and such permit shall expire on the anniversary of the birth date of the applicant which is nearest to a date two (2) years subsequent to the issuing thereof, unless sooner revoked, cancelled or suspended. There shall be a charge of ten dollars ($10.00) for each duplicate issued. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-118. - Issuance of a driver's permit. 
    Whenever an applicant for a driver permit has met all of the requirements provided under this chapter, the director and/or taxicab division shall approve the issuance of a driver permit of a size, color and form to be determined by the said taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-119. - Disqualifying factors. 
    The following disqualifying factors are grounds for denial of an application or renewal for a driver permit: 
(1)  The applicant has been convicted anywhere under the laws of this state or any other state or of the United States and/or of this city or any other city, of an offense or offenses equivalent to homicide, aggravated battery, aggravated rape, simple rape, aggravated kidnapping, simple kidnapping, aggravated burglary, simple burglary, armed robbery, simple robbery. Any such conviction shall subject the applicant to permanent disqualification; or 
(2)  The applicant has a felony conviction of pandering, prostitution, soliciting for prostitution, or illegal possession or sale or use of narcotics, or illegal possession, sale or use of any barbituric acid derivation, or any central nervous system stimulant of any kind within the ten (10) years preceding the application or renewal thereof; or 
(3)  The applicant has been convicted of any other felony besides those enumerated in this subsection (1) or (2) against the criminal laws of this or any other state or the United States within five (5) years of the date of the submission of the application; or 
(4)  The applicant has a felony or misdemeanor charge pending; or 
(5)  During the five-year period preceding the application or renewal processing, the applicant has been convicted of a criminal offense involving: 
a.  Any misdemeanor involving theft, identity theft, robbery, burglary, assault, sex crimes, drugs, pandering, prostitution, or weapons; or 
b.  Any serious traffic crime, including but not limited to: reckless driving, attempt to elude a police officer, or leaving the scene of an injury accident; or 
(6)  The applicant has a current state department of motor vehicles license restriction, suspension or revocation; 
(7)  The applicant is less than twenty-one (21) years; or 
(8)  The applicant has one (1) driving-while-intoxicated conviction within the past twelve (12) months or two (2) such convictions within the past five (5) years; or 
(9)  Is a match in the Dru Sjodin National Sex Offender public website; or 
(10)  Upon review of the applicant's criminal and motor vehicle background check, and other information deemed pertinent to the application, it is determined that information contained in the application is false or incomplete; or 
(11)  Review of the applicant's traffic and criminal record, and other information the director deems pertinent, is reasonable grounds for the determination that the public safety would not be served by the issuance of a driver permit to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-120. - Hearing and appeal when application or renewal for permit is denied; city council action. 
    All hearing and/or appeals shall be administered pursuant to section 16-47. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-121. - Renewal. 
    The renewal process for every driver permit issued under this chapter shall require the submittal of a completed application, as stated in section 16-113, within thirty (30) days from the date of expiration of the current permit and payment of the fees stated in section 16-117. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-122. - Failure to renew. 
    A driver permit not renewed as provided for in section 16-121 shall be considered abandoned. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-123. - Driver requirements and prohibitions. 
    No driver shall permit another person to use his driver permit. Additionally, all drivers shall comply with all of the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to section 16-29. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-124. - Suspension and revocation. 
    The violation of any of the sections of this chapter shall be grounds for the department to suspend or revoke a driver's permit. Any holder of a driver's permit issued under this chapter who has committed three (3) or more violations of this chapter within any twelve-month period shall have his certificate or permit revoked. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-125. - Operation while permit is under suspension or revocation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle regulated by this chapter on the streets and public places of the city whose driver permit has been revoked or cancelled, or during any period of suspension thereof as provided under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-126. - Failure to return after suspension or revocation prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to return to the taxicab division, without necessity of demand for same by said division, any driver permit that has been revoked or suspended or became invalid under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-127. - Notice; change of address required. 
    It shall be the responsibility of each driver to notify the taxicab division of each and every change of address within forty-eight (48) hours after such change is made and to have such change indicated on his driver permit by the taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-128. - Transfer of driver permit. 
    No driver permit may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-129. - Refusal to carry passengers. 
    All holders of a CPNC or TNC permit shall reasonably ensure adequate and non-discriminatory pick up and drop off service to and from all areas in the geographic boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-130. - Penalties for violations by drivers. 
    Unless otherwise provided for in this article, for violations of this chapter, a driver shall be subject to immobilization and/or impoundment of the vehicle and a fine of up to five hundred ($500.00) for a first offense; for subsequent offenses drivers shall be subject to immobilization and/or impoundment of the vehicle and a fine of up to the maximum amount allowable in the mayor's court for the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-131-16-134. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 16-135. - Vehicles exempt from this article III. 
    TNC vehicles, which are regulated elsewhere in this chapter, are exempt from the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-136. - Inspections. 
    A holder of a CPNC permit shall certify that all motor vehicles providing services through its CPNC permit shall have been inspected by a state-certified mechanic or garage prior to allowing them provide such services in the city. A CPNC permit holder shall require and certify that an annual re-inspection has been performed on all motor vehicles providing services through its CPNC permit. CPNC permit holder's must keep all vehicle services records for a period of no less than two (2) years and make them available to the department of inspection and code enforcement upon request. Failure to have a vehicle inspected or failure to maintain vehicle inspection records or provide them upon request shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of a CPNC permit. A state brake tag shall satisfy the inspection requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17; Ord. No. 11,320, § 6, 8-17-17) 
Secs. 16-137, 16-138. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,320, §§ 7, 8, adopted Aug. 17, 2017, repealed §§ 16-137 and 16-138, which pertained to vehicle for hire inspection fee; expiration date and vehicle inspection criteria and derived from Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, adopted June 15, 2017. 
Sec. 16-139. - Vehicle age restrictions. 
    Vehicle age and usage limitations. 
(1)  Except as expressly provided herein, no vehicle that exceeds eight (8) years of age shall be licensed as a vehicle for hire. 
(2)  Vehicle age shall be computed using the model year of the vehicle and December 31 of the year in which the taxicab vehicle license is sought. (For purposes of this chapter, the term "vehicle age" shall be determined based on the vehicle's model year, and a "year" shall be measured through the last day of that respective calendar year. For example, a vehicle with a model year of 2012 shall have a vehicle age of one (1) year as of January 1, 2013). 
(3)  Exemptions. 
a.  If the safety and equipment standards and requirements contained in this chapter are met, the following vehicles may be licensed and used in taxicab service until the age limits indicated below: 
1.  A wheelchair accessible taxicab may be licensed and used in taxicab service until it reaches twelve (12) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-140-16-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 16-146. - Taximeters. 
    All taxicabs shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night. Said taximeters shall be operated mechanically, driven either from the transmission or from one (1) of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. It shall be unlawful to manipulate the seal or tamper in any way with the taximeter so as to affect the correct reading and recording of the device. Taximeters that are moved from one vehicle to another must be re-inspected prior to the vehicle operating as a vehicle for hire. It shall be the duty of the driver to activate the taximeter at the beginning of each trip and to terminate it at the end. Each taximeter shall have a flag to denote when the taxicab is employed and when it is not employed. Taximeters shall be subject to inspection by the taxicab division. Any person of said department upon complaint or without such complaint is authorized to inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy, shall notify the person operating said taxicab to cease operation until taximeter is repaired and in required working condition. There shall be no charge for such special inspections. 
(1)  The permittee shall provide the taxi inspector, upon forms provided by the department, the company or person who calibrates and repairs taximeters used by the permittee. The taxi inspector is authorized to investigate to ensure that the company or person is qualified to calibrate the taximeters. The taxi inspector is authorized to deny a registration sticker and suspend taxicabs in operation until the certificate holder provides an approved company or person authorized to calibrate and repair the taximeters. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any driver to fail to operate the taximeter as required by this section. 
(3)  Taximeters shall dispense, at a minimum, a receipt with the following information: 
a.  The name of the permittee; 
b.  Driver ID; 
c.  Fare charges; 
d.  Extra charges; 
e.  Total charges; 
f.  Taxicab company name and phone number; and 
g.  The name and telephone number of the appropriate department, agency, or office for passengers to direct compliments or concerns. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-147. - Markings on vehicle required; revocation or suspension of permit for violation. 
(a)  Taxicabs shall bear an identifying design approved by the supervisor of the taxicab division. 
(b)  All taxicabs owned by an owner shall be identically painted and shall bear identical color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on said taxicabs. 
(c)  No vehicle covered by the terms of this chapter shall be licensed, whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the supervisor of the taxicab, taxicab division conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already operating under this chapter, in such a manner as to be misleading or intend to deceive or defraud the public. If, after a certificate has been issued for a taxicab hereunder, the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, in the opinion of the supervisor of the taxicab, taxicab division, in conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive the public, the certificate covering such taxicab shall be suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-148. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,320, § 9, adopted Aug. 17, 2017, repealed § 16-148, which pertained to type of vehicle required for issuance and derived from Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, adopted June 15, 2017. 
Sec. 16-149. - Taxicab enhancement specifications. 
(a)  Digital security cameras are not required for permitted taxicabs. However, if digital security cameras are installed in the taxicabs, it may be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  If a city police officer requests access to any record produced by the digital security camera systems to assist in the investigation of any crime, the taxi company must provide access thereto within twenty-four (24) hours. Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no person other than a city police officer may intentionally access any record produced by the digital security camera systems. Records may be accessed only when a formal police complaint number has been generated. 
(2)  No taxicab company or driver shall intentionally access or allow any person to intentionally access any records produced by the digital security camera systems. 
(3)  No taxicab company or driver may benefit or gain from any records produced by digital security camera systems. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any holder of a CPNC, taxicab company, or driver to allow any person to intentionally access any records produced by the security camera systems. Violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of the CPNC permit, and/or driver permit. 
(b)  All taxicabs shall be equipped with a fully functioning credit/debit card acceptance machine. Further, such credit/debit card acceptance machines are subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The passenger shall have the ability to swipe his own credit or debit card. 
(2)  A payment card industry data security standard (PCI DSS) compliant passenger information monitor (PIM) must be installed in all taxicabs. 
(3)  No surcharge may be imposed for the use of a credit/debit card so that the total charge exceeds the legal rate of fare. 
(4)  No minimum charge may be imposed for the use of a credit/debit card. 
(5)  No service may be refused to any person desiring to use a credit/debit card. 
(6)  The taxicab division shall have unlimited access to all information collected by the PIM. 
(c)  All taxicabs shall be equipped with silent alarm feature to notify dispatch or police of danger. 
(d)  All taxicabs shall be equipped with a global positioning system (GPS) to provide efficient navigation to passenger destinations. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-150. - Advertising. 
    No sign, device or poster, whether permanent or temporary, whether for advertising or other purposes, shall be placed or carried on or inside any vehicle regulated by this chapter without the approval of the director and/or taxicab division. Such sign, device or poster, when approved, shall relate to the business of transporting passengers for hire on the public streets, and to any products, places, establishments, or other businesses, occupations, persons or subjects, as per the rules approved by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-151. - Inspection of advertising posters. 
    Each licensed vehicle owner who has installed an approved advertising card holder in or on the vehicle pursuant to the provisions contained herein shall submit such vehicle for inspection prior to placing said vehicle in operation. Vehicles shall be subject to inspections at all times, and such vehicles that fail to pass such inspection shall be subject to such penalties as are provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-152. - Advertising holder inspection fee. 
    There shall be an annual fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for advertising devices, payable in semiannual installments of twelve dollars and fifty cents ($12.50) at the time of inspection. This fee shall be collected by the department and/or taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-153. - Penalties for violation of advertising privileges. 
    Failure to comply in any manner with the provisions of this chapter by any advertising firm, agent, owner, or operator of any vehicle governed by this chapter, or any other person, shall subject the offender to such fines and penalties as are provided by this chapter as well as to the temporary or permanent removal of all advertising material from the vehicle of such owner or operator. The privileges to advertise in vehicles covered by this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the director and/or taxicab division, subject to the hearing and appeal procedures of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-154. - Open stands-Establishment; use. 
(a)  The city council is hereby authorized and empowered to establish open stands in such places upon the streets of the city as it deems necessary for the use of taxicabs operated in the city. Said city council shall not create an open stand without taking into consideration the need for such stands by the companies and the convenience to the general public. The city council shall prescribe the number of cabs that shall occupy such open stands, and shall not create an open stand in front of any place of business where the abutting property owners object to the same or where such stand would tend to create a traffic hazard. 
(b)  Open stands shall be used by the different drivers on a first come first served basis. The driver shall pull onto the open stand from the rear and shall advance forward as the cabs ahead pull off. Drivers shall stay within five (5) feet of their cabs. They shall not solicit passengers, nor engage in loud or boisterous talk while at an open stand. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding the cab of his choice that is parked at open stands. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-155-16-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBLE TAXIS 

Sec. 16-161. - Vehicle specifications for accessible taxicab models. 
(a)  The vehicle model of a wheelchair accessible taxi (hereinafter "WAT") vehicle must comply with guidelines set forth in the Americans with Disabilities Act (hereinafter "ADA") and be approved after a review by the director in consultation with the Office for Citizens with Disabilities for the parish, including, but not limited to the following vehicle specifications: 
(1)  Any vehicle which has been modified or custom-built must be fully compliant with all applicable federal motor vehicle safety standards (hereinafter "FMVSS") requirements. The manufacturer or modifier shall provide, upon request, certified engineering test reports to demonstrate compliance with FMVSS. 
(2)  For vehicles in excess of twenty-two (22) feet in length, the overhead clearance between the top of the door opening and the raised lift platform, or highest point of a ramp, shall be a minimum of sixty-eight (68) inches, must have enough securement locations and devices to secure two (2) common wheelchairs, and at least one (1) securement device or system shall secure the wheelchair or mobility aid facing toward the front of the vehicle. 
(3)  For vehicles of twenty-two (22) feet in length or less, the overhead clearance between the top of the door opening and the raised lift platform, or highest point of a ramp, shall be a minimum of fifty-six (56) inches, be able to accommodate at least one (1) common wheelchair, and the required securement device may secure the wheelchair or mobility aid either facing toward the front of the vehicle or rearward. Where the wheelchair or mobility aid is secured facing the rear of the vehicle, a padded barrier shall be provided. The padded barrier shall extend from a height of thirty-eight (38) inches from the vehicle floor to a height of fifty-six (56) inches from the vehicle floor with a width of eighteen (18) inches, laterally centered immediately in back of the seated individual. Such barriers need not be solid provided equivalent protection is afforded. Side-facing securement is not permitted under any circumstances in vehicles less than twenty-two (22) feet in length. 
(4)  When the wheelchair or mobility aid is secured, it should move no more than two (2) inches in any direction under normal vehicle operating conditions. 
(5)  All WAT vehicles shall be painted a distinct color as set forth by the taxicab division and have approved labels, including but not limited to an accessibility symbol, on its exterior identifying the vehicle as wheelchair accessible as prescribed by the taxicab division; 
(6)  No vehicle for which a WAT CPNC has been issued may be operated when the model year of said vehicle is greater than twelve (12) model years old. An additional three (3) model years may be granted by an approval of a waiver in annual increments. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-162. - Applicability of chapter to WAT vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter with respect to obtaining and maintaining a CPNC or driver permit for a private for hire vehicle shall apply to the operation of a WAT vehicle, with the following additions or exceptions: 
(1)  The applicant for a WAT permit or driver permit is a resident of Jefferson Parish or a contiguous parish; 
(2)  All WAT licensed companies shall provide service to customers at any location in the city within thirty (30) minutes from the customer's call for service; 
(3)  The city may also revoke a WAT permit or driver permit for cause. Cause for revocation of a WAT permit or driver permit includes, but is not limited to the following: 
a.  Citizen complaints; 
b.  Substandard level of service; 
c.  Unauthorized or excessive billing; 
d.  The vehicle for which the WAT permit was issued ceases operation as an ADA compliant accessible taxicab; 
e.  WAT drivers fail to grant priority to requests for service from people with disabilities, and wheelchair or mobility scooter users. Each WAT driver shall maintain verifiable trip sheets documenting the response to each request for WAT transportation and shall maintain said trip sheets in accordance with section 16-42. 
(4)  Each holder of a CPNC will sign an affidavit that they agree to operate said WAT, forty (40) hours per week, forty-seven (47) weeks per year. Additionally, WAT permit holders will agree to operate at either of the following times: 6:00 a.m. to 2:00 p.m.; 2:00 p.m. to 10:00 p.m.; 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. WAT permit holders may operate additional hours over the specific hours assigned to each WAT permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-163. - Driver safety and customer service training requirements. 
    The ADA requires any organization that transports passengers with special needs to provide passenger assistance training for drivers. Therefore, the CPNC, TNC permit or driver permit applicant must provide documentation of successful completion of taxicab division approved driver training prior to issuance of a permit for wheelchair accessible vehicles. 
(1)  WAT permit holders and drivers must successfully complete a taxicab division approved training program for the needs of passengers in wheelchairs and other persons with disabilities. Such training shall include, but not be limited to, assisting passengers in and out of the vehicle, including safe lift procedures, securing passengers within the vehicle, communicating with passengers to better understand their needs, loading and tie-down procedures, first aid and CPR certifications, and door-to-door service. 
(2)  In evaluating whether or not to approve an institution as competent to administer the training required by the provisions of this section, the director in consultation with the office for citizens with disabilities for the parish shall consider the following as minimum requirements for approval: 
a.  The institution's proposed curriculum and training meets the requirements of the director in consultation with the office for citizens with disabilities for the parish as set forth in subsection (3) of this section; 
b.  The institution has the financial ability and has made a commitment to provide the training required by this section on a regular and continuing basis at a reasonable cost; 
c.  The institution's facilities and schedules will allow applicants for a permit to operate a for hire vehicle in the city or renewal thereof to receive training with a reasonable degree of convenience at a reasonable cost. Factors which the director of the department of safety and permits may consider in connection with this requirement include but are not limited to availability of parking, quality and frequency of the training courses, and physical amenities of the institution's facilities. 
(3)  Outlines of proposed training courses and lesson plans for WAT vehicle drivers and areas to be covered by the training course shall be submitted to the director in consultation with the office for citizens with disabilities for the parish for approval. Factors which the director shall take into consideration prior to approving a training course include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Whether or not the proposed training course provides an adequate background to prepare an applicant for a CPNC or driver's permit to operate a WAT vehicle; 
b.  Whether or not proposed training courses are designed to promote the competence and professional abilities of WAT vehicle drivers by increasing the familiarity of drivers with laws, rules and regulations affecting for hire vehicles, the history and geography of the city area, courtesy, safety, and other factors which, in the director's opinion, tend to promote the quality of WAT vehicle service within the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-164. - WAT permit and driver requirements and prohibitions. 
(a)  WAT permit holders and drivers shall provide service to passengers with disabilities or in wheelchairs before any other passengers and shall not accept any other fare while in route to a service call by a customer who is a person with disabilities or in a wheelchair. 
(b)  Accessible taxicab operator eligibility. 
(1)  Determination of eligibility. Each application shall be investigated by the taxicab division to determine the applicant's eligibility pursuant to the factors listed herein. The taxicab division in determining whether the permit should be granted, may consider such facts as it deems pertinent, but shall at least consider the following factors: 
a.  The applicant's compliance with all applicable statutes, ordinances, and regulations. If, during the five (5) years prior to application, an applicant has violated any statute, ordinance or regulation which would be a basis for revocation of the WAT permit or driver permit, the taxicab division may, in its discretion, refuse to issue the permit. 
b.  The record of the applicant regarding any other CPNC or driver permits issued for the commercial operation of a motor vehicle for the transport of passengers, either in the city or elsewhere. 
(2)  The taxicab division shall not issue a WAT permit to an applicant unless the applicant provides written documentation of the following requirements: 
a.  That the applicant has satisfactorily completed training for operation of an accessible taxi in compliance with taxicab division requirements. 
b.  That the applicant agrees to operate said permit during specified times for which the permit is granted. 
(c)  Minimum qualifications for WAT drivers shall be as described below. 
(1)  All applicants for a WAT permit must have been a full-time driver, holding a taxicab division issued permit, for at least five (5) years immediately preceding the application for a WAT permit. 
(2)  All applicants for WAT permits or drivers' permits must meet or exceed both the moving accident and driver violation conviction standards described below. 
a.  Moving traffic accidents. Applicants shall not have more than two (2) moving traffic accidents, in which the applicant was at fault, within the five (5) years preceding the date of his application for a WAT permit or driver permit. Applicants shall not have more than one (1) vehicle moving traffic accident within two (2) years preceding the date of the application for a WAT permit or driver permit. However, any moving traffic accidents within the five (5) years immediately preceding the date of application that result in a serious injury or fatality shall disqualify an individual applicant. 
b.  Violation convictions. Applicants shall not have more than two (2) moving traffic violation convictions within five (5) years preceding the date of his application for a WAT permit or driver permit. Applicants shall not have more than one (1) moving traffic violation conviction within two (2) years preceding the date of the application for a WAT permit or driver permit. 
(3)  All applicants for accessible taxicab permits or drivers' permits must meet or exceed both the following "notice of violation" and "passenger complaint" standards. 
a.  Applicants shall not have more than two (2) sustained violations of this Code relative to operation of a taxicab or for hire vehicle within the five (5) years preceding the date of the application for a WAT permit or driver permit. Applicants shall not have more than one (1) violation of this Code or ordinances relative to operation of a taxicab or for hire vehicle within the two (2) years preceding the date of the application for a WAT permit or driver permit. A notice of violation that is appealed to the city council and withdrawn by the department will not be counted. 
b.  Passenger complaints. Applicants shall not have more than two (2) passenger complaints within the five (5) years preceding the date of the application for a WAT permit or driver permit. Applicants shall not have more than one (1) passenger complaint within the two (2) years preceding the date of the application for a WAT permit or driver permit. Passenger complaints will be counted if they are determined to be credible after investigation by taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-165.-16-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - LIMOUSINES 

Sec. 16-171. - Applicability of chapter to limousine and executive sedan services. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter with respect to all private for hire vehicles, except taxicabs, shall apply to limousine and sedan services, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Limousines and executive sedans are not required to comply with section 16-131, taximeters. 
(2)  Limousines and executive sedans are not required to maintain receipts as required in section 16-197. 
(3)  Limousines and executive sedans are not required to comply with the age requirements contained in section 16-125. 
(4)  Limousines and executive sedans may not use taxicab stands or taxicab zones. 
(5)  No advertising or advertising device shall be placed on any limousine, executive sedan stretch limousine without approval of the director and/or taxicab division. 
(6)  Limousines, executive sedans and stretch limousines must maintain a log in either electronic or written form in which a record of every trip is kept. The following information is required for each trip: 
a.  Customer name; 
b.  Passenger name if different from customer name; 
c.  Date and time of initial reservation; 
d.  Date and start and end times of trip; 
e.  Initial and destination addresses; and 
f.  The fare amount paid. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-172-16-178. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SHUTTLES 

Sec. 16-179. - Applicability of chapter to shuttle services. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter with respect to all private for hire vehicles, except taxicabs, shall apply to shuttle services, with the following exceptions: 
(1)  Shuttle services are not required to comply with section 16-131, taximeters. 
(2)  Shuttle services are not required to maintain receipts as required in section 16-197. 
(3)  Shuttles may not operate after they reach nine (9) years of age. 
(4)  Shuttle services are not permitted to occupy the spaces on the streets that have been designated as taxicab stands or taxicab zones. 
(5)  No advertising or advertising device shall be placed on any shuttle services without approval of the director and/or taxicab division. 
(6)  At the discretion of the director and/or taxicab division, all shuttles are required to have a mechanical inspection regardless of age, prior to operation, completed by an automotive service excellence (ASE) certified mechanic, upon forms provided by the department and/or taxicab division or personnel of the taxicab division. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-180-16-185. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 16-186. - General provisions. 
(a)  No permit required by this chapter shall be issued until the owner of the vehicle for hire shall first have filed with the taxicab division a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. 
(b)  Blanket insurance policy. If such owner operates more than one vehicle for hire, he may file with the taxicab division in lieu of the policy required by subsection (a) of this section, a policy or policies of liability insurance issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in this state, insuring payment of claims for each vehicle for hire operated by such owner in the amounts provided in section 16-175 of this chapter. 
(c)  Ten-day cancellation notice required. Insurance policies provided for in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), of this section shall contain the provision that said policy or policies may not be cancelled without giving a ten-day notice thereof to the city taxicab division. Proof of this ten-day cancellation notice may be by a certificate of insurance providing for such ten-day cancellation notice. 
(d)  Upon filing, by the owner of a vehicle for hire, of the required insurance policy, the taxicab division shall issue a certificate for each such vehicle. This certificate shall show that the owner of such vehicle has complied with the requirements of this section, and shall recite the full name of the owner of the vehicle and of the insurer together with the number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of the vehicle insured thereunder, and the number thereof. The original certificate shall be posted conspicuously within the vehicle. The driver shall retain and preserve a duplicate of the certificate. 
(e)  Effectiveness of certificate. The certificate for any vehicle or vehicles of an owner thereof shall be effective, and operation shall be permitted thereunder, only so long as the insurance required under subsection (a) of this section or permitted under subsection (b) of this section as to such vehicle or vehicles shall remain in force as therein provided, or the statement of financial responsibility required under subsection (c) of this section shall be filed currently each year and the insurance required under said section shall remain in force with regard thereto. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-187. - Insurance requirements for CPNCs. 
(a)  No CPNC required by this division shall be issued until the owner of the vehicle shall first have filed with the taxicab division a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. Said insurance policy shall provide for payment amount as authorized by R.S. 45:200.1 et seq. regarding Public Passenger Motor Vehicle Responsibility Law but in no circumstance shall it be of a sum less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to, or death of, any one (1) person resulting from any one (1) accident, and subject to said limit for one (1) person, for payment of a sum less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to, or death of, two (2) or more persons, resulting from any one (1) accident, and for payment of a sum less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damage to property resulting from any one (1) accident by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such vehicle upon any street. 
(1)  The liability coverage for a LPT vehicle or wheelchair accessible taxi (WAT) shall be represented by a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company for payment amount as authorized by R.S. 45:200.1 et seq. regarding the Public Passenger Motor Vehicle Responsibility Law but in no circumstance shall it be of a sum less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to, or death of, any one (1) person resulting from any one (1) accident, and, subject to such limit for one (1) person, for payment of a sum less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to, or death of, two (2) or more persons, resulting from any one (1) accident; and for payment of a sum less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damage to property resulting from any one (1) accident, by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such vehicle upon any street. 
(2)  The liability coverage for a public carrier vehicle licensed to carry over ten (10) persons shall be represented by a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state and shall provide for payment amount as authorized by R.S. 45:200.1 et seq. regarding Public Passenger Motor Vehicle Responsibility Law but in no circumstance shall it be of a sum less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or death of any one (1) person resulting from any one (1) accident and, subject to such limit for one (1) person, for payment of a sum less than three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or death of two (2) or more persons resulting from any one (1) accident, and for payment of a sum less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages to property resulting from any one (1) accident by reason of the ownership, operation, maintenance or use of such vehicle upon any street. 
(b)  Blanket insurance policy. If such owner operates more than one (1) vehicle, he may file with the taxicab division in lieu of the policy required by subsection (a) of this section, a policy or policies of liability insurance issued by a company or companies authorized to do business in this state, insuring payment of claims for each public carrier vehicle operated by such owner in the amounts provided in subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  Self-insurance. In lieu of the insurance coverage required under subsection (a) or permitted under subsection (b) the owner of one (1) or more private for hire vehicles or public carrier vehicles may act as self-insurer, in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 45:200.1, provided that he shall have filed, and shall refile annually, with the taxicab division a financial statement certified by a certified public accountant showing an unencumbered net worth of such owner in excess of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) in current assets within the state; and shall also have filed a policy or policies of liability insurance issued by one or more underwriters or insurance companies amenable to suit in the state, insuring payment of claims for each private for hire vehicle operated by such owner, in the amounts fixed in subsection (a) in excess of a maximum of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) for personal injury to, or death of, any one (1) person, resulting from any one (1) accident, and, subject to such limit for one (1) person, a maximum of thirty thousand dollars ($30,000.00) for personal injury to, or death of, two (2) or more persons, resulting from any one (1) accident. The certificate or certificates of such owner shall be effective, and operation thereunder shall be permitted, only so long as the insurance shall remain in force as herein provided. 
(d)  Ten-day cancellation notice required. Insurance policies provided for in paragraphs (a), (b) and (c), of this section shall contain the provision that said policy or policies may not be cancelled without giving a ten-day notice thereof to the city taxicab division. Proof of this ten-day cancellation notice may be by a certificate of insurance providing for such ten-day cancellation notice. 
(e)  [Issuance of certificate.] Upon filing, by the owner of a private for hire vehicle, of the required financial statement or insurance policy, the taxicab division shall issue a certificate for each such vehicle. This certificate shall show that the owner of such vehicle has complied with the requirements of this section, and shall recite the full name of the owner of the vehicle and of the insurer together with the number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of the vehicle insured thereunder, and the number thereof. The original certificate shall be posted conspicuously within the vehicle. The driver shall retain and preserve a duplicate of the certificate. 
(f)  Effectiveness of certificate. The certificate for any vehicle or vehicles of an owner thereof shall be effective, and operation shall be permitted thereunder, only so long as the insurance required under subsection (a) of this section or permitted under subsection (b) of this section as to such vehicle or vehicles shall remain in force as therein provided, or the statement of financial responsibility required under subsection (c) of this section shall be filed currently each year and the insurance required under said section shall remain in force with regard thereto. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-188. - TNC insurance requirements. 
    No TNC permit required by this chapter shall be issued until the permittee shall first provide the taxicab division with proof that the permittee has insurance that complies with the requirements of La R.S.45:201.1 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-189. - Duty to comply with claims coverage investigation. 
(a)  A permittee, owner, and/or any insurer potentially providing coverage under this chapter shall cooperate to facilitate the exchange of relevant information with directly-involved parties and their insurers including, but not limited to, a clear description of the coverage, exclusions and limits under any automobile insurance policy maintained under this chapter. 
(b)  A TNC shall cooperate to facilitate the exchange of relevant information with directly-involved parties and their insurers and any insurer of the TNC driver, if applicable, including, but not limited to, the precise times that a TNC driver logged on and off of the TNC's network in the 12-hour period immediately preceding and in the 12-hour period immediately following the accident. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-190. - Mandatory alternative dispute resolution, jurisdiction, and choice of law provisions. 
    For any services rendered pursuant to this chapter any provision in a contract which requires any of the following provisions are declared to be against public policy and are null and void and shall not be enforced: 
(1)  Any provision in a contract between a permittee, owner, driver, or a passenger requiring alternative dispute resolution including, but not limited to, mediation or arbitration, prior to or instead of accessing the court system; or 
(2)  Any provision in a contract between a permittee, owner, driver, or a passenger which seeks to prevent a litigant from filing suit in a court of competent jurisdiction in the state; or 
(3)  Any provision in a contract between a permittee, owner, driver, or a passenger which seeks to mandate or limit choice of law rules. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-191. - Prohibition against waiver or limitation of liability. 
    For any services rendered pursuant to this chapter, any terms or conditions in the agreement between a permittee and a driver, or between a permittee and any passenger that would act as a waiver or limitation of the permittee's liability to a driver, a passenger or the public, or of a driver's liability to the passenger or the public, is declare to be against public policy and are null and void and shall not be enforced. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-192. - TNC duty to inform drivers. 
    A TNC shall disclose in writing to TNC drivers, as part of its written agreement with those drivers and before allowing TNC drivers to accept a request for TNC services, the insurance coverage and limits of liability that the TNC provides while a driver makes himself or herself available for TNC services, and shall advise a TNC driver in writing: 
(1)  That the driver's personal automobile insurance policy may not provide any liability or other related coverage, including, but not limited to uninsured or underinsured motorist, comprehensive, or collision coverage while the driver makes himself or herself available for TNC services or is performing TNC services; 
(2)  That if the vehicle used to provide TNC services has any security interest, privilege, or lien, that the TNC driver must notify the entity possessing that security interest, privilege, or lien that they are using the vehicle to perform TNC services. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-193. - Proof of insurance. 
    A driver of a private for hire vehicle shall carry with them at all times proof of insurance coverage. In the event of an accident, a driver of a private for hire vehicle shall provide this insurance coverage information to any other party involved in the accident, and to a police officer and a department of inspection and code enforcement inspector, upon request. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-194. - Failure to maintain required insurance. 
    Failure to maintain all required insurance at any time for any reason shall be grounds for the suspension and/or revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-195. - Waiver of liability. 
    Any terms or conditions in the agreement between the TNC permit holder and a TNC driver, or between the TNC permit holder and any passenger, that would act as a waiver of the TNC permit holder's liability to the passenger or the public, are declared contrary to public policy, null, void, and unenforceable. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-196-16-201. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FARES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 16-202. - Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any of the vehicles mentioned in this chapter after having hired the same, and it shall be unlawful for any person to hire any vehicle herein defined with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired of the value of such service. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-203-16-208. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - TAXICABS 

Sec. 16-209. - Fares for taxicabs. 
(a)  Legal fares. It shall be unlawful for any person to ask, demand or collect any rate of fare other than as specified herein for use of any taxicab. 
(b)  Rates and charges to be posted. The owner of each taxicab shall post therein the rates and charges specified herein which are applicable to the vehicle and it shall be unlawful for any person to operate same unless the rates and charges are posted as prescribed herein. Such rates and charges specified herein shall be printed in legible type on a card or sticker not less than four (4) inches by seven (7) inches, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the rear windows of the vehicle facing in, and shall be so arranged that passengers can readily determine the exact rate of fare and charges payable by them. 
(c)  Meter fare, personalized service: 
(1)  Meter fare. The fare shall be three dollars and fifty cents ($3.50) for the first one-eighth (&frac18) mile or forty (40) seconds, and twenty-five cents ($0.25) for each additional one-eighth (&frac18) mile or forty (40) seconds. 
(2)  Personalized service. Whenever a taxi driver is called upon to render a time consuming personalized service beyond his normal transportation of passengers, the minimum fare shall be six dollars ($6.00). An acceptance of this charge shall be agreed to between the parties prior to the trip. This provision shall apply for chauffeur hand-carried packages up to and not exceeding four (4) when accompanied by passenger. Passenger-carried packages are not subject to minimum charge rules. 
(d)  Taxicab hourly rate. Whenever a taxicab is chartered by the hour, such arrangement shall be made between the driver and passenger at the start of the charter trip, and the rate therefor shall be thirty dollars ($30.00) an hour for a minimum of two (2) hours. 
(e)  Taxicab rates for additional passengers. An additional charge of one dollar ($1.00) per person for all passengers over one (1) shall be charged. 
(f)  Airport rates-New Orleans International Airport, Moisant Field. The fare to or from New Orleans International Airport shall be: 
(1)  Fares within the city shall be: 
a.  Kenner South: Bounded by the south side of 1-10, Jefferson/St. Charles Parish line, the River, up to but not including Roosevelt Boulevard, Filmore Street shall be fifteen dollars ($15.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
b.  Kenner Central: Bounded by the north side of 1-10, Jefferson/St. Charles Parish line, Roosevelt Boulevard, Esplanade Avenue up to but not including West Esplanade shall be sixteen dollars ($16.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or eight dollars ($8.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
c.  Kenner North: Bounded by West Esplanade Avenue, Jefferson/Street Charles Parish line, the Lake, Power Boulevard, up to but not including Power Boulevard shall be eighteen dollars ($18.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or nine dollars ($9.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
(2)  Fares to and from anywhere in the parish, outside the city limits of Kenner and Gretna shall be: 
a.  Kenner east city limits: Bounded by the Lake, Roosevelt Boulevard, Illinois Central Railroad, David Drive/Power Boulevard up to but not including David Drive shall be eighteen dollars ($18.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or nine dollars ($9.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
b.  River Ridge: Bounded by Illinois Central Railroad, Filmore Street, the River and Folse Street and Hickory Avenue up to but not including Folse Street and Hickory Avenue shall be eighteen dollars ($18.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or nine dollars ($9.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
c.  David Drive/Power Boulevard: Bounded by the Lake, David Drive, Power Boulevard, Illinois Central Railroad, Clearview Parkway up to but not including Clearview Parkway shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or ten dollars ($10.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
d.  Harahan: Bounded by Illinois Central Railroad, Folse Street and Hickory Avenue, the River and Clearview Parkway up to but not including Clearview Parkway shall be twenty dollars ($20.00) for one (1) or (2) passengers, or ten dollars ($10.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
e.  Clearview Parkway.: Bounded by the Lake, Clearview Parkway, the River, and Causeway Boulevard up to but not including Causeway Boulevard shall be twenty-two dollars ($22.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or eleven dollars ($11.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
f.  Causeway Boulevard: Bounded by the Lake, Causeway Boulevard, the River and Jefferson/Orleans Parish line (17th Street Canal) shall be twenty-four dollars ($24.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or twelve dollars ($12.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers, or meter reading, whichever is greater. 
(3)  Fares to New Orleans shall be thirty-three dollars ($33.00) for one (1) or two (2) passengers, or fifteen dollars ($15.00) per person for three (3) or more passengers. 
a.  Location east of the Elysian Field Avenue boundary line, the fare shall be metered fare from such boundary to the destination or point of origin plus the fare stated above. 
(4)  Fares to or from any Westbank location shall be: 
a.  Gretna to Waggaman South of the Mississippi River to Lapalco Boulevard: A flat rate of forty dollars ($40.00). 
b.  Gretna to Waggaman South of Lapalco and beyond, i.e., Estelle, Orleans Village, etc.: A flat rate of forty-five dollars ($45.00). 
c.  Belle Chase to Alvin Callendar Field and Lower Coast Algiers: A flat rate of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
    An additional charge of one dollar ($1.00) shall be charged for crossing the Crescent City Connection or Huey P. Long Bridge and in addition, any ferriage or bridge tolls computed on a round trip basis shall be added to the fare. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-210. - Receipts. 
    The driver of any taxicab shall upon demand by the passenger render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, by a mechanically printed receipt and/or receipt emailed to the passenger, upon request of the passenger. The receipt shall contain, a minimum, the information required by section 16-146. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-211. - Rate card required. 
    Every taxicab operated under this chapter shall have a rate card setting forth the authorized rates of fare displayed in such a place as to be in view of all passengers. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-212-16-217. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - LIMOUSINES 

Sec. 16-218. - Limousine rates. 
(a)  The rates charged for the hire of limousines must be at least thirty-five (35) percent higher than the prevailing taxicab rates for the same route but not be less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
(b)  The rates charged for the hire of luxury sedans must be at least thirty-five (35) percent higher than the prevailing taxicab rates for the same route but not be less than ninety dollars ($90.00). 
(c)  These maximum rates shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside the vehicle so as to be clearly visible to the passengers. The design and placement of the rate schedule shall be subject to the approval of the taxicab division. 
(d)  Each limousine or sedan service shall post its current rates and charges on its website, if any, and shall maintain its current rates and charges with the department and/or taxicab division. No limousine or sedan service shall collect a fare based on a rate or charge that is not posted and maintained as provided in this subsection at the time of the booking. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-219-16-224. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TNC 

Sec. 16-225. - Rates. 
(a)  TNCs may charge rates based upon a calculation of time and/or distance. Passengers shall be provided the method by which the rates will be calculated and the option to obtain an estimated total fare prior to pick-up based upon information provided when requesting service. A TNC shall not apply any surcharge to passengers except as authorized by this chapter. 
(b)  Any time there is a temporary or permanent increase in rates or change in rate calculation which will or may result in a temporary or permanent increase in rates, prior to passenger acceptance of the fare and completion of the order, the TNC shall clearly and without prompting display the increase of the fare in the form of a mathematical multiple and total cost estimation. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-226. - Rates from the Louis Armstrong International Airport to the city of New Orleans. 
    Rates from the Louis Armstrong International Airport to the city of New Orleans shall not be less than $33.00. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-227. - Rates during emergencies. 
    TNCs and TNC drivers may not increase rates during a state of emergency as declared by the governor, parish governing body, or city governing body, except as permissible according to La. R.S. 29:732. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Sec. 16-228. - Passenger receipts. 
(a)  Upon completion of a trip, a TNC shall provide customers with a receipt that lists the: 
(1)  TNC driver's first name; 
(2)  Date and time of the ride; 
(3)  Trip ID; 
(4)  Date of trip; 
(5)  Distance of trip, including the point of origin and ultimate destination; 
(6)  Total fare paid, including the base fare and an additional or alternative charges; 
(7)  TNC name and contact information; and 
(8)  Words "Department of Inspection and Code Enforcement. For compliments or concerns, please call 504-468-4075." 
(b)  A TNC shall maintain such receipts for a period of at least two (2) years. Upon request of the department of inspections and code enforcement or city police department, such receipts shall be made available within seventy-two (72) hours. Such records may only be accessed when a department of inspection and code enforcement complaint number or city police department complaint number has been generated. 
(c)  On an annual basis, a TNC shall provide aggregated, not personally identifiable passenger and trip data to the department of inspection and code enforcement. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
Secs. 16-229-16-234. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - SHUTTLES 

Sec. 16-235. - Shuttle fares. 
(a)  All fares for shuttles shall be privately negotiated and are not subject to regulation, except that rates charged for shuttle services must be at least thirty-five (35) percent lower, per passenger, than the prevailing taxicab rates for the same route but shall not exceed twenty-four dollars ($24.00) including tax and tolls, if any. 
(b)  The fare between hotels in the city and Louis Armstrong International Airport, or vice-versa, shall be a maximum of twenty-four dollars ($24.00) including federal tax and airport tolls; provided however, that no provision of this section shall impair the obligation of any contract between a municipality and any airport lessee, which contract reserves to such lessees. 
(c)  These maximum rates shall be posted in a conspicuous place inside the vehicle so as to be clearly visible to the passengers. The design and placement of the rate schedule shall be subject to the approval of the taxicab division. 
(d)  Each shuttle service shall post its current rates and charges on its website, if any, and shall maintain its current rates and charges with the department and/or taxicab division. No shuttle service shall collect a fare based on a rate or charge that is not posted and maintained as provided in this subsection at the time of the booking. 
(Ord. No. 11,294, § 2, 6-15-17) 
APPENDIX A - UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the United Development Code, adopted by Ord. No. 11,062 on March 17, 2016. The former Appendix A pertained to Zoning; see the code comparative table for complete derivation. The ordinance has been printed as adopted, except that obviously misspelled words and typographical errors have been corrected without notation. Words added for clarification have been added with brackets. Amendments have been included and are indicated by a history note immediately following the amended section. 

Article I. - Title 
    This ordinance shall be known as the "Unified Development Code of the City of Kenner, Louisiana." 
Article II. - Purpose and Intent 
    The regulations and districts set forth in this code have been made in accordance with the goals and objectives of the City of Kenner Comprehensive Plan with the purpose of addressing existing and future needs of the City of Kenner in order to guide development, protect, promote and improve community resilience, the public health, safety, convenience, order, appearance, prosperity and general welfare. 
    The regulations hereby enacted are designed to exercise the full range of authority available to the City of Kenner under Louisiana law to: 
(a)  Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community, while recognizing the rights of real property owners, by adopting a Unified Development Code for the City of Kenner. 
(b)  Help achieve the goals, objectives, and policies of the City of Kenner "Pattern for Progress" Comprehensive Plan. 
(c)  Make the City of Kenner more resilient to natural and man-made disasters by reducing vulnerability to potential disasters and improving the City's ability to adapt and recover from a disaster. 
(d)  Provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of land and buildings and the circulation of automobile traffic and pedestrians throughout the City of Kenner, and to secure safety from natural disasters, fire, and other dangers by providing for the proper location of streets, sidewalks, and buildings. 
(e)  Provide for a range of open spaces through the most efficient design and layout of the land. 
(f)  Carry out such other purposes in the public interest as may be specifically cited in this code. 
Article III. - General Provisions 

Section 3.01 - Existing Codes to be Repealed or Modified. 
    Upon the effective date of this Code, the following ordinances that are currently in effect and any subsequent amendments to them shall be repealed or modified: 
(a)  Ordinance 2427, Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, adopted December 4, 1978, shall be repealed and replaced with the Unified Development Code; 
(b)  Chapter 14, Subdivisions; of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, adopted August 14, 1972, shall be repealed and modified in Article XIII of the Unified Development Code; 
(c)  Chapter 10, Article VII, Group Homes and Community Homes of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, adopted August 14, 1972, shall be repealed and modified in Article XII, Section 12.10 of the Unified Development Code; 
(d)  Chapter 2, Article III, Planning Commission, and Zoning Commission of the Code of Ordinances, City of Kenner, adopted August 14, 1972, shall be repealed and modified in Article IV, Section 4.03 of the Unified Development Code. 
Section 3.02 - Applicability 
(a)  Territorial Application : This Ordinance applies to all land, uses, and structures within the corporate limits of the City of Kenner, LA. 
(b)  General Application : In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this Ordinance are the minimum and maximum requirements for the promotion and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare, and are construed to achieve the purposes for which this Ordinance was adopted. 
(c)  Required Conformance with Ordinance : No portion or whole of any lot, parcel of land, or structure may be used or occupied, and no structure, in whole or in part, may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless it conforms to the provisions of this Ordinance. 
(d)  Subdivisions Required to Conform with Ordinance : All subdivision of land must conform to the provisions of this Ordinance. Where this Ordinance is more restrictive than the Subdivision Regulations, the more restrictive will prevail. 
(e)  Ordinance Control of Private Agreements/Restrictive Covenants : Where this Ordinance is more restrictive than a private agreement or restrictive covenant, this Ordinance controls. Where a private agreement or restrictive covenant is more restrictive than this Ordinance, the private agreement controls. The City will not enforce any private agreements or restrictive covenants. 
Section 3.03 - Conflict with Other Laws and Regulations 
(a)  In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance these provisions shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public safety, health, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare. 
(b)  It is not intended by this Ordinance to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any easements, covenants, or other agreements between parties. 
(c)  Whenever these regulations contain an actual, implied, or apparent conflict with other laws and regulations, including an internal conflict within this Ordinance, the more restrictive regulation applies, unless otherwise specified. 
(d)  All development must comply with relevant Federal and State regulations. Whenever any provision of this zoning code imposes a greater requirement or a higher standard than is required in any Federal or State statute or regulation, the provisions of this zoning code shall govern unless preempted by Federal or State law. 
Section 3.04 - Severability 
    If any section or provision of this Ordinance is declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision will not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part declared to be invalid. 
Section 3.05 - Effective Date 
    The effective date of this Ordinance is seventeen (17) days from the date of adoption of this Ordinance, adopted March 17, 2016. 
Section 3.06 - Restriction on Land, Buildings and Structures 
(a)  Use : No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, structure or premises be used for any purpose or in any manner other than a use designated in this ordinance, or amendment thereto. Further, no property shall be utilized as allowed under this ordinance unless fronting on an improved, accepted-for-maintenance street. 
(b)  Height : No structure or building shall be erected nor shall any existing building be moved, reconditioned, or structurally altered to exceed in height the limit established in this ordinance, or amendment thereto, for the district in which such building or structure is located. Further, no building or structure shall exceed height limits established in Section 3.09, airport runway approach zones. 
(c)  Percentage of lot occupancy : No building or structure shall be erected, nor shall any existing building or structure be moved, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt, nor shall any open space surrounding any building or structure be encroached upon or reduced in any manner, except in conformity with the building site requirements, and the area and parking space and yard regulations established by this ordinance, or amendment thereto, for the district in which such building or structure is located. 
(d)  Density of population : No building, structure, or premises shall be erected, occupied, or used to provide a greater density of population than is allowed under the terms of this ordinance for the district in which such building, structure, or premises is or are located. 
(e)  Open space use limitation : No yard or open space provided about any building or structure, for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this ordinance, or amendment thereto, shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building structure, except as otherwise provided by this zoning ordinance. 
(f)  Required lot and occupancy : Every building or structure hereinafter erected shall be located on a lot of record. The physical development of land shall not be constructed over existing lot lines. A resubdivisoin of land into one (1) lot of record may be required in order to accommodate the size of the development. 
Section 3.07 - Revocation of Streets and Public Ways 
    Whenever the dedication of any street, alley or other public way is revoked by ordinance, the zoning district abutting each side of such street, alley or public way shall automatically extend to the center of same, and all area included therein shall then become subject to all appropriate regulations of the extended districts. 
Section 3.08 - Protection of Major Street Rights-of-Way 
    Every building or structure hereafter erected on any lot abutting on any street shown as a designated street on the major street plan, shall in the computation of the front and side yard depth as hereafter required, compute, and measure the required depth from the right-of-way line as set out in the major street plan of the City of Kenner. 
Section 3.09 - Approach Zones 
    No hazard to aircraft shall be located in airport runway approach zones, as indicated on the attached zoning maps of the City of Kenner and shall not exceed a height established by a line beginning at the end of the runway and in alignment with the runway and extending outward and upward at a ratio of one foot vertical distance to fifty (50) feet horizontal distance. Further, all structures placed in the runway approach zones must be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration and determined to be no hazard to flight navigation. 
Section 3.10 - Ingress and Egress 
    Whenever an industrial or general commercial development abuts a residential district, or occurs near a residential district, no residential street shall be used to provide ingress and egress to said industrial or general commercial development. 
Section 3.11 - Exception to Side Yard Requirements for Corner Lots in Residential Areas 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this ordinance concerning side yard requirement for corner residential lots, there shall be permitted projection into required side yards along the side street of such corner lots for the purpose of construction of fireplaces, bay windows and central air conditioning systems, provided that such projections shall not project more than three (3) feet into the required side yard, and shall not exceed eight (8) feet in total length. 
Article IV. - Administration and Enforcement 

Section 4.01 - Purpose 
    The purpose of this Article is to outline the specific powers of the various City of Kenner boards, commissions, and officials as they relate to the administration and implementation of this Ordinance. 
Section 4.02 - Administration 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be administered by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department, or the Director's designee. 
Section 4.03 - Powers 
(a)  City Council : Pursuant to the City of Kenner Home Rule Charter, the Kenner City Council has the following powers: 
(1)  To make final decisions by ordinance on zoning regulations and the official zoning map. 
(2)  To make final decisions by ordinance on amendments to the zoning text or map. 
(3)  To make final decisions by ordinance on conditional use applications. 
(4)  To make final decisions by ordinance on planned development applications. 
(5)  To accept dedication of improvements. 
(b)  Planning and Zoning Commission : The Planning and Zoning Commission shall have the following powers and rights, and shall perform all the duties and be charged with all of the responsibilities pursuant to Louisiana Revised Statutes Title 33 Sections 101 - 119, and local Ordinance No. 7525. 
(1)  To make and adopt a master plan for the City of Kenner. 
(2)  To make recommendations on the adoption by ordinance of the zoning regulations and zoning map. 
(3)  To make recommendations on the adoption of amendments to the zoning text or map. 
(4)  To make recommendations on the adoption by ordinance on conditional use applications. 
(5)  To make recommendations on the adoption by ordinance on planned unit development applications. 
(6)  To make recommendations on the adoption by ordinance on site plan review applications when required as a condition of development approval. 
(7)  To make recommendations on the adoption by ordinance on subdivision and resubdivision requests that require approval by Kenner City Council. 
(8)  The process for these actions by the Commission is in accordance with Article VI of this Ordinance. 
(9)  Terms of Office: The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, all of whom must be residents of the City of Kenner. Members shall be appointed by the City Council, unless stated otherwise, of the municipality and in accordance with the provisions of Title 33, Section 103 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes, for a term of four (4) years, from and after the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office, one appointment to be made each year. 
(10)  All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation. 
(11)  The City municipal planning commission is hereby designated as the City zoning commission, in accordance with the provisions of Title 33, Section 106, and Section 4726, Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950. 
(12)  The zoning commission shall have and hold all of the powers, and rights and shall perform all of the duties and be charged with all the responsibilities provided for in Title 33, Sections 4721 to 4729, inclusive, Louisiana Revised Statutes. 
(c)  Board of Zoning Adjustments : The Board of Zoning Adjustments was created and established in accordance with the Section 4.28 of the City of Kenner Charter and with Louisiana Revised Statues, Chapter 33, Section 4727. The word "board" when used in this Article shall be construed to mean the board of zoning adjustments. 
(1)  Powers of the Board of Zoning Adjustments : The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall have the following powers, and it shall be its duty: 
a.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an error of law in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the Director of inspection and code enforcement in the enforcement of City of Kenner ordinances adopted pursuant to R.S. 33.4721 through R.S. 33.4729. 
b.  In hearing and deciding appeals, the board shall have the power to grant an exception in the following instances: 
i.  Where the boundary line of a district divides a lot held in single ownership at the time of the passage of this ordinance, permit the extension of the district to include the entire lot. 
ii.  Interpret the provision of ordinance adopted pursuant to R.S. 33.4721 through R.S. 33.4729 in such a way as to carry out the intent and purpose of the plan, as shown on the map fixing the several districts, accompanying and made a part of said ordinances, where the street layout actually on the ground varies from the street layout as shown on the map aforesaid. 
(2)  Terms of Office : The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall consist of five (5) members and shall include two (2) alternate members, all of whom shall be freeholders and qualified voters. The membership of the first board shall serve respectively, one (1) for one year, one for two (2) years, one for three (3) years, one for four (4) years, and one for five (5) years. Thereafter, members shall be appointed for terms of five (5) years each. Of the two (2) alternate members first appointed, one alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years and the other for a term of two (2) years. Thereafter, each alternate member shall be appointed for a term of three (3) years. Alternate members shall serve only when called upon to form a quorum, and when so serving, shall have all the powers and duties of regular members. All members shall be appointed and removed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the entire authorized membership of the Council. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. The board shall elect its own chairperson, who shall serve for one year. 
(3)  Appeals to the Board of Zoning Adjustments : 
a.  Appeals to the board of zoning adjustments may be taken by any party aggrieved, or by any official officer, department, commission, board, bureau, or any other agency of the City of Kenner affected by any decision of the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement. Such appeals shall be taken within thirty (30) days, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the Director of planning and with the board, a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
b.  The Director of Planning or the Director of Code Enforcement shall produce all papers, correspondence, and records requested by the Board of Zoning Adjustments for any hearing or meeting held by the board. 
c.  An appeal stays all proceedings and furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement certifies to the Board of Zoning Adjustments, after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, that a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril of life or property. In such cases, proceedings shall not be stayed unless by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by the civil district court of Jefferson Parish on application to the board or civil district court of Jefferson Parish, and notice to the Director of planning and on due cause shown. 
d.  The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the interested parties, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing, any party may appear in person or by an attorney. If the board denies said appeal, re-appeal or rehearing of substantially the same matter shall not be heard by the board within one (1) calendar year, commencing from the date of said denial. Re-appeals or re-hearings properly granted shall be subject to all rules of procedure relative to appeals as set forth in this ordinance. 
e.  A variance from the terms of this ordinance shall not be granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment unless and until a written application for a variance is submitted demonstrating the following nine criteria are met: 
i.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved due to an irregular shape of the lot, topographical or other physical conditions, and are not generally applicable to other lands, structures or buildings in the same zoning district. 
ii.  Literal interpretation of the provisions of this Ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this Ordinance. 
iii.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant. 
iv.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege, which is denied by this Ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district or similarly situated. 
v.  The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
vi.  Strict adherence to the regulation by the property would result in a demonstrable hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from mere inconvenience. 
vii.  The request for the variance is not based primarily upon a desire to serve the convenience or profit of the property owner or other interested party(ies). 
viii.  The granting of the variance will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located. 
ix.  The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, increase substantially the congestion in the public street, increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety. 
f.  The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall not grant a use variance, as that could constitute a spot zone. 
g.  The board shall not have the authority to grant a variance in the Rivertown Historic District. Variance requests in this district must be acted on by the Historic District Design Commission. 
h.  In consideration of all appeals and all proposed exceptions or variances under the terms of this ordinance, the board shall, before making any exception or variance from the ordinance in a specific case, first determine that it will not impair an adequate supply of air or light to adjacent property, or unreasonably increase the congestion in public streets, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety, or unreasonably diminish or impair established property values within the surrounding area, or in any other respect impair the public health, safety, morals, comfort or welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Kenner. Any variance granted shall expire six (6) months from date of approval unless construction has commenced. 
(4)  Action by Board of Zoning Adjustments : 
a.  In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the board may reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall have all the powers of the office of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. In granting a variance, the board may attach thereto such conditions, as it may deem advisable in furtherance of the purpose of this ordinance. 
b.  The concurring vote of a majority of the board shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the Director of inspections and code enforcement, or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under ordinance, or to effect any variance of such ordinance. 
(5)  Appeals to the decisions of the Board of Zoning Adjustments : Any person or persons, or any officer, department, board, bureau, or any other agency of the City of Kenner jointly or severally aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Zoning Adjustments, may present to the civil district court of the Parish of Jefferson, within thirty (30) days after filing of the decision in the office of the board, a writ of certiorari asking for such relief and under such rules and regulations as are provided for such matters in the appropriate legislation of the State of Louisiana. 
(6)  Rules of procedure : 
a.  The board shall adopt rules of procedure not in conflict with any general state act, the City charter, or City ordinance. 
b.  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairperson, and at such other times as the board may determine. 
c.  The chairperson, or, in his absence, the acting chairperson, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. 
d.  All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
e.  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating that fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed immediately in the office of the board and shall be public records. All testimony, objections, and rulings shall be taken down by a recorder employed by the board for this purpose. 
(7)  Appointment of Secretary : 
a.  The board shall have the power and authority to appoint a secretary who shall not necessarily be a member of the board, in which event any payment or salary made to such secretary shall be approved by the Mayor after recommendation by the board. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a true and correct record of all proceedings at both general and special meetings of said board, in a book or books to be kept especially for that purpose. 
b.  Certified copies of the minutes of all such proceedings shall be furnished to the Director of Planning and the chairperson of the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
(d)  Historic District Design Commission : 
(1)  Purpose : The purpose of the Historic District Design Commission is the preservation of all such buildings in the Rivertown Historic District that are considered to have architectural and historical value and which should be preserved for the benefit of the people of the City and state, and to review and judge plans for new and/or renovated structures proposed within the district. The commission should foster a type of architecture and construction within the district that is compatible with that architecture identified during the time of the City's early growth. 
(2)  Recommendation and appointment of members : The commission shall consist of five (5) voting members, four (4) citizens of the City of Kenner, and one (1) qualified architect. Each commission member shall be appointed by the Mayor with a majority vote of approval by the City Council. The "qualified architect" must recuse him or herself from voting should a project of their own design come before the Commission. 
(3)  Term vacancies : Each of the members of the commission shall be appointed for a term of four (4) years. Whenever the term of a member of the commission expires, the Mayor shall appoint his successor. The members may serve consecutive terms. 
(4)  Employees and committees : The commission may select such employees as may be necessary to carry out the purposes for which it is created with approval of the Council. The City attorney shall be ex-officio attorney for the commission. The commission may designate and appoint, from among its members, various committees with such powers and duties as the commission may have and prescribe. 
(5)  Rules and regulations; meetings; reports and recommendations : The commission shall make such rules and regulations, as it may deem advisable and necessary for the conduct of its affairs, not inconsistent with the laws of the City and state. The commission may meet at least quarterly, but meetings may be held at any time by the commission on the written request of any of the three (3) members or on the call of the chairperson of the commission or the Mayor. 
(6)  Submission of plans for interior and exterior changes to commission : Before the commencement of any work in the erection of any new building or in the alteration or addition to, or painting or repainting or demolishing of any existing building, any portion of which is to front on any public street or alley in the Rivertown Historic District, application by the owner for a permit therefore shall be made to the commission, accompanied by the full plans and specifications thereof so far as they relate to the proposed appearance, color, texture or materials and architectural design of the exterior, including the front, sides, rear and roof of such buildings, alteration or addition or of any outbuilding, party wall, courtyard, fence or other dependency thereof, and interior floor plan alterations in relation to any proposed exterior renovations. 
(7)  Commission recommendation and action thereon : The Historic District Design Commission shall, upon due consideration, report thereon promptly its recommendations, including such changes, if any, as in its judgment are reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of this Article, by sending them, in writing, to the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement with the application and documents referred to in this Article and, if they are found by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement to comply reasonably with requirements of this Article and if such application and intended work shall conform also to all other regulations, ordinances and laws of the City, the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall issue promptly a permit for such work and indicate on such permit the extent and nature of the work to be performed thereunder. 
(8)  When Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement is to submit question to Council; action of Council : If the applicant for a permit shall refuse to accede to reasonable changes recommended by the commission, if the commission shall disapprove any application or if the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement finds that the recommendations of the commission do not comply reasonably with the requirements of this Article, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement, or in his/her absence his/her designated assistant, shall, within not later than fifteen (15) days, forward such matters and his written comments to the City Council for such action as in its judgment, after notice and affording an opportunity to the applicant and to the commission and other protesting parties to be heard, shall effect reasonable compliance with such recommendations and this Article. 
(e)  Director of the Department of Planning . The Director of the Planning and Zoning Department, or the Director's designee, has the following powers, pursuant to this ordinance: 
(1)  To make final decisions on the interpretation of the provisions of this, the Unified Development Code. 
(2)  To make final decisions on requests for zoning interpretations. 
(3)  To make final decisions on requests for interpretations of conformance with the City of Kenner's Comprehensive Plan. 
(4)  To make final decisions on minor map adjustments to the future land use map of the City of Kenner's Comprehensive Plan. 
(5)  To make final decisions on administrative exceptions. 
(6)  To make final decisions on minor amendments to previous Council approved site plans. 
(7)  To make final decisions on minor subdivision applications. 
Section 4.04 - Enforcement 
    The provisions of this ordinance shall be enforced by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement, or Director's designee, who shall have the power and authority to make inspection of buildings or premises and to issue citations for violations necessary to carry out Director's duties in the enforcement of this ordinance. The Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement may request assistance from the Chief of Police when necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance. 
(a)  Permit Required : It shall be unlawful to commence development site improvements, the excavation for the structure of any building, including accessory buildings, or to commence the moving or alteration of any building including accessory buildings, until the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement has issued a permit for such work. 
(1)  In applying to the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement for a building permit, the applicant shall submit a set of construction or architectural plans drawn to scale. Such sketch shall indicate the shape, size, height, and location of all buildings to be erected, altered, or moved and of any building already on the lot. 
(2)  Applicant shall state the existing and intended use of all such buildings and supply other information required by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement for determining whether the provisions of this ordinance are being observed. 
(3)  If the proposed construction as set forth in the application is in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and other ordinances of the City of Kenner then in force, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall issue a building permit for such construction. 
(4)  If a building permit is refused, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall state such refusal in writing with the cause. 
(5)  The issuance of a permit shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this ordinance. 
(6)  If the work described in any building permit has not begun within ninety (90) days from the date of issuance, said permit shall expire automatically. 
(7)  A building permit shall become void six (6) months from the date of issuance unless substantial progress has been made by that date on the project described therein, as determined by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(b)  Violations : In case the structure is erected, or structurally altered or maintained, or any structure or land is used in violation of this ordinance, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement may take any appropriate action or proceedings necessary to prevent such unlawful construction or alteration or use of or other violations, to restrain, to enjoin, to correct or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business, or use in or about such premises. 
(c)  Certificate of Occupancy : 
(1)  No land or building or part thereof, hereafter erected or altered in its use or structure, shall be used until the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement issues a certificate of occupancy stating that such land, building, or part thereof, and the proposed use thereof are found to be in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(2)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a period not exceeding six (6) months during the completion of alterations or during partial occupancy of a building pending completion. Within three (3) days after notification that a building or premises or part thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement to make a final inspection thereof and to issue a certificate of occupancy if the land, building, or part thereof and the proposed use thereof are found to conform with the provisions of this ordinance; or if such certificate is refused, to state refusal in writing with the cause. 
(d)  Records, Refusal and Cancellations : 
(1)  A record of all certificates of occupancy, building permits, applications, sketches, and plans shall be maintained in the office of the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(2)  The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement may refuse to issue any certificate of occupancy until all fees required by the City of Kenner have been paid. He/she may further cancel any and all certificates of occupancy applied for or issued to any delinquent party and may prevent any further construction, repairs, alterations, additions, maintenance, or occupancy of buildings, structures or land anywhere within the City of Kenner by such party until all delinquent fees and charges are paid in full. 
(e)  Penalty : In addition to the civil remedies provided for in Section 4.04(b), any person violating any provision of this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be fined an amount not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00) or be imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Article V. - Definitions 

Section 5.01 - Purpose 
    This Article contains definitions for generic uses allowed in zoning districts and general terms used throughout this ordinance. This section divides definitions into two (2) categories: "Uses" and "General Terms." 
Section 5.02 - Terms 
(a)  The following terms shall apply to the regulations of this ordinance : 
(1)  The word "shall" is always mandatory. The word "may" is permissive. 
(2)  The word "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. The word "building" shall also imply or mean the word "structure." 
(3)  Words and terms not defined herein shall be interpreted in accordance with their normal dictionary meaning and customary usage. 
(4)  The definitions in this section cannot be waived. No variances to the following terms shall be permitted. 
Section 5.03 - Use definitions 
    The uses defined below are to assist in determining whether the defined use is permitted, prohibited, or permitted with conditions in a particular zoning district. These defined uses may also be used in determining required off-street parking, as specified in this ordinance. 
(1)  Accessory Structure or Building : A structure detached from a principal building on the same lot and clearly, incidental, and subordinate to the principal building or use in both size and function. 
(2)  Accessory Use : A subordinate use which is incidental to and customary or necessary in connection with the main building or use and which is located on the same lot with such main building or use. 
(3)  Adult Use : An adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture-theater, adult cabaret, or an adult massage business (does not include licensed therapeutic massage establishments). Adult use also means any premises that sells or disseminates explicit sexual material as defined in the City code and thereby must limit the public display of such explicit sexual material by restricting access to young persons as required by the provisions of the City code. 
(4)  Agriculture : The use of land for dairying, farming, floriculture, horticulture, pasturage, viticulture, and animal and poultry husbandry and the necessary accessory uses for packing, treating, or storing the produce provided, however, that the operation of any such accessory use shall be secondary to that of the normal agricultural activities. 
(5)  Airport : Land, water, or a structure used for the landing and takeoff of aircraft, including airport buildings, airport structures, or airport rights-of-way. An airport includes passenger terminals for that airport and any accessory uses within the passenger terminal, such as restaurants and retail goods establishments. 
(6)  Amphitheater : An outdoor structure that accommodates an audience for concerts, public speaking, or other live entertainment, which is open to the general public, with or without an admission charge. An outdoor amphitheater includes band shell structures. 
(7)  Amusement Place : Any business, place or establishment where three or more amusement-type machines such as, but not limited to, flipper-type machines, target machines, foos-ball machines, and the like are available for the use and enjoyment of the public, in which minors are permitted by law to frequent. Refer to Section 7.133-7.135 of the Code of Ordinances for additional requirements. This definition excludes party-places that cater to children twelve years old and younger. Refer to Children's Amusement Place for such establishments. 
(8)  Antenna : A metallic, graphite, fiberglass or other device which is attached to a transmission tower, telecommunications tower, monopole, mast, building or other structure for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves. 
(9)  Apartment : A portion of a building consisting of a room or suite of rooms intended, designed, or used as a permanent residence by an individual or one family. 
(10)  Apartment Complex : See Dwellings, multiple. 
(11)  Assisted Living : A long-term care facility for elderly or disabled citizens who are able to function on their own, but who may need assistance with some activities of daily living. Usually includes meals, private quarters, personal assistance, housekeeping, and nursing services. 
(12)  Arcade : see Amusement Place. 
(13)  Artisan Workshop : An establishment, not exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet in gross floor area, for the preparation, display and sale of individually crafted artwork, jewelry, furniture, sculpture, pottery, leather craft, hand-woven articles, and related items. 
(14)  Auditorium : A structure designed or intended for use as a concert, commencement, or lecture hall to accommodate the gathering of people as an audience to experience music, lectures, plays and other performances and presentations. 
(15)  Automotive Repair, Major : An establishment primarily engaging in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment, including paint, body and fender, and major engine and engine part overhaul and which may be conducted either outdoor or within a completely enclosed building. All other repairs are considered minor. 
(16)  Automotive Repair, Minor : An establishment primarily engaging in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune-ups, and transmission work, which are conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(17)  Automobile Service Station : Any building, land area or other premises, or portion thereof, used or intended to be used for the retail dispensing or sales of vehicular fuels; and including as an accessory use the sale and installation of lubricants, tires, batteries and similar accessories or the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune-ups, oil change and transmission work, which is conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
(18)  Automobile Sales : An open, partially open, or enclosed area other than a street, used for the display, sale or rental of new or used automobiles and/or where no repair work is done except minor incidental repair of automobiles to be displayed, sold or rented on or from the premises. All vehicles must be operational. Non-operational vehicles must be screened from view by a six (6) foot solid wood or masonry fence. 
(19)  Bar : An establishment serving alcoholic beverages in which the principal business is the sale of such beverages for consumption on the premises. Snack foods or other prepared food may be available for consumption on the premises as an accessory use only. No retail sales of alcohol for consumption off-premises are permitted. A bar may include a microbrewery on-site as an accessory use only. 
(20)  Bar, Holding : An area within a restaurant and with patron seating used for the serving of alcoholic and non-alcoholic beverages while restaurant patrons wait for a table, provided there is no entrance to the bar except through the restaurant and no operation of the bar except while food is served in the restaurant and dining room. 
(21)  Bar, Service : An area without patron seating used for the preparation of alcoholic beverages to be carried to restaurant patrons by the wait staff. 
(22)  Bed and Breakfast : An owner-occupied residential structure, originally constructed as either a single-family or a two-family dwelling that has been converted to a single-family dwelling, which provides no more than three (3) sleeping rooms for overnight paid occupancy of up to seven (7) nights. Common bathroom facilities may be provided rather than private baths for each room. 
(23)  Boarding House : A residential building other than an apartment, hotel, motel, or tourist cabin where lodging and meals are served for compensation, and by prearrangement for definite periods. For the purpose of these provisions, this shall not include a mobile home. 
(24)  Boat Repair Facility : A facility (which could include a boat repair garage, boat storage yard) where boats are repaired and stored until repairs are completed. 
(25)  Boat Sales/Rental : A marine retail sales and service use in which boats 16 feet or more in length are rented or sold. The sale or rental of smaller boats shall be defined as a major durables sales and service use. 
(26)  Boathouse : A structure that provides storage for watercraft and may be used for transient residential use. 
(27)  Borrow Pit : Any place or premises where dirt, soil, sand, gravel, or other material is removed by excavation or otherwise, below the grade of surrounding land, for any purpose other than mining operations such as gold, silver, coal, etc., and, that are necessary and incidental to grading or to building construction on the premises. 
(28)  Brewery/Distillery : A facility for either the production and packaging of malt beverages of low alcoholic content for wholesale distribution, with a capacity of more than fifteen thousand barrels per year, or for the distilling of liquors. Retail sales of alcohol from the brewery directly to the public may be permitted. 
(29)  Broadcast Studio : Commercial and public communications facilities, including radio, internet and television broadcasting and receiving stations and studios. 
(30)  Building, Public and Semipublic : A building operated and used for the benefit of the general public or for nonprofit organizations, clubs, lodges, and congregations whose membership is composed of a segment of the general public. Public and semipublic buildings include but are not limited to such buildings as schools, churches, government buildings, colleges, libraries, museums, art galleries, auditoriums, lodge halls, and country clubs, and electric and gas substations. 
(31)  Bus Terminal : see Passenger Terminal. 
(32)  Campground : An area to be used for transient occupancy by camping in tents, camp trailers, travel trailers, motor homes, or similar movable or temporary sleeping quarters of any kind for a maximum of 15 days. 
(33)  Car-Share Facility : A membership-based car-sharing service that provides automobile rental to members, billable by the hour or day. Car-sharing is not considered a motor vehicle rental establishment. 
(34)  Car Wash : A building or structure erected for the primary purpose of washing automobiles. 
(35)  Carport : A canopy-like structure, open on at least two (2) sides, for the purpose of providing shelter for one (1) or more vehicles. 
(36)  Casino : A structure, a minimum of fifty thousand square feet of floor area, in which legal gambling is conducted. 
(37)  Cemetery : Land used or dedicated to the burial of the deceased, including crematoriums, mausoleums, and necessary sales and maintenance facilities. Mortuaries and chapels may be included when operated within the boundary of such cemetery. 
(38)  Check Cashing Establishment : An establishment, other than a state or federally chartered bank or financial institution, which provides the general public a check cashing service. As a primary element of its operation, the establishment charges either a flat fee for such service or a service fee based upon a percentage of the face value of the check to be cashed. 
(39)  Child Care Center : See Day Care Center - Child. 
(40)  Children's Amusement Place : Any indoor or outdoor place that is maintained or operated for the amusement, patronage, or recreation of children, aged 12 years or younger, to include coin-controlled amusement devices of any description. 
(41)  Church : See Place of Worship. 
(42)  Cistern : A permanent artificial reservoir built to catch and store rainwater, typically located underground, but may be located above ground. 
(43)  Clinic : An establishment where patients are admitted for examination and treatment by one or more physicians, dentists, psychologists or social workers and where treatment of persons is solely on an outpatient basis. Medical clinics also include alternative medicine clinics, such as acupuncture and holistic therapies, and physical therapy offices for physical rehabilitation. 
(44)  Cocktail Lounge : See Bar. 
(45)  Commercial Use : The purchase, sale, or transaction involving the disposition of any Article, substance, commodity, or service, the maintenance or conduct of offices, professions, or recreational or amusement enterprises conducted for profit and also including renting of rooms, business offices, and sales display rooms and premises. 
(46)  Communication Equipment Shelter : A constructed or prefabricated building or other structure located on a telecommunications site designed principally to enclose equipment, switches, communication lines and other related facilities used in connection with telecommunications transmissions. 
(47)  Community Center : A facility used as a place of meeting, recreation, or social activity, and not operated for profit, which is open to the public. 
(48)  Community Garden : An area of land managed and maintained by a group of individuals to grow and harvest food crops and/or non-food, ornamental crops, such as flowers, for personal or group use, consumption, donation, or sale on-site. Community gardens may be divided into separate plots for cultivation by one or more individuals or may be farmed collectively by members of the group. 
(49)  Community Home : see Group Home. 
(50)  Composting Facility : A facility to process raw manure or other raw organic by-products into biologically stable organic material. 
(51)  Condominium : A dwelling unit, townhouse or apartment that is owned in fee simple with the undivided ownership, in common with other purchasers, of the common elements in the structure and including the land and its appurtenances. 
(52)  Contractor : A general contractor or builder engaged in the construction of buildings, either residences or commercial structures as well as heavy construction contractors engaged in activities such as paving, highway construction, and utility construction. This includes establishments and companies engaged in specific utility trades of a type that are specialized to assist in building construction and remodeling. This definition includes but is not limited to heating, air conditioning, painting, plumbing, and roofing. 
(53)  Contractor Storage Yard : Land or structures used primarily for the storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery or building materials of a contractor in the conduct of any building trade or building craft. 
(54)  Convenience Store : A retail store with a floor area of less than 2,500 square feet that sells groceries and other household items. May also sell gasoline; does not include automotive service stations or vehicle repair shops. 
(55)  Correctional Facility : A public or privately operated facility for the detention, confinement, treatment, or rehabilitation of persons arrested or convicted for the violation of civil or criminal law. Such facilities include adult detention centers, juvenile delinquency centers, jails, or prisons. 
(56)  Country Club : A public or private facility operated for social and outdoor recreation purposes with recreation facilities for members, their families and invited guests. A country club may include bars and restaurants. 
(57)  Cultural Facility : A use that is open to the public and provides cultural services and facilities including, but not limited to, libraries, museums, aquariums, zoos, botanical gardens, and historical societies. A cultural facility may have accessory retail uses, that offer items related to the facility for sale, and accessory restaurants, which are only open during the hours of operation of the facility. A cultural facility may hold special events and receptions on-site, including events, which take place after closing hours. 
(58)  Day Care Center, Adult : A facility licensed by the State of LA where, for a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour day, functionally impaired adults that are not related to the owner or operator of the facility are supervised or participate in a training program. This excludes alcohol and drug abuse clientele, former inmates of prisons or correctional institutions or former patients of mental institutions who have been found not guilty by reason of insanity. An adult day care center does not include adult day care home. 
a.  Day care center, small: Up to twelve (12) adults 
b.  Day care center, large: Thirteen (13) to thirty (30) adults 
c.  Day care center, commercial: Thirty-one (31) or more adults 
(59)  Day Care Center, Child : A facility licensed by the State of LA where care, supervision, and guidance of children that are not related to the owner or operator of the facility is provided on a regular basis. A child day care center does not include a child day care home. 
a.  Day care center, small: Up to twelve (12) children 
b.  Day care center, large: Thirteen (13) to thirty (30) children 
c.  Day care center, commercial: Thirty-one (31) or more children 
(60)  Drive-in Theater : See Theater, drive-in. 
(61)  Drive-in Use : An establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles. 
(62)  Drive-Through Establishment : Premises used to provide or dispense products or services through an attendant, window, or automated machine to persons remaining in their vehicle. A drive-through facility may be in combination with other uses such as a financial institution, a retail goods establishment or restaurant. A car wash, gas station or motor vehicle service and repair shall not be considered a drive-through facility. 
(63)  Driving Range : An area equipped with distance markers, clubs, balls and tees for practicing the hitting of golf balls, which may include a snack-bar and pro-shop. 
(64)  Duplex : Two dwelling units affixed as one structure located on a lot. 
(65)  Dwelling : A building, or portion thereof, designed or used exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including trailers, hotels, motels, motor lodges, board and lodging homes, tourist courts, or tourist homes. For the purpose of this ordinance, such building shall have a minimum area of four hundred square feet. 
(66)  Dwelling, Single-family : A building designed for or occupied exclusively by not more than one family. 
(67)  Dwelling, Two-family : A building designed for or occupied by two families. 
(68)  Dwelling, Three-family : A building designed for or occupied by three families. 
(69)  Dwelling, Four-family : A building designed for or occupied exclusively by four families. 
(70)  Dwelling, Multiple-family : A building designed or occupied exclusively by five or more families. 
(71)  Dwelling, Patio Home : A single-family dwelling on a separate lot with open space setbacks (yards) on three sides. The term "patio home dwelling" is synonymous with the term "zero lot line home." 
(72)  Dwelling, Townhouse : A single-family dwelling in a row of at least three such units in which each unit has its own front and rear access to the outside, no unit is located over another unit, and each unit is separated from any other unit by one or more common fire resistant walls. 
(73)  Educational Facility, Primary : A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary and/or junior high school levels. Places of worship with primary educational facilities are classified as primary educational facilities so long as both uses are located on the same lot, even if in separate buildings. 
(74)  Educational Facility, Secondary : A public, private, or parochial school offering instruction at the senior high school level. Secondary educational facilities also include secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests, or rabbis. Places of worship with secondary educational facilities are classified as secondary educational facilities so long as both uses are located on the same lot, even if in separate buildings. 
(75)  Educational Facility, University : A post-secondary institution for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor degrees. The institution may also have research facilities and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral degree. University educational facilities also include post-secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests, or rabbis. University educational facilities do not include vocational educational facilities. 
(76)  Educational Facility, Vocational : A school that teaches industrial, clerical, computer, managerial, automotive, repair (electrical, plumbing, carpentry, etc.), commercial or artistic skills, or a school conducted as a commercial enterprise, such as a driving school or school for general educational development. This definition applies to privately operated schools that do not offer a complete educational curriculum. Vocational educational facilities do not include university educational facilities. 
(77)  Emergency Homeless Shelter : A facility that provides temporary or transitional shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations of the homeless. 
(78)  Employment Services : A business that provides employment services for temporary or transient employment of semi-skilled and unskilled workers, and typically operates as a labor pool where workers gather on-site for job placement. 
(79)  Fabrication and Assembly : The manufacturing from standardized parts of a distinct object differing from the individual components. 
(80)  Fairgrounds : An area of land used for exhibitions and shows including, but not limited to concerts, animal shows, carnivals, and other outdoor recreational events. These may include dog and horse racetracks included as part of the fairground development. 
(81)  Farmers Market : The offering for sale of produce or processed, packaged, or prepared food on pre-established dates in an open area or structure, subject to the procedures and regulations set forth in this ordinance. The individual sellers need not be the same each time the market is in operation. 
(82)  Financial Institution : A bank, savings and loan, credit union or mortgage office. A financial institution does not include check-cashing establishments or pay day or title loan establishments. 
(83)  Fishing Camp : Areas reserved for public or private fishing, and structures in support of those activities, excluding transient rentals. 
(84)  Flea Market : An activity where two or more booths, tables, platforms, racks or similar display areas are set up for the purpose of selling or buying merchandise. Such sales involve new or used items and crafts and may include the sale of fruits, vegetables and other edible items. The individual vendors each operate one or more such booths under the supervision of the flea market proprietor, who rents or otherwise arranges for assigned spaces for each vendor and monitors the activity to ensure that all applicable laws are adhered to. The individual sellers need not be the same each time the market is in operation. 
(85)  Food Processing : A facility for the preparation, processing, canning, or packaging of food products. Small food processing facilities may include areas for accessory retail sales or specialty restaurants of the products processed on site, but no alcohol is sold. Food processing does not include a brewery or winery. 
(86)  Forest/Nature Preserve : Designated and managed open space that preserves natural features and protects wildlife and critical environmental features. A forest/nature preserve may include opportunities for passive recreation and environmental education. 
(87)  Freight Terminal : A facility for freight pick-up or distribution by rail, air, truck, or shipping transport. 
(88)  Funeral Home : An establishment in which the deceased are prepared for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings, and/or display of funeral equipment. 
(89)  Gaming or Gambling : The dealing, operating, carrying on, conducting, maintaining, or exposing for pay of any game. 
(90)  Gaming Boat : A vessel in which legal gaming is conducted that meets the following criteria: 
a.  Carries a valid certificate of inspection issued by the United States Coast Guard with regard to the carriage of passengers on designated rivers or waterways within or contiguous to the boundaries of the state of Louisiana. 
b.  Carries a valid Certificate of Inspection from the United States Coast Guard for the carriage of a minimum of six hundred passengers and crew. 
c.  Has a minimum length of one hundred fifty feet. 
(91)  Garage : A deck, building or structure, or part thereof, used or intended to be used for the parking and storage of vehicles. 
(92)  Garage, Private : An accessory building or portion of a principal building not exceeding 800 square feet in area, per dwelling unit; designed, intended and used for the storage of not more than four motor driven vehicles, per dwelling unit; owned, used and registered in the name of the occupants of the dwelling unit for which said private garage is intended. Not more than one of the vehicles shall be a commercial vehicle and this vehicle shall not be more than of two-ton capacity. The term "private garage" does not include a public garage. 
(93)  Garage, Repair : see Automobile Service Station, Minor Automotive Repair or Major Automotive Repair. 
(94)  Garage Sale : The sale or offering for sale to the general public of over five items of personal property on any portion of a lot in a residential zoning district, whether within or outside any building. Sales of programs and food and beverage items shall not be deemed to constitute garage sales. 
(95)  Gas Station : see Automobile Service Station. 
(96)  Gazebo : A freestanding outdoor structure that is open-sided and designed for recreational use and not for habitation. 
(97)  Government Offices : Offices owned, operated, or occupied by a federal, state, or local governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public. 
(98)  Golf Course : A tract of land for playing golf, improved with tees, greens, fairways, hazards, and which may include clubhouses and shelters. See Country club. 
(99)  Green Area : see Open Space, (General Definitions). 
(100)  Green Market : see Farmer's Market. 
(101)  Grocery : see Retail Goods Establishment. 
(102)  Group Home : A group care facility in a residential dwelling, licensed by the state, for twenty-four (24) hour medical or non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living, or for the protection of the individual. Group homes include youth transitional residences, adult residential care facilities, emergency child shelters, and child residential care facilities licensed by the state. 
a.  Small group homes: Up to six (6) residents 
b.  Large group homes: Seven (7) to fifteen (15) residents 
c.  Congregate group homes: Sixteen (16) or more residents 
(103)  Halfway House, Penal : A licensed home for inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. A halfway house must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as a halfway house or similar facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
(104)  Hazardous Waste : A waste, or combination of wastes, regulated by Title 33, Part V of the Louisiana Environmental Regulatory Code (LAC 33.V), which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may do either of the following: (1) cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or increase or serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
(105)  Hazardous Waste Disposal Facility : All structures, appurtenances, and improvements on the land used for treatment, storage or disposing of hazardous waste, including all operations or storing areas, diked overflows, or emergency spillway areas. A hazardous waste disposal facility may consist of several treatment, storage, or disposal operational units; it includes all areas where hazardous waste may be received, stored, handled, or processed. 
(106)  Hazardous Waste Incinerator : An enclosed device using controlled flame combustion, where the primary purpose of which is to thermally break down hazardous waste. 
(107)  Hazardous Waste Processing Facility : Any commercial facility, as defined by LAC 33.V§106, that treats or stores hazardous waste generated on properties other than those on which the processing facilities are located. 
(108)  Hazardous Waste Storage : Any environmentally sound facility used to store hazardous waste for a temporary period as regulated by LAC 33.V. 
(109)  Hazardous Waste Treatment : The physical, chemical, or biological processing of any hazardous waste to neutralize such waste or to render such waste nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume. 
(110)  Health Club : An establishment that provides health and fitness facilities such as running, jogging, aerobics, weight lifting, court sports and swimming, and may include accessory facilities such as locker rooms, showers, massage rooms, saunas and other related accessory uses. 
(111)  Heavy Sales, Rental and Service : Includes retail, rental and/or service establishments that have permanent outdoor service or storage yards, or partially enclosed structures including, but not limited to, rental components, lumberyards, playground equipment sales and rental, truck repair establishments, and uses with permanent outdoor service or storage areas for heavy equipment such as truck rental establishments, large-scale moving centers, and temporary storage container facilities. 
(112)  Heliport : Land, water or structure used for the landing and take-off of helicopters, and having service facilities for such aircraft or providing for permanent basing of such aircraft. 
(113)  Home Occupation : A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted within the principal structure of a residential use by a resident of the dwelling which is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling, does not change the essential residential character of the use, and which complies with the requirements of Article XII, Section 12.4 of this ordinance "Home Occupations." 
(114)  Horticulture : A use, other than an urban farm, in which plants, or their products, are grown for sale or for use in any business, and in which other customarily incidental products may be sold. Examples include nurseries with greenhouses and garden stores. 
(115)  Hospital : A building or group of buildings having room facilities for overnight patients, used for providing services for in-patient medical or surgical care of sick or injured humans and which may include related facilities such as central service facilities and staff offices; provided, however, that such related facilities must be incidental and subordinate to the main use and must be an integral part of the hospital operation. 
(116)  Hospital, Animal : A building used by a group of professional medical persons for the healing arts or treatment of animals, generally, on an inpatient or boarding basis and shall have outside runs. 
(117)  Hospitality Center : A facility where visitors can find information related to the community and its neighborhoods, tourist attractions, etc., and may include restrooms, seating areas, and historical displays. 
(118)  Hotel : A building occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place for travelers and transient guests who are lodged with or without meals and in which there are sleeping rooms usually occupied singly and with no provisions made for cooking in any individual room or a group of rooms occupied by a person and with no provision made for cooking in any of the rooms as specified. 
(119)  House Trailer : See Mobile Home. 
(120)  Impervious (or impermeable) Surface : A measure of intensity of land use that represents the portion of a site that is occupied by structures, pavement, and other impervious surfaces that do not allow for the absorption of water. Semi-pervious surface areas (e.g. permeable paving) may be counted as impervious surface at a reduced rate based on the coefficient of permeability. Unroofed, unenclosed accessory structures, where water is allowed to drain to a pervious surface, such as decks constructed of wood slats, are not included in impervious surface calculations. 
(121)  Incinerator : Any enclosed device using controlled flame combustion, capable of withstanding heat, and designed to efficiently reduce solid, semisolid, liquid or gaseous waste at specified rates and from which residue contains little or no combustible material, as defined in Louisiana Administrative Code (LAC). 
(122)  Indoor Shooting Range : An enclosed firing range with targets for rifle or handgun practice. 
(123)  Internet Sales : Business-to-consumer and business-to-business commerce conducted by way of the Internet or other electronic networks. 
(124)  Industrial Property : Any lot of land containing an industrial use or building of such uses as may be defined herein. 
(125)  Industrial Use : An establishment engaged in the manufacture, fabrication, processing, reduction, or destruction of any Article, substance, or commodity, or any other treatment thereof in such a manner as to change the form, character, or appearance thereof, and includes storage elevators, truck storage yards, warehouses, wholesale storage, and other similar types of enterprise. 
(126)  Institutional Use : A nonprofit or quasi-public use or organization such as a church, library, public, or private school, hospital, or municipally owned or operated building, structure or land used for public purpose. 
(127)  Junkyard : An open area where any waste, used or second hand materials are bought, sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packed, disassembled or handled including, but not limited to, scrap iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires and bottles. 
a.  The term "junkyard" includes an auto wrecking yard or the storage or keeping of one or more inoperative motor vehicles unless where otherwise specifically permitted. 
b.  The term "junkyard" does not include uses established entirely within enclosed buildings. 
(128)  Kennel : Any building, structure, or open space devoted in its entirety or in part to the raising, boarding or harboring of four or more animals at least four months of age. 
(129)  Laboratory, Research and Development : A use in which research and experiments leading to the development of new products are conducted. This use may be associated with an institutional, clinical, or commercial use. This use includes but is not limited to the operation of a laboratory subject to any level of biosafety containment standard described by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories, current edition. Space designed for this use typically includes such features as floor-to-floor ceiling heights of at least fourteen feet to accommodate mechanical equipment, and laboratory benches plumbed for water service. 
(130)  Laundromat : A business that provides washing, drying and/or ironing machines or dry-cleaning machines for hire to be used by customers on the premises. 
(131)  Live Entertainment, Secondary Use : Any one or more of the following live performances, by one or more persons, whether or not done for compensation, and whether or not admission is charged: musical act, theatrical play or act, including stand-up comedy and magic, dance clubs, and disc jockey performances using vinyl records, compact discs, computers or digital music players. Live entertainment-secondary use must be part of a standard restaurant, indoor amusement facility, or bar, and must be approved separately. A standard restaurant, indoor amusement facility, or bar may be open to the public when no live performances are scheduled. Live entertainment-secondary use does not include: 
a.  Any adult uses. 
b.  Supper clubs, periodic entertainment by educational facilities or places of worship, performances at cultural facilities, performances at reception facilities, performances at weddings and similar religious events, the playing of recorded music over speakers without a disc jockey, poetry readings, or non-amplified musical accompaniment for patrons at a restaurant. 
(132)  Live Performance Venue : A facility for the presentation of live performances, including musical acts, theatrical plays or acts, including stand-up comedy and magic, dance clubs, and disc jockey performances using vinyl records, compact discs, computers, or digital music players. A live performance venue is only open to the public when a live performance is scheduled. Unless otherwise restricted by this ordinance, a live performance venue may serve alcohol as an accessory use but only when the venue is open to the public for the live performance. A live performance venue does not include any adult uses. 
(133)  Live-Work Unit : Shall mean an attached or detached single-family residential unit in which a residential unit is connected to and accessible through non-residential floor area that is associated with the residential unit. For attached residential units each non-residential unit shall have access to only one (1) residential unit. Residential space is generally located above and/or behind the non-residential space. For purposes of this ordinance, a live-work unit is not considered a mixed-use building. 
(134)  Main Building : Any building having the predominant land use which is not an accessory building. See also "Use, Principal." 
(135)  Manufactured Building : A structure mass-produced in a factory; either an independent, individual building or a module for combination with other elements designed for transportation to the site for installation and use when connected to the required utilities. 
(136)  Manufactured Housing : A structure built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to the required utilities, fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility built to the federal 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards (better known as the HUD Code). Designed to be transported for installation or assembly at the building site, the wheels and running gear are removed at the site. A manufactured home shall include "look alike" features that more closely match those of a typical site-built home, including a pitched roof, an entrance porch, and foundation skirting on all sides (unbroken except for ventilation). This definition does not include recreational vehicle, modular home or mobile home. 
(137)  Manufactured Home Community : A unified development of two (2) or more manufactured home sites, plots or stands, arranged on a large tract usually under single ownership, meeting the area and yard requirements of this Article, and designed to accommodate manufactured homes for a more or less permanent duration. Such term may include travel trailer accommodations, if no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the park is used for such purpose. 
(138)  Manufacturing : Establishments engaged in the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts; the manufacturing of products; and the blending of materials such as lubricating oils, plastics, resins, or liquors. 
(139)  Manufacturing, Heavy : The manufacturing or compounding of raw materials, which may include the storage of large volumes of finished and raw materials that are highly flammable, toxic or explosive. This manufacturing may involve outdoor operations as part of their manufacturing process. Typical heavy industrial uses include, but are not limited to concrete batch plants, concrete, tile or brick manufacturing, motor vehicle and tire assembly, chemical processing, metal casting or foundries, gas manufacturing, grain milling or processing, refining, smelting or alloying, and petroleum or petroleum products. Heavy manufacturing processes ordinarily have greater than average impacts on the environment or significant impacts on the use and enjoyment of adjacent property in terms of noise, smoke, fumes, odors, and vibration, glare or health and safety hazards. 
(140)  Manufacturing, Light : The manufacturing from previously prepared materials of finished products or parts, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution of such products, provided all manufacturing activities are contained entirely within a building and noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare and vibration resulting from the industrial activity are confined entirely within the building. 
(141)  Marina, Commercial : A place for docking or storage of commercial boats and/or providing services for them, limited to minor repairs to boats while in the water for a maximum thirty day period, and the sale of fuel, ice, food and beverages. No lodging for the occupants, other than the manager or owner of the commercial marina or entertainment, is permitted as accessory to the marina. Vehicular access to the site is limited to automobiles, pickup trucks, and vans with a maximum load capacity of one ton. The sale or processing of seafood at the marina site is expressly prohibited with the exception of bait that may be sold by the operator. The marina must be kept free of noxious odors at all times. Repair facilities for repairs of boats when out of the water are prohibited. 
(142)  Marina, Recreational : A place for docking or storage of pleasure boats or providing services to pleasure boats and the occupants thereof, including minor servicing and repair to boats while in the water, sale of fuel and supplies, or provision of lodging, food, beverages and entertainment as accessory uses. A yacht club is considered a recreational marina. A hotel/motel, or similar use where docking of boats and provision of services thereto is incidental to other activities, is not considered a recreation marina. Boat docks accessory to a multi-family dwelling where no boat-related services are rendered are not considered a recreational marina, but an accessory use to the multi-family dwelling. 
(143)  Medical/Dental Clinic : See Clinic. 
(144)  Medical Waste Treatment or Disposal Facility : Includes any and all facilities for the purpose of changing character of composition of any medical waste so as to reduce or eliminate its potential to causing disease including, but is not limited to: Decontamination by autoclaving and other methods; Incineration; Landfill disposal; or Sanitary sewer disposal; Unless such decontamination shall cause the medical waste to be suitable and destined to become a feedstock for recycling and the decontamination and recycling occur at the same site. 
(145)  Mini-Storage : A structure that rents individual compartments for storing personal property. 
(146)  Mining and Drilling Activities : Any pursuit or occupation associated with an area of land where operations are conducted to extract valuable mineral deposits, petroleum, or other materials. 
(147)  Mixed-Use Building : Building or groups of buildings under one ownership designed to encourage a diversity of compatible land uses, which include a mixture of two or more of the following uses: residential, office, retail, recreational, and other miscellaneous uses. 
(148)  Mixed Use Developments : Mixed-use developments are multiple story buildings with a mix of retail, office, and residential uses integrated into the same building. Retail is encouraged or required on the first floor with the offices or residential above. A mixed-use development may be designed with or as part of a traditional neighborhood form or as a more typical suburban configuration. 
(149)  Mobile Home : A structure built on an integral chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to the required utilities. It is fabricated in an off-site manufacturing facility and designed to be transported for installation or assembly at the building site. A mobile home does not meet the definition of a manufactured home due to its age (pre-HUD Code) or lack of "look-alike" features. This definition does not include recreational vehicles, manufactured homes, or modular homes. 
(150)  Mobile Home Park : Any lot, parcel, or premises subdivided, designed, maintained, intended, or used for supplying a location or accommodation for six (6) or more mobile homes. For the purpose of this chapter, the term "mobile home park" does not include any lot or premises used for the wholesale or retail sale of mobile homes. 
(151)  Modular Housing : (also Modular Home) A structure designed to be used as a dwelling unit when connected to the required utilities that is in whole or in part manufactured at an off-site facility and complies with the adopted building code of the City of Kenner for residential construction. This definition does not include recreational vehicles, manufactured homes, or mobile homes. 
(152)  Motor Vehicle Dealership : An establishment that sells or leases new or used automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats or motorcycles, or other similar motorized transportation vehicles. A motor vehicle dealership may maintain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either on-site or at a nearby location, and may provide on-site facilities for the repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the dealership. 
(153)  Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment : Rental of passenger vehicles, vans and light trucks, including incidental parking and servicing of rental vehicles. Car sharing services included as part of a parking lot or structure are not considered motor vehicle rental establishments. 
(154)  Movie Studio : All uses related to the production of motion pictures and film, including stages, exterior sets, laboratories, construction, repair and storage facilities, caretaker and temporary housing, all vehicles used to transport this equipment and other related commercial vehicles, and accessory fabrication activities. 
(155)  Motel : A group of attached or detached buildings, but not mobile homes, containing individual sleeping or living units for travelers and transient guests, with garage attached or parking facilities conveniently located near each unit. The term "motel" includes tourist courts when related to the context specified in this definition. 
(156)  Neighborhood Commercial Establishment : A commercial use within a residential neighborhood that is non-residential in its construction and original use. 
(157)  Nonconforming Use : A use, which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time the zoning ordinance became effective, which has been lawfully continued and which, does not now conform to the use regulations. 
(158)  Nonresidential Use : A permitted use in residential districts other than dwellings, townhouses, boarding and lodging houses, apartments, condominiums, apartment hotels, rooming houses, or trailers. 
(159)  Nursery : Any building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the cultivation or growing of plants and including all accessory buildings, but does not include, the wholesale or retail sale of any items other than those incidental to the items raised or grown on said premises. 
(160)  Nursery School : See Child care center. 
(161)  Nursing Home : Any private home, institution, building, residence, or other place, serving two or more persons who are not related by blood or marriage to the operator, whether operated for profit or not, and including those places operated by a political subdivision of the state of Louisiana which undertakes, through its ownership or management, to provide maintenance, personal care, or nursing for persons who, by reason of illness or physical infirmity or age, are unable to properly care for themselves. 
(162)  Office : A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry, or government. 
(163)  Off-Track Betting Facility : An establishment that accepts wagers on horse and dog races away from a racetrack. 
(164)  Outdoor Amusement Facility : Participatory and spectator uses conducted outdoors, which may include partially enclosed facilities. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, miniature golf courses, batting cages, archery ranges, outdoor racetracks, theme parks, and amusement parks. An outdoor amusement facility includes accessory uses, such as food stands, snack bars, or restaurants for the use of patrons, but does not serve alcohol. 
(165)  Outdoor Sales and Display : Part of a lot used for outdoor sales or display of goods accessory to the principal use and separate from the required off-street parking lot. 
(166)  Outdoor Storage Yard : The storage of material as a principal use of the lot for more than twenty-four (24) hours, including items for sale, lease, processing and repair not in an enclosed building. Items stored within an outdoor storage yard must be owned, consigned, or leased by the owner of the storage yard. 
(167)  Parking Building or Garage : A building or portion thereof designed, intended and used exclusively for the temporary parking of self-propelled motor vehicles and may be publicly or privately owned and/or operated and may be for remuneration, free or privately utilized. 
(168)  Parking Lot : An open area used for temporary parking of operable vehicles, inclusive of adequate pedestrian walks, landscaping, lighting, drains, car stops, drives, curb cuts, traffic control screening and layout. Inoperable wrecked or disabled vehicles or outdoor sales and display areas shall not be permitted to occupy said areas nor shall vehicles or structures be allowed to occupy such areas in an attempt to advertise, sell, or avoid other City codes regulating signs. Nor shall such areas be used as truck stops or sleeping areas. 
(169)  Parks and Playgrounds : A non-commercial, not-for-profit facility designed to serve the recreation needs of the residents of the community. Parks and playgrounds include, but are not limited to, baseball fields, football fields, soccer fields, basketball courts, tennis courts, dog parks, skateboard parks, playgrounds and park district field houses, which may have indoor recreation facilities. 
(170)  Passenger Terminal : A facility or location where the principal use is handling, receiving, and transferring passenger traffic for aircraft, rail, buses, and watercraft. 
(171)  Passive Recreation : Recreational activities that generally do not require a specially developed open space site. This includes, but is not limited to, activities such as hiking, running trails, playgrounds and picnicking. 
(172)  Pawn Shop : An establishment that lends money on the deposit or pledge of physically delivered personal property, and who may purchase such property on the condition of selling it back again at a stipulated price. A pawnshop includes establishments that buy personal property, such as jewelry or artwork, made of gold or other valuable material for refining. Consignment shops and antique shops are not considered pawnshops. 
(173)  Pay Day or Title Loan Agency : An establishment providing loans to individuals in exchange for receiving personal checks or titles to the borrowers' motor vehicles as collateral. 
(174)  Personal Services Establishment : An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, tanning salons, media spas, shoe repair, personal item repair shops, dry cleaners, and tailors. Personal services establishments shall not include any adult uses. 
(175)  Pervious (or Permeable) Paving : Is designed to allow percolation or infiltration of stormwater through the surface into the soil below where the water is naturally filtered and pollutants are removed. Pervious paving is a recognized runoff-reducing substitute for normal pavements in development or redevelopment sites. 
(176)  Pet Day Care Service : An establishment where pet animals owned by another person are boarded for the day (no overnight boarding), services such as grooming, dog walking, and pet training are offered. A pet day care service may include accessory retail sales on the site. 
(177)  Place of Worship : A building or an establishment where persons regularly assemble in a congregation for performing acts of religious praise, honor, or devotion. It also includes places where religious instruction and ceremonies associated with the faith are carried out. Examples include churches, chapels, temples, synagogues, and similar designations used by organized religious sects as defined by the United States Internal Revenue Service. Auxiliary uses not normally associated with worship include residential use, private school, recreational development, and licensed adult and childcare. 
(178)  Planned Unit Development (PUD) : A development guided by a preliminary site plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision regulations, other than use regulations, may be waived or varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and location, in accordance with the general guidelines and procedures of this ordinance. 
(179)  Private Club or Lodge : A building and related facilities owned or operated by a corporation, association, or group of individuals established for the fraternal, social, educational, recreational, or cultural enrichment of its members and not primarily for profit, and whose members meet certain prescribed qualifications for membership and pay dues. 
(180)  Prison : A facility for the detention, confinement, treatment, or rehabilitation of persons arrested or convicted for the violation of civil or criminal law. 
(181)  Private Recreation : indoor or outdoor recreation facilities located within a residential development that is limited to use by residents and their guests. 
(182)  Public Building : Any building open to the general use, participation, or enjoyment of the public or operated for the public's benefit and owned and/or operated by a City, parish, state, or federal government or by a public utility corporation or municipal district or authority. 
(183)  Public Facilities or Public Improvements : Facilities, whether public or privately owned, that are intended for common use, including, but not limited to water, sewer, drainage, transportation, parks, schools, and other utilities. 
(184)  Public Monument : A building, pillar, or similar structure either erected by a public agency or controlled by a public agency in memory of the dead, a person, or event. 
(185)  Pumping Station : Facilities including pumps and equipment for pumping fluids from one place to another, typically to remove water that has found its way into low-lying areas because of leakage or flooding. 
(186)  Racetrack : A measured course where animals or machines are entered in competition against one another or against time, including tracks used only in the training of animals. 
(187)  Real Estate Model Unit : A residential unit temporarily used for display purposes as an example of dwelling units available or to be available for sale or rental in a residential development. Model units may also incorporate sales or rental offices for dwellings within the development. 
(188)  Reception Hall : A commercial establishment principally used for gatherings, entertainment, exhibits, etc., in which food and drink may be offered for consumption. A reception hall may contain a service bar. 
(189)  Recreation Facility, Commercial : A recreation facility operated as a business and open to the public for a fee. 
(190)  Recreation Facility, Public : A recreational facility operated by a governmental agency and open to the general public such as parks, playing courts, etc. 
(191)  Religious Institution : see Place of Worship. 
(192)  Research and Development : An establishment where research and development is conducted in industries that include, but are not limited to, biotechnology, pharmaceuticals, medical instrumentation or supplies, communications and information technology, electronics and instrumentation, and computer hardware and software. Research and development does not involve the bulk manufacture, fabrication, processing, or sale of products. 
(193)  Residential Care Facility for the Elderly : See Nursing Home. 
(194)  Restaurant : An establishment principally offering food for consumption on the premises and deriving at least fifty percent of its gross revenue from food sales. A restaurant may contain a service or holding bar. Restaurants include cafeterias. 
(195)  Restaurant, Carryout : A structure, which is maintained, operated, or advertised or held out to the public as a place where food, beverage, or desserts are served in disposable containers or wrappers from a serving counter for consumption off the premises. Carryout restaurants may not offer alcoholic beverages for sale. 
(196)  Restaurant, Drive-in : An establishment which provides food and/or drink items specifically prepared for/or packaged in such a way as to permit consumption outside the building and principally while patrons remain in their vehicles. 
(197)  Restaurant, Drive-thru : An establishment which provides food and/or drink items specifically prepared for/or packaged in such a way as to permit consumption outside the building, with a window for purchase and pick-up from a vehicle. 
(198)  Restaurant, Fast Food : An establishment whose principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer in a ready-to-consume state for consumption within the restaurant building or off-premises. 
(199)  Restaurant, Full-Service : A restaurant with table service (order placement and delivery on-site) provided to patrons, also including cafeterias. Carryout service, if any, shall be a limited portion of the facility and activity. Full-service restaurants shall only offer alcoholic beverages for on premise consumption at the table. 
(200)  Restaurant, Specialty : Establishments whose primary business is the sale of a single type of food or beverage that is not considered a complete meal (e.g. candy, coffee, or ice cream). The sale of other food, beverages, or merchandise is incidental to the sale of the specialty food or beverage. Food and beverages are for customer consumption on- or off-premises. Specialty restaurants shall not offer alcoholic beverages for sale. 
(201)  Rest Home : see Nursing Home. 
(202)  Retail Goods Establishment : A business that provides physical goods, products, or merchandise directly to the consumer, where such goods are typically available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. A retail goods establishment does not include any adult uses. A retail goods establishment may not sell alcohol unless a retail sale of alcohol is allowed within the district and a separate approval is obtained for such use. A retail goods establishment that sells food products, such as a delicatessen, bakery or grocery, may offer incidental seating areas for consumption of food on the premises. 
(203)  Retail Sales of Alcoholic Beverages : Retail sales of alcoholic beverages for consumption off-premises, when licensed by the City. Sale of alcohol must be in factory original containers. 
(204)  Sanitary Landfill : An engineered land burial facility for the disposal of solid waste, which is so located, designed, constructed, and operated to contain and isolate the solid waste so that it does not pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment. 
(205)  Satellite Dish Antenna : A dish antenna designed for transmitting signals to a receiver or receiving station or for receiving television, radio, data, communication, or other signals from other antennas, satellites or other services. 
(206)  School : see Educational Facilities. 
(207)  Seasonal Sales : A retail sales operation, generally conducted outdoors, that offers for sale on a temporary, limited basis, holiday-related items. Typical uses include Christmas tree sales lot and pumpkin patches. 
(208)  Service Facilities, Public Utilities : Includes all facilities of public utilities operating under the jurisdiction of the public service commission, or the department of transportation and development, or Federal Power Commission, and common carriers by rail, other than office space, garage, and warehouse space and include office space, garage space and warehouse space when such space in incidental to a service facility. 
(209)  Service Station : Any building, structure, or land used for the dispensing, sale, or offering for sale at retail of any automobile fuels, oils, or accessories and in connection with which is performed general automotive servicing as distinguished from automotive repairs. 
(210)  Semiprivate Athletic Club : A facility used primarily for active physical recreation, sport, or exercise on a commercial membership basis. 
(211)  Shopping Center : A group of retail and other commercial establishments that is planned, owned, and managed as a single property. The center's size and orientation are generally determined by the market characteristics of the trade area served by the center. The two main configurations of shopping centers are malls and strip centers. 
(212)  Sno-ball Stand : A place where sno-balls are made and sold. A sno-ball stand may also sell additional food and beverage items, such as ice cream, hot dogs, nachos, and non-alcoholic beverages. 
(213)  Social Club or Lodge : Structures operated by an organization or association for some common purpose, such as, but not limited to, a fraternal, social, educational, or recreational purpose or a union hall, but not including clubs organized primarily for profit or to render a service, which is customarily carried on as a business. Such organizations and associations must be incorporated under the laws of Louisiana as a nonprofit corporation or registered with the Secretary of State of Louisiana. 
(214)  Solid Waste : Any garbage, refuse, or sludge from a waste treatment plant, water-supply treatment plant, or air pollution-control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities. However, the term "solid waste" does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation-return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permits under LA R.S. 30:2074; source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 923 et seq.), as amended (42 U.S.C. Section 2011 et seq.); or hazardous waste subject to permits under LA R.S. 30:2171 et seq. 
(215)  Solid Waste Collection Facility : A facility that is used to accumulate solid waste generated by and delivered by more than one household or commercial establishment for pickup by a transporter, including, but not limited to, facilities typically located in rural areas where garbage collection does not occur. This definition does not include containers that receive only solid waste generated on property that is contiguous with the property on which the container is located (e.g., containers located at and receiving solid waste only from a multiunit dwelling or a commercial establishment or an industrial establishment). 
(216)  Solid Waste Compost Facility : A facility where organic matter is processed by natural or mechanical means to aid the microbial decomposition of the organic matter. 
(217)  Solid Waste Transfer Station : A solid waste processing facility where solid waste is transferred from collection vehicles, processed, and placed in other vehicles for transportation (e.g., a facility that separates recyclables from industrial or putrescible waste streams). 
(218)  Stable, Private : An accessory building located on a lot of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for the housing of not more than two (2) horses or mules owned by a person or persons living on the premises and which horses or mules are not for hire or sale. 
(219)  Stable, Public : A stable with a capacity for the housing of more than two (2) horses or mules which stable may be operated for remuneration, hire, sale or stabling. This definition includes livery stables. 
(220)  Stadium : A commercial structure with tiers of seats rising around a field or court, intended to be used primarily for the viewing of athletic events, typically designated for one sport and/or sporting team. Sports arena may also be used for secondary entertainment and other public gathering purposes, such as conventions, circuses, or concerts. Unless otherwise restricted by this ordinance, a stadium may serve alcohol as an accessory use but only when the stadium is open to the public for an event. 
(221)  Strip Center Development : A pattern of commercial development comprised of two or more separate businesses, generally one lot in depth with commercial activity arranged in a line formation. 
(222)  Substance Abuse Treatment Facility, Outpatient : A facility used for the treatment of alcohol or other drug abuse where neither meals nor lodging is provided. An outpatient substance abuse treatment facility must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as an outpatient substance abuse treatment facility or similar facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
(223)  Supermarket : see Retail Goods Establishment. 
(224)  Supper Club : A restaurant having a minimum enclosed dining/entertainment area of four thousand square feet and providing live entertainment, but not adult uses. The dining and entertainment area must be composed of standard restaurant tables and seating and a live entertainment stage area or dance floor. The dining area must occupy a minimum of fifty percent of the floor area of the restaurant/entertainment area. A supper club must provide full and continual food service throughout the periods of its operation. No more than twenty percent of the seating area, as approved by the Department of Safety and Permits, may be removed to accommodate special performances. A supper club may offer the sale of alcoholic beverages as incidental to food service. 
(225)  Swimming Pools : Any portable pool or permanent structure containing a body of water eighteen (18) inches or more in depth and two hundred fifty (250) square feet or more of water surface area, intended for recreational purposes, including a wading pool, but not including an ornamental reflecting pool, a fish pond, or similar type pool, located and designed so as not to create hazard or be used for swimming or wading. 
(226)  Tattoo Parlor : Establishments where services offered are tattooing, body piercing and non-medical body modification. This definition does not include establishments that offer only ear piercing as an accessory use. 
(227)  Tavern : See Bar. 
(228)  Theater, Drive-in : An open lot with its appurtenant facilities devoted primarily to the showing of motion pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis to patrons seated in automobiles. 
(229)  Tourist Court : See Motel. 
(230)  Town House : See Dwelling. 
(231)  Trade Service Establishment : Any establishment whose primary activity is the provision of assistance or trade skills, as opposed to products to individuals, businesses, industry, or government and other enterprises. This includes, but is not limited to, plumbing, carpentry, electrical, and appliance repair. 
(232)  Trailer Park : See Mobile Home Park. 
(233)  Transmission Towers : A structure or framework, usually of a steel lattice construction, principally intended to support radio, cellular, telecommunications, television, electric utility and/or any other electromagnetic transmissions, and receiving antennas and/or equipment. 
(234)  Travel Trailer : A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary recreational dwelling, and may be transported by a motor vehicle. 
(235)  Truck Repair : Establishments involved in the repair and service of trucks. As used in this definition the term truck does not include any vehicle whose maximum gross weight is ten thousand pounds or less as rated by the Louisiana Department of Motor Vehicles. 
(236)  Truck Stop : A facility engaged primarily in the fueling, servicing, repair, or parking of tractor trucks or similar heavy commercial vehicles, including the sale of accessories and equipment for such vehicles. A truck stop may also include overnight accommodations, showers, or a restaurant primarily for the use of truck crews. The storage of vehicles for the use of parts off such vehicles for sale or repair is prohibited. Such facility may also include gaming machines and uses within as allowed in LA R. S. 33:4862.1 et seq. As used in this definition the term truck does not include any vehicle whose maximum gross weight is ten thousand (10,000) pounds or less as rated by the Louisiana Office of Motor Vehicles. 
(237)  Tutoring Service : A business providing additional, special, or remedial instruction to a student or a group of students for a fee. 
(238)  Urban Agriculture : An activity that produces, processes, and markets food and other products within the urban areas of the City, applying large-scale, intensive production methods to yield a diversity of crops. 
(239)  Use, Permitted : A "permitted use" is a use which may be lawfully established in a particular zoning district or districts, provided it conforms with all requirements, regulations and performance standards (if any) of such district. 
(240)  Use, Principal : A "principal use" is the main use of land or buildings as distinguished from a subordinate or accessory use. A principal use may be either "permitted" or "conditional." 
(241)  Use, Temporary : A use established for a fixed period of time with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period. 
(242)  Veterinary Clinic, Small Animal : An establishment used by veterinarians or practitioners in related specialties for the practice of veterinary medicine where small animals are admitted for examination or treatment, but are not lodged or kept overnight. Limited laboratory and other diagnostic services are also provided on an outpatient basis. Reptiles, lizards, hoofed animals, exotic birds, exotic animals, or wild animals shall not be considered as small animals. 
(243)  Warehouse Facilities or Buildings : These are used primarily for the storage of wholesale goods and materials for industrial, manufacturing, and institutional use; and large-scale terminal facilities for retail storage, leased storage, or temporary storage. 
(244)  Waste Transfer Station : see Solid Waste Transfer Station 
(245)  Wedding Chapel : A place, other than a legal court and a church or religious institution, where couples can get legally married. 
(246)  Wholesale Trade : Establishments or places of business primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, or professional business users, or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies. 
(247)  Wind Farm : A facility for wind turbines and generators used to generate and produce electric power. 
(248)  Winery : An agricultural operation where the cultivation, processing, fermentation, and bottling of grapes, berries, or fruits occurs including all related equipment. 
(249)  Wireless Communications Facility : An un-staffed structure used to house and protect the equipment necessary for processing telecommunications signals, which may include air conditioning equipment and emergency generators. 
(250)  Wireless Communications Tower : A structure designed and constructed to support one or more wireless communications antennas and including all appurtenant devices attached to it. A tower can be freestanding (solely self-supported by attachment to the ground) or supported (attached directly to the ground and with guy-wires) and of either lattice or monopole construction. 
(251)  Yard Sale : See Garage Sale. 
Section 5.04 - General definitions 
(1)  Airport Hazard : Any structure or tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport, or is otherwise hazardous to such landing or taking off of aircraft. 
(2)  Accessory Building : A subordinate building, attached to, or detached from the main building, the use of which is incidental to the main building and not used as a place of habitation, for a living room, kitchen, dining room, parlor, bedroom, or library. When an accessory building is not a portion of the main building, it must be separated from the main building by a minimum horizontal distance of six (6) feet. 
(3)  Access Way : An all-weather surface for vehicular access to parking and loading spaces, traversing a greenbelt area on a development site. 
(4)  Accessory Use : A subordinate use which is incidental to and customary or necessary in connection with the main building or use and which is located on the same lot with such main building or use. 
(5)  Aerial : An antenna extending into the air. 
(6)  Alley : A way, which affords only a secondary access to property abutting thereon. 
(7)  Antenna : A metallic, graphite, fiberglass, or other device which is attached to a transmission tower, telecommunications tower, monopole, mast, building or other structure for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves. 
(8)  Balcony : A railing enclosed platform projected from and supported by an outer wall of a building but not supported directly from the ground. 
Figure V-1: Buildable Area 

(9)  Basement : The portion of a building below the first story and having more than one-half (1/2) its height below grade. 
(10)  Berm : A mound of earth. 
(11)  Buildable Area : The area of a lot not included within the yards or open spaces herein required (Fig. V-1). 
(12)  Building : Any structure designed, built, or used for the support, enclosure, or protection of persons, animals, chattels, or property of any kind. 
(13)  Building, Community : A building used for social, recreational, or educational activities of the residents in the neighborhood or community. Such building owned by a government agency, welfare, religious organization, or nonprofit civic organization, and not operated for commercial gain. 
(14)  Building, Height of : The vertical distance from the grade to the highest point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line or highest point of coping or parapet of a mansard roof, or to the main height level between eaves and ridges for gable, hip, shed, and gambrel roofs. When the highest wall of a building with a shed roof is within thirty (30) feet of the street, the height of such buildings shall be measured to the highest point of coping or parapet. 
Figure V-2: Measuring the Height of Buildings 

(15)  Buffer Yard : A landscaped area to separate and partially obstruct the view of two (2) adjacent land uses or properties from one another. 
(16)  Caliper : The diameter of a tree, measured at a point six (6) inches above the ground line if the resulting measurement is no more than four (4) inches. If the resulting measurement is more than four (4) inches, the measurement is made at a point twelve (12) inches above the ground line; multi-stem trees must be specified by height, not caliper. 
(17)  Canopy : A detachable, roof-like cover, supported from the ground, deck, floor or walls of a building for protection from the sun or weather. 
(18)  Carport : A canopy or shed open on at least two (2) sides for providing shelter for one or more vehicles. 
(19)  Cellar : That portion of a building below the first story having more than one-half (1/2) of its height below grade. 
(20)  Clearing : Includes, but is not limited to, the removal of trees, shrubbery brush, ground cover, and/or topsoil from any part of the land, but does not include maintenance mowing or trimming. 
(21)  Comprehensive Plan : Also known as, a master or general plan is the collection of information and material including a set of goals, policies, and guidelines intended to direct the present and future physical, social, and economic development that occurs within a City or parish, as required by LA RS 33:104. 
(22)  Conditional Use : A use that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by the Planning Commission and granting of a conditional use permit imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use harmonious or compatible with neighboring uses, as outlined in Article VI of this Ordinance. 
(23)  Court : An open space at ground level, which may or may not have direct street access around which is arranged a single building or a group of related buildings. 
(24)  Culinary or Cooking Facilities : A space in a dwelling arranged, intended, designed, or used for the preparation of food for a family. Facilities may include a sink, stove, cabinets, and refrigerator or any kind of combination of these arranged in such space. A refrigerator alone shall not constitute culinary or cooking facilities under this definition. 
(25)  DBH (diameter at breast height) : The method used to measure caliper by the timber industry, which is taken approximately four and one-half (41/2) feet high on the trunk of a tree above the ground line. 
(26)  Development Project : A public or private sector venture involving the development, structural modification, or redevelopment of commercial, industrial, residential, or other properties. 
(27)  Developed Site : Premises that contain existing structures or buildings for which a building permit is required. 
(28)  District, Zoning : An area or areas within the limits of the City for which the regulations and requirements governing use, lot, and size of building and premises are uniform. 
(29)  District, Commercial : Any district designated in these regulations as a business or commercial district, and permitting the purchase, sale, or transaction for the disposition of any Article, substance, commodity, or service; the maintenance or conduct of offices, professions, or recreational or amusement enterprises conducted for profit and also including renting of rooms, business offices, and sales display rooms and premises. 
(30)  District, Industrial : That portion of the City with designated land uses characterized by production, manufacturing, distribution, or fabrication activities. 
(31)  District, Residential : Any single-family, two-family or multifamily residential zoning district or a planned unit development where a majority of the land area or floor area is devoted to residential dwelling uses. 
(32)  Dormitory : A building intended or used principally for sleeping accommodations where such building is related to an educational or public institution, including religious institutions and hospitals. 
(33)  Drip Line : A vertical line extending from the outermost portion of the tree canopy to the ground. 
(34)  Drive-in : A term used to describe an establishment designed or operated to serve a patron while seated in an automobile parked in an off-street parking space. 
(35)  Exotic Dancers : Any male or female performer or male or female impersonator hired to dance, gyrate, twist or do any other physical performance on the floor, tables, stage or other contrivance in a sexually suggestive or provocative manner on the premises of any private or public property, whether said performer is paid a salary or receives compensation by way of gratuities by customers or commission. 
(36)  Family : One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit with a single, indoor culinary facility, as a single housekeeping unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, no such family shall contain over six persons, including any roomers, boarders, and/or domestic servants. 
(37)  Family-Unit : A single housekeeping unit with complete, independent facilities for living, sleeping, cooking and dining. 
(38)  Floor Area, Gross (GFA) : The total area of all floors of a building, including basements, mezzanines, and upper floors, if any, expressed in square feet and measured from the centerline of joint partitions and from outside wall faces. 
(39)  Commercial, Business and Industrial (GFA) : The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two (2) buildings but not including: 
a.  Attic space, providing less than seven (7) feet of head room 
b.  Cellar space not used for retailing 
c.  Outside stairs or fire escapes, roof overhangs and balconies 
d.  Accessory water towers or cooling towers 
e.  Accessory off-street parking spaces 
f.  Accessory off-street loading area 
(40)  Residential (GFA) : The gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the dwelling exclusive of garages, cellars, and open porches, measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls of a dwelling. 
(41)  Floor Area Ratio (FAR) : The floor area of a building or buildings on a lot divided by the lot area. 
Figure V-3: Floor Area Ratio 

(42)  Frontage, Street : The distance along a street line from one intersecting street to another or from one intersecting street to the end of a dead-end street. 
(43)  Frontage, Lot : The distance for which the front lot line and the street line are coincident. 
(44)  Gallery : A railing enclosed platform, projected from and supported by an outer wall of a building and supported from the ground by columns. 
(45)  Grade : The required elevation of the ground at the building or building site as established by the building code of the City of Kenner. 
(46)  Greenbelt : Required landscaping space adjacent to the property line of any public right-of-way of which the developed site fronts. 
(47)  Ground Cover : Low growing plant material installed in such manner as to provide a continuous cover of the ground surface that can be maintained at a height of not greater than twelve (12) inches. For example, Asian jasmine or Mondo grass. 
(48)  Hardship : A restriction on property so unreasonable that it results in an arbitrary and capricious interference with basic property rights. Hardship relates to the physical characteristics of the property, not the personal circumstances of the owner or user. A hardship may occur if the property is rendered unusable without the granting of a variance. 
(49)  Institution : A building or group of buildings designed or used for the nonprofit, charitable, or public service purposes of providing board, lodging, help, care for persons aged, indigent, or infirm or for the purpose of performing educational or religious services and offering board and lodging to persons in residence. 
(50)  Institutional Entity : An established organization or corporation, especially of a public or charitable character, including but not limited to religious, educational, charitable, public service or cultural organizations. 
(51)  Junk : Abandoned or dilapidated automobiles, trucks, tractors, and other such vehicles and parts thereof, abandoned or dilapidated wagons and other kinds of vehicles and parts thereof, scrap building materials, scrap contractor's equipment, tanks, casks, cans, barrels, boxes, drums, piping, bottles, glass, old iron, machinery, rags, paper, excelsior, hair mattresses, beds or bedding, or any other kind of scrap or waste material which is stored, kept, handled or displayed. 
(52)  Junkyard : A lot, land, or structure, or part thereof, used for the collection, storage, and sale of waste paper, rags, scrap metal, or discarded material; or for the collecting, dismantling, storage, salvaging, or sale of parts or machinery or vehicles not in running condition. 
(53)  Landscaping : Any combination of living plants such as trees, shrubs, vines, ground covers, flowers or lawns. It may include natural features such as rock, stone, and bark or structural features, including but not limited to fountains, reflecting pools, art works, screen walls, fences, and benches. 
(54)  Landscape plan : A scaled plan that clearly delineates vehicular use areas and displays and describes all landscaping, to include methods of irrigation and maintenance, and all other features of landscape areas to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
(55)  Loading Space : A space within the main building or on same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. The space shall have a minimum area of five hundred forty (540) square feet with a minimum width of twelve (12) feet, a maximum depth of thirty-five (35) feet, a vertical clearance of at least fourteen and one-half (14.5) feet, and must be an impervious, hard-surface area connected to an accepted for maintenance street or alley by an impervious hard surface driveway. 
Figure V-4: Lot Types 

(56)  Lot : A parcel of land occupied or which may be hereafter occupied by a building and its accessory buildings, together with such open spaces and parking spaces or area as are required under this ordinance and having its principal frontage upon an officially approved street or place. 
(57)  Lot Area : The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot. 
(58)  Lot, Corner : A lot abutting on two (2) or more streets at their intersection. 
(59)  Lot, Depth of : The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
(60)  Lot, Interior : A lot other than a corner lot. 
(61)  Lot Line : A line dividing one lot from another or from a street or other public place. 
(62)  Lot of Record : A lot which is a part of a subdivision, the map of which has been recorded in the office of the clerk of the court and assessor's office or a parcel of land which can be legally established and defined by a deed or act of sale on or before the adoption of this ordinance. 
(63)  Lot, Through (Double Frontage) : A lot having a frontage on two (2) approximately parallel streets or places. 
(64)  Lot, Width : The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the required front yard line and parallel to the front street line, or measured at the street line if no front yard is required. 
(65)  Main Building : Any building having the predominant land use which is not an accessory building. 
(66)  Mast : A frame supporting antennas not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height which is mounted on a roof or some other structure. 
(67)  Median : The land in the center of the right-of-way, which is used to separate the directional flow of traffic, and may contain left turn pockets. A median is often locally referred to as a "neutral ground." 
(68)  Monopole, Standard : A single self-supporting vertical pole with no guy wire anchors, usually consisting of a galvanized or other unpainted metal, or a wooden pole with below grade foundations that is intended to support antennas necessary to deliver and receive telecommunications transmissions. 
(69)  Monopole, Nonstandard : A monopole, or other freestanding structure containing antennas, which is designed to camouflage the appearance of a standard monopole, such as a clock tower. Nonstandard monopoles shall be designed, subject to the guidelines herein, to be aesthetically compatible with character of the neighborhood in which they are located. Artificial tree designs shall not be permitted as nonstandard monopoles. 
(70)  Motorized Home : Is a portable dwelling designed and constructed as an integral part of a self-propelled vehicle, and limited to eight (8) feet in width, forty-five hundred (4,500) pounds in weight, and twenty-nine (29) feet in length. A motorized home is considered a recreation vehicle. 
(71)  Neutral Ground : See "Median." 
(72)  Nonconforming Structure : A structure, or a portion thereof, that no longer conforms to the site area, coverage, setback, or other regulations prescribing physical development standards for the district in which such structure is located. 
(73)  Opacity : An imaginary vertical plane extending from the established grade to a required height, of which a required percentage will be visually screened from adjacent property use. 
(74)  Open Space : An area or portion of land, either landscaped or essentially unimproved and which is used to meet human recreational or spatial needs, or to protect air, water or plant areas. 
(75)  Open Space Ratio : The open space on the lot (excluding required parking) divided by the total floor area of any building or buildings on the lot. 
(76)  Parking Space : An area enclosed in the main building or in an accessory building, or unenclosed, permanently reserved for the storage of one (1) motor vehicle and connected to an accepted-for-maintenance street or alley by a driveway providing unobstructed ingress and egress for motor vehicles. 
(77)  Permit : An official document authorizing performance of a specific activity regulated by the Code of Ordinances. 
(78)  Pickup Coach : Is a structure designed primarily to be mounted on a pickup or truck chassis and with sufficient equipment to render it suitable for use as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation and vacation uses, and limited to eight (8) feet in width, forty-five hundred (4,500) pounds in weight, and twenty-nine (29) feet in length. A pickup coach is considered a recreation vehicle. 
(79)  Plant Material : Any plant including trees, vines, shrubs, ground covers and annuals or vegetation of any size, species, or description. 
(80)  Public Monument : A building, pillar, or similar structure either erected in memory of the dead or a person or event by a public agency or controlled by a public agency. 
(81)  Recreation Vehicle : A vehicle, or similar means of human transportation, used primarily for recreational purposes or as a temporary dwelling for travel. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, dirt bikes, all-terrain vehicles, campers, pop-up campers, travel trailers, motor homes, and pickup coaches designed to be mounted on a truck chassis. 
(82)  Recreational Watercraft : A watercraft, or similar means of human transportation over water, used primarily for recreational purposes. Recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, boats, rafts, jet skis, personal watercraft and their trailers. 
(83)  Residual Areas : Excess space not used for parking, walkways, or other site amenities. 
(84)  Right-of-Way : Public easement or servitude or property owned by a subdivision of the state containing roadways, medians, berms, utilities, pipelines, drainage ditches and canals. 
(85)  Shrub : A woody perennial plant differing from a perennial herb by its persistent and woody stems and from a tree by its low stature (generally obtaining a height less than eight (8) feet and its habit of branching from the base. For the purposes of this ordinance, shrubs shall be defined as obtaining a minimum height of thirty-six (36) inches at maturity. For example, Indian hawthorn or azalea. 
(86)  Sidewalk : A paved surface or leveled area separated from the street and used as a pedestrian walkway. 
(87)  Sign : For definitions pertaining to signs, see Article XI, section 11.06. 
(88)  Site Plan : A plan (to scale) showing uses and structures proposed for a parcel of land as required by the regulations involved. Its purpose is to show how the intended use relates to the major landscape features, and the surrounding areas. Requirements and procedures for "Site Plan Review" are found in Article VI of this ordinance. 
(89)  Story : That portion of a building, other than a cellar or basement, included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
(90)  Street : A public or private thoroughfare, which affords a principle, means of access to abutting property. 
(91)  Street Façade : That exterior side of a building, which faces, and is most nearly parallel to, a public or private street. The façade shall include the entire building walls, including wall faces, parapets, fascia, windows, doors, canopies, and visible roof structures of one (1) complete elevation. 
(92)  Street Line : A line separating a lot, tract, or parcel of land, and abutting a street right-of-way. 
(93)  Street, Major : Streets, which serve high-volume travel corridors that, connect major generators of traffic such as commercial centers, large industrial centers, major residential communities, and other major activity centers. 
(94)  Street, Minor : public streets that provide access to individual single-family residential lots, provide entry and exit to the neighborhood, and provide connectivity to major streets. 
(95)  Structure : Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but without the generalities of the foregoing, advertising signs, billboards, backstops for tennis courts, fences, and pergolas. 
(96)  Structural Alteration : Any change in the supporting members of a structure such as footings, foundations, bearing walls, or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any substantial change in the roof or the exterior walls. 
(97)  Theater : A building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, dance, musical, or other live performances. 
(98)  Transmission Tower : A structure or framework, usually of a steel lattice construction, principally intended to support radio, cellular, telecommunications, television, electric utility and/or any other electromagnetic transmissions, and receiving antennas and/or equipment. 
(99)  Travel Trailer : Is a recreation vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational, and vacation uses; permanently identified "travel trailer" by the manufacturer of the trailer and, when factory equipped for road, having a body width not exceeding eight (8) feet, a body length not exceeding twenty-nine (29) feet, and a gross weight not exceeding forty-five hundred (4,500) pounds. 
(100)  Tree - Class A : Any self-supporting woody plant of a species that normally grows to an overall height of fifty (50) feet or more, usually with one (1) main stem or trunk, and many branches. Class A trees may be counted toward Class B tree requirements, however, Class B trees may not be counted toward Class A tree requirements. 
(101)  Tree - Class B : Any self-supporting woody plant of a species that normally grows to an overall height of twenty-five (25) feet or more, usually with one (1) main stem or trunk, and many branches. It may have multiple stems or trunks; for example, crape myrtle. Class A trees may be counted toward Class B tree requirements, however, Class B trees may not be counted toward Class A tree requirements. 
(102)  Tree Preservation : Any portion of a site containing existing trees that are proposed to be preserved in order to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(103)  Variance : A variance is a relaxation of the terms of the zoning ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. As used in this ordinance, a variance is authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and open spaces; establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the presence of nonconformities in the zoning district or uses in an adjoining zoning district. 
(104)  Vegetation : Plant life, including but not limited to, trees, shrubs, flowering and non-flowering plants. 
(105)  Vehicle - Commercial : A vehicle bearing or required to bear a commercial license plate, and having a gross vehicle weight of less than 10,000 pounds designed for the transportation of commodities, merchandise, produce, freight, animals, or passengers in the furtherance of any commercial enterprise. 
(106)  Vehicle - Heavy Commercial : Any vehicle bearing or required to bear commercial license plates and/or any motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer designed or used to carry freight, passengers for a fee, or merchandise, including but not limited to dump trucks, motorized heavy construction vehicles, solid waste collection vehicles, commercial haulers, concrete mixer trucks, towing and recovery vehicles, any vehicle in which food or beverages are stored or sold, and any vehicle designed or used to transport heavy construction, landscaping, or lawn care equipment in the furtherance of any commercial enterprise and having a gross weight of more than 10,000 pounds, and has one (1) or more of the following specifications: 
a.  Exceeds eight (8) feet in height which includes the total vertical dimension of any vehicle above the ground surface including any load and /or load-holding devices thereon; and 
b.  Exceeds twenty-one (21) feet in length which includes the total longitudinal dimension of a single vehicle, including load, meaning from the front of the vehicle to its rear and including any load-holding devices thereon; 
c.  Has special equipment that distinguishes it from private passenger automobiles including but not limited to, a crane or an electronic message board. 
(107)  Vehicular Use Area : All area subject to vehicular traffic, including access ways, driveways, loading areas, service areas, and parking lots and stalls for all types of vehicles. 
(108)  Waterway : Any body of water, including any bayou, creek, canal, river, lake, or bay, or any other body of water, natural, artificial, except a swimming pool, or ornamental pool located on a single lot. 
(109)  Yard : An open space other than a court at existing ground level between a buildable area and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of a structure from the ground upward except as otherwise provided herein. For the purposes of determining yard measurements, the least horizontal distance between a lot line and the buildable area shall be used. 
(110)  Yard, Front : A yard extending across the front of a lot between the side yard lines, and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the street line and the maximum permissible main building. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has its least dimension. 
(111)  Yard, Rear : A yard extending across the rear of a lot between the side lot lines and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the rear of the building area. On both corner lots and interior lots, the rear yard shall in all cases be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. 
(112)  Yard, Side : A yard between the main building and the side lot line and extending from the required front yard to the required rear yard and being the required minimum horizontal distance between the side lot line and the side line of the buildable area. 
Figure V-5: Yard Types 

(113)  Zoning : A police power measure in which the City is divided into districts or zones within which permitted and special uses are established as are regulations governing lot size, building bulk, placement, and other development standards. 
(114)  Zoning, Spot : An arbitrary rezoning of a parcel or parcels of land located within a larger zoned area of a markedly or substantially different zoning or land use intensity that is not consistent and noncompliant with the City's comprehensive plan and current zoning restrictions. A spot zoning of land primarily promotes the private interest of the individual owner rather than the general welfare of the greater community. 
(Ord. No. 11,394, § 1, 4-5-18) 
Article VI. - Zoning 

Section 6.01 - General procedures 
    The following requirements are common to many of the following procedures, and apply to all applications submitted under this ordinance. Additional details may be included in the specific procedure. 
(a)  Zoning Verification : Before submitting an application for any procedure in this ordinance or for a building permit, the applicant shall submit a "Zoning Verification Request Form" with the Department of Planning and Zoning. 
(b)  Pre-Application Conference : 
(1)  Optional - Before submitting an application for review, an applicant may schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning and Zoning Director or a designee to discuss the procedures, standards, and regulations required for approval. A pre-application conference is optional, except for the procedures listed below. 
(2)  Mandatory - Before submitting an application for the following types of review, an applicant must schedule a pre-application conference with the Planning and Zoning Director or a designee to discuss the procedures, standards, and regulations required for approval in accordance with this ordinance and other applicable City codes. 
a.  Formal applications to amend the Pattern for Progress comprehensive plan 
b.  Any amendments to the Unified Development Code 
c.  Zoning Map changes 
d.  Planned Unit Development applications 
e.  Conditional Use applications 
(c)  Neighborhood Early Notice Conference : Following a mandatory pre-application conference, the applicant must provide notice and present the project to the neighborhood association board where the project will be located, or, if no such neighborhood board exists, to the City Council District office representing the area where the project is to be located. If an application does not require a mandatory pre-application conference, it does not require a Neighborhood Early Notice Conference. 
(1)  The applicant, when required, must request in writing a public community meeting with the affected neighborhood to disclose the details, plans, and proposals of the request or project seeking approval. 
(2)  Upon written notice to the community, a community meeting must take place within 45 days of the written request, or the community or neighborhood will lose its right to a public meeting. 
(3)  The applicants must prepare a report accompanying the formal application, delineating concerns raised at the neighborhood meetings as well as any actions taken to assuage or mitigate these concerns. 
(4)  As part of the application, following the community meeting, the applicant shall submit to the Director of the Department of Planning and Zoning a letter verifying the time, place, and location of the meeting and the issues and concerns discussed at that meeting. 
(d)  Application : 
(1)  Initiation - The owner(s) of the property in question, or the authorized agents of the owner(s), may initiate and file an application for approval from the City of Kenner. 
(2)  Application Forms - Applications, containing all information requested on the application and any additional information required by a designee of the City of Kenner, must be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by this ordinance. All applications must be complete and sufficient for processing before they will be reviewed. 
(3)  Fees - As per Section 14.01 of this ordinance, no applications shall be reviewed, and no permit, certificate, or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees, or expenses have been paid in full. When an application is submitted on behalf of the City of Kenner, no fees shall be required. 
(4)  Complete Applications - An application is complete when it contains all the information necessary to decide whether the development as proposed will comply with all of the requirements of this Ordinance. Details for each application are included in the specific procedure Section of this Ordinance. The presumption is that all of the information required in the application forms is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this Ordinance. However, it is recognized that each application is unique, and more or less information may be required according to the needs of the particular case. The applicant may rely on the determination of the Planning and Zoning Director as to whether more or less information may be submitted. 
(5)  Concurrent Applications - Applications may be filed by the same applicant and reviewed concurrently, at the option of the applicant. 
a.  Any application that also requires a variance shall not be eligible for final approval until the variance has been granted. 
b.  Applications submitted concurrently are subject to approval of all other related applications; denial or disapproval of any concurrently submitted application shall stop consideration of any related applications until the denied or disapproved application is resolved. 
c.  No more than one (1) applicant shall submit a land use or zoning application for an identical request. Applications will be accepted only on a first-come first-served basis. 
(6)  Modification of Application - An application may be modified at the applicant's request following the approval of the Planning and Zoning Director or his designee before the request is advertised in the official journal for Planning and Zoning meetings. Any modification after the request has been advertised shall require a new hearing. 
Section 6.02 - Notice provisions 
(a)  Published Notice for Planning and Zoning Commission Hearings : For all land use and zoning applications and requests appearing before the City of Kenner Planning and Zoning Commission, a notice setting forth the date, time, place and purpose of the public hearing, the name of the applicant, and identification of the subject property must be published once a week for three (3) consecutive weeks in the official journal of the City of Kenner. At least twenty (20) days shall lapse between the first publication and the date of hearing. 
(b)  Notice by Mail : In addition to notice by publication, at least ten days prior to the public hearing, a good faith attempt to notify all property owners of record within a 250-foot radius of the property under consideration shall be made by the sending of an official notice by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the public hearing and the subject matter of the applicable regulations and restrictions. No other mandatory types of notice shall be required; however, the City of Kenner Planning and Zoning Commission, by rule may provide for additional discretionary forms of notice. 
(c)  Notification Following Decision : Within ten (10) calendar days of the effective date of the City Council's ordinance reflecting action on any application for which notice is required under this section, written notification of such action shall be mailed to the applicant by the Director of planning, stating the action taken and including all conditions imposed and items established for satisfaction of such conditions, if any. 
(d)  Notice of Termination of Approval : Prior to the City Council's review of whether an approved land use or zoning application should be terminated, personal notice of the termination proceeding shall be given to the applicant and other interested parties in the manner provided herein. 
(e)  Costs of Notice : All actual costs incurred by the City in preparing and publishing the notice required by this Article shall be paid by the applicant prior to publication or mailing of such notice according to a schedule of fees established by the City Council. 
(f)  Validity of Defective Notice : 
(1)  No action on a land use or zoning application shall be declared invalid by reason of any defect in: 
a.  The publication of the notice of the purpose or subject matter and the time and place of the hearing if the published notice gives reasonable notification of its purpose, subject matter, substance or intent; or 
b.  The mailing of notice to property owners as described in Section 6.02 (b). 
(2)  Any defect in or failure to strictly adhere to the discretionary forms of notification or a form of notice not required by state law shall not form a basis for declaring invalid any ordinance or City Council action on any zoning matter. 
(3)  No denial by the City Council of any application requiring notice shall be declared invalid by reason of any defect in any form of public notice, if the applicant has received notice of the time, date, and place of the hearing. 
Section 6.03 - Procedures and approvals 
(a)  Zoning Compliance : 
(1)  Purpose : The purpose of a zoning verification is to promote compliance with this Ordinance by establishing a procedure for the City to verify the zoning classification of a specific lot, parcel, or tract of land prior to development or establishment of a use on said, lot, parcel, or tract. 
(2)  Authority : Prior to the issuance of a building permit or occupational license, the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement must review the zoning verifications in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(3)  Applicability : No structure or land may be used or occupied, in whole or in part, for any purpose, until a zoning verification has been issued stating that the use, structure, and site improvements comply with the provisions of this Ordinance. A zoning verification must be issued prior to issuance of a building permit or an occupational license. A zoning verification is needed only for the first permit or license issued for the building or site. For example, new construction that requires both a building permit and an occupancy permit only requires a zoning verification for the building permit. 
(4)  Process : 
a.  Prior to the issuance of a building permit or an occupational license by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement, a zoning verification of the use of the subject property shall be performed. 
b.  When a zoning verification is issued in conjunction with a building permit, occupancy permit or business license, no separate application is required. 
c.  An applicant may request a zoning verification. The applicant must submit an application containing the following material, unless waived by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement: 
i.  A completed application containing the applicant's name(s), address, and interest in the subject property. 
ii.  The name and address of the owner of the subject property, if different from the applicant, and the owner's signed consent to the filing of the application. 
iii.  The proposed use or uses of the subject property and a brief description of the construction, reconstruction, remodeling, or alteration requiring the issuance of a zoning verification. 
iv.  Such other and further information or documentation as the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement may deem necessary or appropriate for a full and proper consideration and deposition of the particular application. 
(5)  Expiration : A verification of zoning compliance expires after six (6) months if a building permit application has not been filed. 
(b)  Site Plan Review : 
(1)  Types of Site Plan Reviews : Site plan reviews are classified as either Administrative or General. 
(2)  Purpose and Applicability : 
a.  Site Plan Review is to assist the City's zoning enforcement officials in determining whether the purpose of Administrative specific standards of this ordinance and, if applicable, other laws and regulations have been complied with. Upon a determination of compliance, requested permits and licenses may be issued to the applicant. Administrative site plan review is a prerequisite to the issuance of new construction building permits. 
b.  The purpose of General Site Plan Review is to assist the Planning Department and the Planning and Zoning Commission in determining the merits of an application that requires final action by the City Council. General site plan review is conducted by the Department of Planning. It entails a public hearing process that requires a recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission and final action by the City Council. 
(3)  Administrative Site Plan Review : Any development not governed by a Special Ordinance shall initially submit a request for Administrative Site Plan Review with the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(4)  General Site Plan Review : The following types of applications require General Site Plan Review: 
a.  Application for a Planned Unit Development (PUD) 
b.  Application for a Conditional Use in any district 
c.  Application for a rezoning of land and property 
d.  Application to amend the Comprehensive Plan of the City of Kenner 
e.  Application for a major resubdivision of land 
f.  Any other land use application for which the Planning and Zoning Commission reviews and the City Council is authorized to act on 
(5)  Application and Fees : 
a.  All applications for general site plan review shall be filed in writing with the Planning and Zoning Director (See Section 16.01, review Criteria Fees.) 
b.  A pre-application conference is required for general site plan review. 
(6)  Submittal Requirements for Site Plans : In addition to any other information required to be submitted by zoning district regulations for site plans, site plans should be prepared at a scale of not more than fifty (50) feet to one (1) inch and should contain the following information. 
a.  The name of the individual or firm preparing the plan. 
b.  Sheets or pages numbered. 
c.  Date and any revision dates. 
d.  The north point, scale, and date. 
e.  The boundaries of the property involved, the general location of all existing easements, sector lines, and property lines, existing streets, buildings, or waterways, and other significant physical features in or adjoining the project. 
f.  The approximate location and sizes of sanitary and storm sewers, water mains, culverts, and other underground utilities and structures in or near the project. 
g.  The general location and character of construction of any proposed streets, alleys, driveways, curb cuts, entrances and exits, vehicular use and off-street parking areas, loading areas (including numbers of parking and loading spaces), outdoor lighting systems, storm drainage and sanitary facilities. 
h.  Calculations for off-street parking requirements. 
i.  The approximate height of all proposed buildings and structures, accessory and main or major excavations in relation to heights of buildings and structures on adjoining property. The location should be drawn to scale, but full dimensioning is not required. 
j.  Preliminary plans and elevation of the building(s) as may be deemed necessary. 
k.  General location, height, and material of all dumpsters, fences, walls, screen planting and landscaping. 
l.  General location, character, size and height, and orientation of proposed signs. 
m.  A tabulation of the total gross area in square feet or acres of the project site and the floor area in square feet of any building(s) in the proposed development. 
n.  Landscaping and design information necessary to meet the requirements of design review, where applicable. 
o.  Such other information as may be required by the Planning and Zoning Department in order to meet standards in the zoning district in which the use is to be located. 
(7)  Waiver of submittal requirements : The Director of Planning and Zoning may waive submittal requirements for site plans where the information is not necessary under the circumstances to determine the nature of the development or whether the development meets relevant approval criteria. 
(8)  General Site Plan Review - Process : 
a.  Review by the Planning Department: 
i.  The Planning Department will review the site plan and other submittals and make a report to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
ii.  The Planning Department may refer the site plan to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
b.  Public Hearing and Recommendation by the Planning and Zoning Commission: Whenever the Planning and Zoning Commission is required by this ordinance to make a recommendation to the City Council concerning a land use or zoning application, the Commission shall make such recommendation after it has conducted a public hearing. 
c.  Review and Action by City Council: 
i.  Public hearing by City Council: Whenever the City Council is required by this ordinance to decide upon an application, the Council shall conduct a public hearing in accordance with its rules. The public hearing shall be held within the time period established by these regulations. 
ii.  Decision by the City Council: If the City Council is the final decision-making authority for an application, it shall decide whether to approve, approve subject to modification, or deny the proposal at a public meeting. The City Council shall not take official action upon any application requiring a recommendation of the Planning and Zoning Commission, until the report of the Planning Department has been received; provided, however, that if the report has not been filed within forty-five (45) days following the date of the public hearing, the City Council may then take official action on the application without the report from the Planning Department. 
iii.  The City Council shall render its decision on a General Site Plan Review application within one hundred twenty (120) days from the filling of a petition for relief by the applicant, unless otherwise expressly provided in these zoning regulations. 
iv.  If the City Council has not approved the request within one hundred twenty (120) days, it shall be considered to fail. 
v.  Review Criteria: The City Council shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying a land use or zoning application: 
1)  The proposed development is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Kenner Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans; 
2)  The proposed development meets the requirements of this Ordinance; 
3)  The proposed development will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood and the City. 
4)  The site plan demonstrates: 
a)  Compliance with any prior approvals; 
b)  Site design and development intensity appropriate and tailored for the unique natural characteristics of the site; 
c)  Adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of access, pedestrian circulation, bicycle facilities, roadways, driveways and off-street parking, stacking and loading spaces; 
d)  Connectivity to surrounding neighborhoods and the City as a whole; 
e)  Adequate design of grades, paving, drainage and treatment of turf to handle stormwater, and; 
f)  Adequate access for disabled residents through the provision of special parking spaces, accessible routes between parking areas and buildings, passenger loading zones and access to other facilities. 
g)  Any adverse impacts on adjacent properties have been minimized or mitigated. 
h)  The request satisfies conditions of any other City departments pertinent to the review process. 
(c)  Building Permit : No building permit shall be issued for a development requiring a site plan until the site plan has been approved. 
(d)  Dedication and Improvements : For development of property requiring a site plan under this Ordinance, the applicant must dedicate any additional right-of-way necessary to the width required by the City of Kenner for streets adjoining the property, install curbs and gutters and pave all streets adjoining the property, and install sidewalks and street trees based on the standards set forth in this and all other City Codes and Ordinances. 
    The applicant shall bear the costs of installation of any on-site or off-site improvements required by this Ordinance, including provisions for stormwater management, paving, and utilities. 
(e)  Modification of Approved Site Plan : The Planning Department Director is authorized to approve minor modifications to an approved site plan. All modifications not listed as minor below shall be considered major by the body that approved the original site plan. The following modifications shall be considered minor: 
(1)  Up to ten percent (10%) increase or any decrease in gross floor area of a single building; 
(2)  Up to a ten percent (10%) reduction or any increase in the approved setbacks from exterior property lines; 
(3)  Relocation of parking areas, internal streets, or structures where such relocation occurs more than one hundred feet (100') for exterior property lines. 
(4)  Appeals of City Council Decisions : Within fifteen (15) calendar days of a final decision on Site Plan Review of the City Council, any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal that decision to the 24th judicial district court for the Parish of Jefferson. An appeal of a final decision of the City Council shall not affect a stay of such decision, unless specifically authorized by the City Council or ordered by the court. 
(5)  Expiration : A site plan expires after twelve (12) months where a building permit application has not been filed for all or part of said development. Applicants may file for one (1) six (6) month extension of the site plan approval in writing with the Planning and Zoning Director subject to administrative approval. 
(f)  Planned Unit Developments (PUD's) : Purpose of provisions: Planned unit developments are of such substantially different character that specific and additional standards and exceptions are hereby set out to govern the recommendations of the Planning and Zoning Commission and the action of the City Council. In the case of a planned unit development, the Planning and Zoning Commission, after holding a public hearing, may recommend and the City Council may authorize that there be in part of the area of such development and for the duration of such development, specified uses not permitted by the use regulations of the district in which said development is located, provided the Planning and Zoning Commission shall find: 
(1)  That the uses proposed are consistent with the City of Kenner's Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  That the uses permitted by such exception are reasonable or desirable and are appropriate with respect to the private purpose of the development. 
(3)  That the uses permitted by such exception are not of such a nature or so located as to exercise a detrimental influence on the surrounding neighborhood. 
(4)  Providing the above conditions are met, the City Council shall have the power to grant exceptions to the following: 
a.  Yard requirements 
b.  Lot area 
c.  Use requirements 
(5)  Limitations : The provisions of this section are applicable in all districts providing the lot area of the property in question has the following minimum area: 
a.  In R-1, R-1A and RR-1 Districts: Ten (10) contiguous acres 
b.  All other districts except the R-1, R-1A and RR-1 Districts: Two (2) contiguous acres 
c.  In calculating the minimum area for a planned unit development, the measurement shall not include the area of any previously dedicated streets or alleys. 
d.  Adult book/video stores and truck stops with video poker machines are not permitted uses under the provisions of this section. 
(6)  Conditions to be met by planned unit developments : 
a.  District regulations: Every building erected and maintained under the provisions of this section shall comply with all of the regulations established by this ordinance for the district in which the building group is located except the regulation requiring a separate building site to be provided and maintained for each principal structure. 
b.  Site plan and improvements: A site plan for a building development shall include the requirements listed with Section 6.03 (b)(6). 
c.  Formation of incorporate nonprofit association (when applicable and/or when required by the City Council as part of a PUD). When the formation of an incorporate nonprofit association is part of a PUD the developer shall: 
i.  Create an incorporate nonprofit automatic homes association, which assures exterior maintenance of each unit and the common areas. 
ii.  Record covenants which automatically make every lot owner an association member, give the owner the right to use the common property, and establish his/her voting rights in the association and his obligation to pay its assessments. 
d.  Variations and exceptions: Whenever the tract to be subdivided is of such unusual size or shape or is surrounded by such development of unusual conditions that the strict application of the requirements contained in these regulations would result in real difficulties and substantial hardships or injustices, the Council may vary or modify such requirements, so that the subdivider is allowed to develop his property in a reasonable manner, but so that, at the same time, the public welfare and interest of the City are protected and the general intent and spirit of these regulations are preserved. 
(7)  Procedure on planned unit developments . 
a.  Application for approval: An application for approval of a planned unit development shall be filed with the planning department and shall contain the following: 
i.  Interest and ownership: The applicant's name, address and interest in the application, and the name, address, and interest of every person, firm or corporation represented by the applicant in the application; the concurrence of the owner or owners of the entire land area included in the special plan and all encumbrances of such land; and sufficient evidence to establish that the applicants are all the owners and encumbrances of the designated land area, intend actually to develop the designated area, and have the means and ability to do so. 
ii.  Survey: The survey shall be performed and stamped by a licensed surveyor or engineer, and be no less than five (5) years old, and reflect existing site conditions. 
iii.  Site Plan for building development: The site plan shall contain any other site information as may be necessary to describe completely the proposed improvements. 
iv.  Building Elevation Plan: The building elevation plan shall illustrate the exterior architectural features of the building(s) including roof design, pitch, and height. 
v.  Landscape Plan: Illustration of the landscape plan shall be consistent with Article IX. Landscaping Regulations; Section 9.04 (c). Content of Landscape Plan. 
b.  General examination: Upon receipt of an acceptable application for approval of a planned unit development, properly and completely made out as listed herein, the planning department shall examine the application and make such investigation as is necessary. Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of an application, the planning department shall transmit the application together with its report to the Planning and Zoning Commission. The planning department may also transmit a copy of the application to any department or agency, which might be affected by the approval of the application, and such department or agency may transmit its report and recommendation to the Planning and Zoning Commission. 
c.  Compliance with state laws: Planned unit developments must comply with any applicable state laws 
d.  Review by Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission shall hold a public hearing concerning the planned unit development in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and shall review each application and shall approve or disapprove the site plan; approval may establish conditions and limitations, which may include a performance bond. The Planning and Zoning Commission shall then, within sixty (60) days render a recommendation to the City Council of approval, approval with conditions, or denial. 
e.  Presentation of planned unit development to the City Council: Upon action taken by the Planning and Zoning Commission, the plan shall be presented to the City Council for final action. Action by yea and nay vote shall be taken within ninety (90) days [after] being submitted to the City Council. If the Council fails to vote within the ninety (90) day period, the time for Council action on the PUD will have prescribed and the PUD application will have failed. The one (1) year limitation period for reapplication, as provided for herein, shall be in effect from the prescription date. 
f.  Registration of planned unit development: Upon approval of a planned unit development, a copy of such plan shall be registered among the records of the planning department and shall thereafter be binding upon the applicants, their heirs, successors, and assigns; shall limit and control the issuance and validity of permits and certificates, and shall restrict and limit the use and operation of all land and structures within the area designated in such planned unit development and approval thereof; provided, however, that the department of planning may, upon a showing of land use necessity thereof, permit minor changes in the location of structures and site improvements if such minor changes will not change the character or use of the development, increase the gross floor area, intensity of use, or ground coverage, reduce the total building site area, the space between buildings, or the ratio of off-street parking area and off-street loading area to gross floor area, or gross floor area, or otherwise cause the planned unit development to fail to meet the conditions specified herein. 
g.  Amendment or withdrawal of planned unit development: Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the planned unit development was approved and registered, any planned unit development may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, if all land and structures remaining under such planned unit development comply with all the conditions and limitations of the planned unit development and all land and structures withdrawn from such planned unit development comply with all regulations established by this ordinance and unrelated to the planned unit development. 
h.  Fees: Before any action shall be taken, fees must be paid in accordance to section 16.01, Fee Schedule. 
i.  One-year limitation: When a planned unit development application is filed with the planning department, and has been finally acted on by the City Council in accordance with the above outlined procedure, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council shall not be petitioned to consider the identical planned unit development, for the same property, within a period of one calendar year from the date of the City Council's final action on said planned unit development. 
(g)  Conditional Use Permits : 
(1)  Nature of conditional use : A "conditional use" is a land use which, because of its unique nature or impact on the public's health, safety and/or welfare, is compatible with the permitted uses in a given zoning district and in nearby areas only upon a determination that the external effects of the use, in relation to the existing and planned uses of adjoining property, can be mitigated through the imposition of standards and conditions. This Article sets forth the standards used to evaluate proposed conditional uses and the procedures for approving conditional use permit applications. 
(2)  Permit required : No conditional use shall be established and no building permit shall be issued for any use designated as a conditional use within a zoning district until a conditional use permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this Article. An application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in the manner described in Site Plan Review Section 6.03(b). The site plan shall illustrate the proposed use to be established, its relationship to adjoining properties and how it meets the approval standards set forth in Section 6.03(g)(6). 
(3)  Status of Conditionally Permitted Uses : The following general rules apply to all conditional uses: 
a.  The designation of a use in a zoning district as a conditional use does not constitute an authorization or assurance that such use will be approved. 
b.  Approval of a conditional use permit shall authorize only the particular use for which the permit is issued. 
c.  No use authorized by a conditional use permit shall be enlarged, extended, or relocated, nor may the number of dwelling units be increased, unless an application is made for approval of a new conditional use permit in accordance with the procedures set forth in this section. 
d.  Development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all the permits and approvals required by the ordinances of the City of Kenner, including but not limited to these zoning regulations and the City Code, and all permits, if any, required by regional, state or federal agencies. 
(4)  Application for Conditional Use Permit : When an application for a conditional use permit is made, the application shall be submitted by the property owner or by the property owner's designated representative to the Director of Planning and Zoning. The application shall be accompanied by a site plan prepared in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance for Site Plan Review. 
a.  Subdivision approval: If the proposed use requires a division of land, an application for subdivision approval shall be submitted in conjunction either with the application for a conditional use permit or include the subdivision request in the ordinance for conditional use approval. Approval of the conditional use permit shall not become effective until final approval of the subdivision application provided, that if the land is to be divided in phases, the approval of the conditional use permit shall take effect upon final approval of the phase of the subdivision containing the property on which the conditional use is to be located. 
(5)  Procedures for Conditional Use Permits : 
a.  Planning and Zoning Commission Recommendation: Upon receipt of the report from the Director of Planning, the Planning and Zoning Commission shall conduct a public hearing in order to formulate its recommendations to the City Council on the conditional use permit application. Following the public hearing, the Commission shall recommend approval, approval subject to modification, or denial of the proposal to the City Council in accordance with these regulations. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, the Commission shall recommend denial of the application as being incompatible with existing uses or uses permitted by right in the district and any other areas that would be materially affected by the use. 
b.  City Council Action: The City Council shall be the final decision-maker on applications for conditional use permits. Following a public hearing and in consideration of the Planning and Zoning Commission's recommendations, the City Council shall approve, modify, or deny the proposal for a conditional use permit in accordance with these regulations. If the appropriateness of the use cannot be assured at the location, and in areas of the City reasonably anticipated to be affected by the use, the application for a conditional use permit shall be denied as being incompatible with existing uses or uses permitted by right in the district and in other significantly affected areas. 
(6)  Standards and Review Criteria : When considering applications for a conditional use permit, the Planning and Zoning Commission in making its recommendation and the City Council in rendering its decision on the application shall, on the basis of the site plan and other information submitted, evaluate the impact of the conditional use on, and the compatibility of the use with, surrounding properties and neighborhoods to ensure the appropriateness of the use at a particular location. The Commission and the City Council shall specifically consider the following factors: 
a.  The proposed use is consistent with the general purpose and intent of the applicable zoning district regulations, the regulations of other districts which are reasonably anticipated to be significantly affected by the use, and any other plan, program, map or ordinance adopted, or under consideration pursuant to official notice, by the City of Kenner; 
b.  The proposed use meets all standards specifically applicable to the use. 
c.  The proposed use is compatible with and preserves the character and integrity of adjacent development and neighborhoods and, as required by the particular circumstances, includes improvements or modifications either on-site or within the public rights-of-way to mitigate development-related adverse impacts, including but not limited to: 
i.  Adequate ingress and egress to property and proposed structures thereon with particular reference to vehicular and pedestrian safety and convenience, and access in case of emergency; 
ii.  Off-street parking and loading areas; 
iii.  Refuse and service areas; 
iv.  Utilities with reference to location, availability, and compatibility; 
v.  Landscaping, screening and buffering, features to minimize visual impacts, and/or setbacks from adjacent uses; 
vi.  Control of signs, if any, and proposed exterior lighting with reference to glare, traffic safety, economic effect, and compatibility and harmony with properties in the district; 
vii.  Required yards and open space; 
viii.  Height and bulk of structures; 
ix.  Hours of operation; and 
x.  Roadway adjustments, traffic control devices or mechanisms, and access restrictions to control traffic flow or divert traffic as may be needed to reduce or eliminate development-generated traffic on neighborhood streets. 
d.  The proposed use is not materially detrimental to the public health, safety, convenience, and welfare, and will not result in material damage or prejudice to other property in the vicinity. 
e.  The proposed use at the proposed location shall not be designed, constructed or operated in a manner as to so dominate the immediate vicinity to the extent that the use would be incompatible with or injurious to the use and enjoyment of neighboring property, or otherwise would significantly diminish or impair property values within the vicinity. In determining whether the proposed conditional use would so dominate the immediate vicinity, consideration shall be given to: 
i.  The location, nature and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences on the site; 
ii.  The nature and extent of screening to be employed on the site. 
f.  The benefits to be derived by the City of Kenner from the proposed use at the proposed location outweigh the loss of, or damage to, any homes, businesses, natural resources, public revenue, historic or cultural landmarks or sites, wildlife habitats, parks, or natural, scenic, or historic features of significance, and outweigh the personal and economic costs of any disruption to the lives, businesses and property of individuals affected by the proposed use. 
g.  Adequate nuisance prevention or control measures have been or shall be implemented and maintained to prevent or appropriately mitigate offensive odors, fumes, smoke, air pollution, dust, noise, vibration, visual blight, liquid or solid wastes, biohazards, heat, glare, storm and/or floodwater runoff and other adverse effects associated with the proposed use at the proposed location. 
h.  The proposed use at the proposed location is consistent with prior plans, Pattern for Progress comprehensive plan, master plans and projections of the applicant, if any, upon which the City of Kenner has based planning or zoning decisions or, where inconsistencies exist, any such inconsistency is outweighed by the benefits to the community associated with the proposed use. 
i.  The proposed conditional use will comply with any additional standards imposed on it by an ordinance authorizing such use. 
j.  The proposed conditional use will minimize disruption to existing neighborhoods, will minimize the adverse impact on existing community services, and will complement in the least intrusive manner possible the needs of the City, region and the state, and 
k.  All reasonable alternative sites and all reasonable means for meeting the projected need or demand for the proposed building, structure, development, use or activity which may be less costly or less intrusive to existing communities have been considered and rejected by the applicant for clearly disclosed reasons, and that all reasonable means for minimizing adverse impacts of the proposed use have been considered and incorporated into the proposal. 
(7)  Conditions and Approval : In approving the application, the Planning and Zoning Commission may recommend and the City Council shall impose such conditions as are reasonably necessary to assure compliance with these standards and the purpose and intent of this section, in accordance with the procedures in these regulations. 
a.  Any conditions imposed shall be set forth in the ordinance approving the conditional use and shall be incorporated into or noted on the site plan for final approval. 
b.  The Director of Planning or his/her agent shall verify that the plan incorporates all conditions set forth in the ordinance authorizing the conditional use, and shall sign the plan to indicate final approval. 
c.  The applicant shall have the signed site plan recorded in the public property records of Jefferson Parish no later than thirty (30) days following the date of final approval, or the ordinance approving the conditional use shall be deemed null. 
d.  The department of planning and zoning shall maintain a record of such approved conditional uses and the site plans and conditions attached thereto, and forward copies thereof to the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
e.  Record and notification of conditions. The Director of Planning shall include a copy of the conditions attached to approval of the special ordinance with the record of the decision filed with the clerk of the City Council. The applicant shall be notified of any conditions imposed on the application in the manner provided in this ordinance. 
(8)  Prohibition on waivers and variances : The foregoing standards of development shall not be subject to waivers or variances that otherwise could be granted under the provision in this ordinance for the Board of Zoning Adjustments, nor may conditions imposed by the City Council subsequently be waived or varied by the board. In conformity with the authority of the City Council to authorize conditional uses, the Council may waive or modify specific standards otherwise made applicable to the use by this ordinance, to secure the general objectives of this section, provided, however, that the Council shall not waive or modify any approval factor set forth in subsection (1) of this section. 
(9)  Expiration and Extension : 
a.  Application for Permit: Upon approval by the City Council, a building permit to initiate new construction shall be applied for within six (6) months from the date of the adoption of the conditional use ordinance; otherwise, the approved conditional ordinance shall be null and void. 
b.  Termination for Failure to Commence Development: If substantial construction has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of permit, the permit shall be terminated for a failure to commence development. The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall determine if the amount of construction is determined to be substantial. 
c.  Extension Procedures: Unless otherwise prohibited by law or this ordinance, the Director of planning may extend the time for expiration of an approved conditional use permit, for a period not to exceed six (6) months upon a showing of good cause by the applicant, if request for extension is made in writing within the original period of validity. An extension for a period in excess of six (6) months shall be granted only by the City Council, but not for a period to exceed six (6) additional months. A determination by the City Council on whether to extend such approval shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in this ordinance for the original approval for which extension is requested. 
(10)  Amendment to an Approved Conditional Use Permit : 
a.  No proposed or existing building, premise, or land use authorized as a conditional use may be established, enlarged, modified, structurally altered, or otherwise changed from that approved in the conditional use permit, unless such amendment is authorized in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this section, and the conditional use permit and approved site plan are amended accordingly. 
b.  Administrative Approval to Site Plan Changes - In order to provide a more practical, reasonable and expeditious method of correction errors, omissions, oversights, or for making changes, alterations or adjustments to approved applications, the Director of Planning and Zoning or the City Council, as the case may be, may make the following types of amendments to site plans for approved conditional use permits upon written request by the property owner holding the approved application: 
i.  The Director of Planning and Zoning may approve minor revisions to the terms of approval of any application, when the Planning and Zoning Commission or the City Council is not considering such matter for amendment or revision. Minor revisions that may be authorized are those that appear necessary in light of technical considerations. 
ii.  Additionally, the Director of Planning, upon recommendation of the Department of Public Works or Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement and Inspections, where applicable, may approve the following amendments or revisions: 
(1)  Increases, decreases, or rearrangements of off-street parking spaces in any section or sections or in the overall plan provided the off-street parking requirements of the district in which the development is located are complied with. 
(2)  Increases or decreases of the ground floor area or total floor area of structures in any section or sections provided that the total requirements of the district in which the development is located are met. 
(3)  Increases or decreases of the height of any individual structure provided that any proposed increase does not exceed by more than twenty (20) percent the approved height of said individual structure, and provided further that no increase in height greater than eight (8) feet shall be allowed by the Director of Planning. 
(4)  A rearrangement of streets or driveways, where such is found to be consistent with previous approvals, improves traffic circulation or otherwise improves the plan. 
c.  City Council Approval to Site Plan Changes: The City Council may approve the following major amendments or revisions: 
iii.  Increases or decreases in the number of structures or dwelling units permitted in any sections provided the total number of such units of the approved overall plan is not increased. 
iv.  Increases or decreases of the height of any individual structure beyond an eight (8) foot increase provided that any proposed increase does not exceed by more than twenty (20) percent the approved height of any individual structure. 
v.  Shifts or adjustments in the location of buildings or structures when such would improve the overall plan. 
vi.  Such additional changes, adjustments, or alterations to elements of the site plan, such as walks, pools, fencing, signs, lighting, landscaping, or other elements, as may be necessary or desirable to improve the quality of the approved plan or to provide for consistency with such other changes as may be authorized under this section. 
d.  The applicant shall attach to his written application a map or maps, which will delineate any corrections or changes, requested, and any other pertinent data proper for the understanding of the matter, in sufficient numbers for all departments or agencies reviewing the request. 
e.  After receiving the recommendations of all required agencies and departments, the Director of Planning and Zoning, upon determination that such amendment or revision is not inconsistent with the original approval and will not adversely affect the remaining parts of the proposal and adjoining and abutting property, may approve or recommend for approval, to the City Council for such change. 
f.  If approved by the Director of Planning and Zoning, or the City Council, as the case may be, a revised plan indicating the corrections, changes, alterations or adjustments shall be filed with the Director, the clerk of the City Council, and the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement, and recorded in the public property records of the clerk of court of Jefferson Parish no later than thirty (30) days following date of approval of the plans as evidenced by their stamped approval by the Director, or said approval shall be deemed null. 
g.  If the holder of an approved application wishes to make a revision to the approval other than that authorized in Section 6.03(g)(10), approval is required of the original final decision-maker in accordance with the procedures established for the original approval of the application. 
(11)  Appeals : Within fifteen (15) calendar days of a final decision of the City Council, any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Council may appeal that decision to the 24th Judicial District Court for the Parish of Jefferson. An appeal of a final decision of the City Council shall not affect a stay of such decision, unless specifically authorized by the City Council or ordered by the court. 
(h)  Amendments to Zoning Ordinance : 
(1)  Purpose : The purpose of this section is to establish the rules and procedures for amending the City of Kenner's Unified Development Code (UDC) and Official Zoning Map. 
(2)  Types of Amendments or Changes : The City of Kenner's Unified Development Code (UDC) consists of two parts: the written document containing zoning regulations and procedures as well as other parts of the text of the UDC and the "Official Zoning Map of the City of Kenner." 
a.  Text Change or Amendment - is a revision to a zoning regulation or a specific Article or section of the text of the UDC. 
b.  Map Change or Amendment - also known as a rezoning, is an amendment that changes the particular zoning district designation of a specific piece of property or properties. 
(3)  Initiation of Change : The City Council may from time to time, amend, supplement, or change the regulations, restrictions, or boundaries herein or subsequently established. Such amendments may be initiated: 
a.  By action of the City Council by introduction of an ordinance or by adoption of a motion; or, 
b.  On petition by property owners, by filing with the City Council through the City of Kenner Planning and Zoning Commission, a petition in writing which conforms with the standards and requirements of the City Planning and Zoning Commission, provided that such petition is duly signed and acknowledged by the owners or authorized agents of not less than seventy-five (75) per cent of the area of the land in which a change of classification is requested. 
c.  Where property is jointly owned, all co-owners of the property, or their authorized agents, must sign the application for the property to be included in the seventy-five percent (75%) area requirements. 
(4)  Procedure : No text or map amendment shall become effective until: 
a.  Neighborhood Early Notice Conference has been held by the applicant, as per Section 6.01 (c) of this ordinance. 
b.  Submittal of Application - All applications must be filed with the Director of the City of Kenner Planning Department in accordance with the requirements of this Ordinance and reviewed for completeness by the Director. 
c.  Rezoning or text amendments initiated by the City Council require a complete application, but are exempt from fees. 
d.  There shall have been a public hearing held in relation thereto before the City of Kenner Planning and Zoning Commission, at which time interested citizens and parties shall have had an opportunity to be fully heard. Notice of the proposed change shall comply with public notice requirements in Section 6.02. 
e.  After the public hearing as provided above, the City of Kenner Planning and Zoning Commission shall have submitted the zoning report and recommendation upon the proposal or proposed change to the City Council. The report shall be filed with the City Council within thirty (30) days after the date of the public hearing. 
f.  A final yea and nay vote shall be taken on the proposal by the City Council within ninety (90) days from the receipt by the City Council of the report and recommendation of the City of Kenner Planning and Zoning Commission. If the Council fails to vote within this ninety (90) day period, the time for Council action on the proposal will have prescribed and the existing zoning is unchanged. The two (2) year limitation period as provided for in Section 9 of this Article shall be in effect from the prescription date. 
g.  The provisions of this section do not apply in cases where there is a proposal to enact an entire new ordinance to change the text as a whole, or to change all the official zoning maps of the City, or both, in which event the procedure set out in Revised Statutes, 33.4721 through 33.4730 (Act 240 of legislature of Louisiana, 1926) shall be followed. 
(5)  Approval Standards : The Planning and Zoning Commission recommendation and the City Council decision on any zoning text or map amendment are matters of legislative discretion. In making their recommendation and decision, the Planning and Zoning Commission and the City Council must consider the following standards: 
a.  The proposed amendment is compatible with the City of Kenner's Comprehensive Plan and Future Land Use Map. 
b.  The proposed amendment is compatible with existing land use and zoning of nearby property. 
c.  The proposed amendment promotes the public health, safety, and welfare of the City. 
d.  The proposed map amendment is a more suitable zoning classification for the property than the current classification, and allows for feasibility of developing the property in question for one (1) or more of the uses permitted under the existing zoning classification. 
e.  The proposed amendment is compatible with the intent and general regulations of this Ordinance. 
f.  The proposed amendment corrects an error or omission, adds clarification to existing requirements, or reflects a change in policy. 
g.  The proposed amendment benefits the citizens of the City as a whole. 
h.  The proposed amendment provides a more workable way to achieve the intent and purposes of this ordinance and the Master Plan. 
i.  The proposed amendment does not create a significant number of nonconformities. 
j.  The proposed map amendment is compatible with the trend of development, if any, in the general area of the property in question. 
k.  Does not constitute a spot zone, as defined herein. 
(6)  Appeals : An aggrieved party may appeal a City Council decision on a zoning map or text amendment to Jefferson Parish Civil District Court within thirty (30) days following City Council action. 
(7)  Fees : Before any action shall be taken as provided in this section, the party or parties proposing or recommending a change in the zoning ordinances, either text change or map change, shall deposit with the City clerk the following: 
a.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) for each text change not involving acreage. 
b.  Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for all land or portion thereof for which a change of classification or permitted use is proposed or recommended up to one acre and an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) per acre for all over one acre. 
c.  These fees are to cover the appropriate cost of this procedure, and under no condition shall such sum or any part thereof be refunded for failure of such changes to be adopted by the City Council. The maximum fee required for acreage or a portion thereof shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), for which a change of classification or permitted use is proposed or recommended, to cover the approximate cost of this procedure. 
(8)  Validity : If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this ordinance shall for any reason be held unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance, which shall continue in full force and effect. 
(9)  Two-year limitation : Whenever a petition is filed requesting or proposing a change in or amendment to the Unified Development Code, and said petition has been finally acted on by the City Council in accordance with the above-outlined procedure, then the City Council shall not consider any further petition requesting or proposing the same change or amendment for the same property within a period of two (2) calendar years from the date of the City Council's final action on said petition. 
Section 6.04 - Zoning districts - General 
(a)  Purpose : The zoning regulations and districts as herein set forth have been made in accordance with the City of Kenner comprehensive plan for the purpose of promoting the public health, safety, morals, conveniences, order, prosperity, resilience, and general welfare of the community. 
(b)  Establishment of Districts : In order to classify, regulate and restrict the location and use of land, buildings, and structures for trade, industry, residence, and other purposes; to regulate and restrict the height and size of buildings hereafter erected or structurally altered, the area of yards, courts and other open spaces and the density of population, all in the incorporated area of the City of Kenner, Parish of Jefferson, Louisiana. 
(c)  Boundaries of Districts : The boundaries of the various districts are identified on the "Official Zoning Map, City of Kenner, Parish of Jefferson, Louisiana." The official zoning map of Kenner shall be kept on file and maintained in the Department of Planning and Zoning for the City of Kenner. The official zoning map of Kenner is hereby made a part of this ordinance and shall form a part of this ordinance as if all the matter and information set forth thereon were fully described and copied herein. 
(d)  Interpretation of District Boundaries : The following rules shall be used whenever any uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district: 
(1)  Where boundaries are indicated as following street and alley lines, lot and other boundary lines, watercourses and other natural topographic features, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
(2)  In unsubdivided property or tracts, where a district boundary divides a lot, the location of such boundaries, unless indicated by dimensions, shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on such maps. 
(3)  In case any further uncertainty exists, the Director of planning shall determine the location of boundaries. 
(4)  Where boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerline of streets or to the centerline of alleys or the centerline of highways, such boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated by dimension or scale shown on said maps. 
(e)  Regulations of Areas Under Water : All areas within corporate limits of the City of Kenner, which are under water and not shown as included within any district, shall be subject to all the regulations of the district adjacent to the area under water. If the area under water adjoins two (2) or more districts, the boundaries of each district shall be construed to extend into the area under water in a straight line until they intersect. 
(f)  Classification of Annexed Territory : All territory, which may be, hereafter, annexed to the City of Kenner, Louisiana, shall be automatically classified as temporary R-1 Single-Family Residential District until otherwise changed by ordinance after public hearings. 
Section 6.05 - Single-Family Residential Districts (R-1, R-1A, RR-1) 
(a)  R-1 - Single-Family Residential District : 
Purpose : This district shall provide for low-density residential development with relatively spacious open areas and to permit accessory uses and such nonresidential uses that are compatible with residential surroundings. The district is located to protect existing developments unique of this character. 
(b)  R-1A - Single-Family Residential District : 
Purpose : This district shall provide for single-family development on medium-size lots, together with such accessory uses and nonresidential uses that are compatible with residential surroundings. The district is located to include developments of this unique character. 
(c)  RR-1 - Single-Family Residential District : 
Purpose : This district shall provide for single-family residential development on smaller lots, together with such accessory uses and nonresidential uses that are compatible with residential surroundings. The district is located to include existing developments of this character and contains vacant land considered appropriate for such development in the future. 
(d)  Permitted Uses : A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Dwelling, Single-family. 
(2)  Churches, rectories, parish homes, temples and synagogues, or dwellings used for worship by organized religious sects as defined by the Internal Revenue Service, provided that such churches, temples, synagogues, etc., shall be located on a lot of at least twenty thousand (20,000) square feet in area; except in RR-1 zoned areas having only legally substandard lot sizes less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area within one hundred fifty (150) feet of a church, temple, synagogue, etc., of such lot, the lot size for such church, temple, synagogue, etc., shall be at least fourteen thousand (14,000) square feet in area. 
(3)  Public Facilities. 
(4)  Parks and Playgrounds. 
(5)  Public or Private Schools having a curriculum the same as that ordinarily given in public schools, including kindergarten, provided elementary schools including kindergartens are located on a site having a minimum area of two (2) acres, and provided junior or senior high schools are located on a site having a minimum area of five (5) acres, and provided further that the following requirements shall be observed: Appropriate setbacks shall be provided for all structures (exclusive of play equipment) of not less than fifty (50) feet where the side yard line or rear yard line abuts a residential district and not less than twenty-five (25) feet from all lot lines abutting streets, canals, or open public spaces. 
(6)  Private gardens and nurseries for the propagation and cultivation of plants only when said plants, flowers, and produce are not offered for sale. 
(7)  Home Occupation (subject to the supplementary regulations in Article XII). 
(8)  Monopoles/Antennas (subject to the supplementary regulations in Article XII). 
(9)  Accessory Use - Accessory buildings and uses, which are customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot and not involved in the conduct of a business. 
(e)  Conditional Uses : The following uses may be permitted but shall comply with the provisions and procedures of Section 6.03(g), Conditional Use Permits, of this ordinance: 
(1)  Day Care Center, adult or Day Care Center, child. Providing that : 
a.  Center is located on a site having a minimum area of one acre. 
b.  There shall be a building or structure within which a minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet per child (based on total enrollment) of useable, available play or instruction space shall be provided. 
c.  There shall be a minimum of seventy-five (75) square feet per child, (based on total enrollment) of useable available outdoor play or instruction area on the lot or property, providing that no portion of such play or instruction area shall be located within the required front yard of the lot or property. 
d.  Outdoor play or instruction area shall be enclosed by a fence no less than four (4) feet, nor more than six (6) feet in height. 
e.  Additionally, a wood, metal, or masonry fence shall be provided along any rear or side property line adjoining any residentially zoned property not used for a similar purpose. Any such fence shall be designed to be at least five (5) feet in height and eighty (80) percent or more opaque when viewed horizontally. 
f.  There shall be provided a minimum of three (3) off-street parking spaces, or one off-street parking space for each three hundred fifty (350) square feet of indoor play or instruction space, whichever is the greater. 
g.  Hard-surfaced paved area shall be provided off-street for buses and/or motor vehicles bringing and picking up children. This may be in the required front yard. That the regulatory department be empowered to enforce all provisions of state law R.S. 46:1401 as amended, which is made a part of this ordinance prior to issuance of a permit and thereafter. The Planning and Zoning Commission will hold public hearings per section 6.03 (f)(7)(d) and make recommendation to the City Council, and all property owners within one hundred (100) feet fronting on both sides of the street of the premises affected shall be notified by certified mail calling the attention of the public hearing for this purpose. 
(2)  Club, Lodges, Fraternities, and Community Centers : 
a.  Clubs when approved by an ordinance by the City Council, when they are satisfied that granting approval will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare and further that the Planning and Zoning Commission hold a public hearing to make a recommendation to the City Council and that all property owners within one hundred (100) feet fronting on both sides of the street of such locations shall be notified by certified mail calling the attention of the public hearing for this purpose. 
(3)  Private recreational uses : 
a.  Private recreational uses such as tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses, operated exclusively for private use of the occupants of the premises and not for commercial purposes. 
b.  Private recreational uses such as tennis courts, swimming pools, golf courses, and other similar activities operated exclusively for the use of private membership clubs or organizations and their guests and not for commercial purposes, when approved by an ordinance by the City Council, when they are satisfied that granting approval will not seriously affect any adjoining property or the general welfare and further that the Planning and Zoning Commission hold public hearings and make recommendations to the City Council and that all property owners within one hundred (100) feet fronting on both sides of the street of such locations shall be notified by certified mail calling the attention of the public hearing for this purpose. 
c.  No such use, structure or accessory use to be located closer than fifty (50) feet to any adjoining property line unless such property line fronts a public street or drainage canal with rights-of-way not less than twenty-five (25) feet, in which instance the required setback need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
d.  That all such facilities must be located on a site having a minimum area of one acre. 
(4)  Camping and recreational equipment may be parked or stored on private property subject to the following conditions : 
a.  At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreational equipment be occupied or used for living, sleeping, housekeeping purposes, storage or any other use other than that which the manufacturer primarily intended the usage for. 
b.  If said camping and recreational equipment is parked or stored longer than three (3) days, the owner thereof shall register the same with the office of regulatory inspections, giving a full description of the camping and recreational equipment, the address where it is being parked or stored, and the period during which it is contemplated to be parked or stored. 
c.  If the camping and recreational equipment is parked or stored outside of a garage, it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the front building line of the lot. It shall not be parked in the required front yard area. 
d.  Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-paragraph c, camping and recreational equipment may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading or unloading purposes. 
(f)  Site Development Regulations : 
(1)  Maximum Height : 
a.  No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
b.  Front Yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet. On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
c.  Side Yard: 
i.  There shall be two (2) side yards having a combined width of not less than twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot; provided that in no case shall either side yard be less than five (5) feet and provided further that the combined width of two (2) side yards need not exceed twelve (12) feet. 
ii.  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
d.  Rear Yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, provided, however, that the depth of such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
(2)  Lot Area : 
a.  R-1: Every lot shall contain an area of not less than six thousand six hundred (6,600) square feet with a minimum width of sixty (60) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise provided herein. 
b.  R-1A: Every lot shall contain an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise provided herein. 
c.  RR-1: Every lot shall contain an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise provided herein. 
(3)  Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements : The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as provided in Article VII, Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this ordinance. 
Section 6.06 - Residential Planned Unit Development District (R1-P) 
(a)  Purpose : This district shall provide controlled areas where development may occur different from existing development due to various physical conditions. 
(b)  Permitted uses : A building or land shall be used for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use which is permitted "as-of-right" in the R-1, Single-family, zoning district. 
(2)  Development, which relates to the physical condition of the area or provides an acceptable deviation from surrounding existing development, after a submittal of a planned unit development (PUD) per Section 6.03 (c) of this ordinance, has been approved by the City Council. There shall be no minimum requirement concerning the lot area of the property in question, as per Section 6.03 (d) of this ordinance, when submitting a planned unit development in this zoning district. 
(3)  Accessory signs as allowed in R-1, R-1A, and RR-1 Districts subject to the regulations in Article XI of this ordinance, or signs approved as part of a planned unit development. 
(c)  Height regulation : No building or structure shall exceed the maximum height allowed by the R-1, Single-family, zoning district, unless action by the City Council approves said height as part of a planned unit development. 
(d)  Area regulations : Any use allowed shall be governed by all area requirements of the district in which said proposal would normally be governed, or as approved by the City Council as part of a planned unit development. 
(e)  Off-street parking and loading requirements : The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as provided in Article VII, or as approved by the City Council as part of a planned unit development. 
Section 6.07 - Two-Family Residential District (R-2) 
(a)  Purpose : This district shall provide for two-family dwellings and to permit accessory uses and such nonresidential uses that are compatible with residential surroundings. 
(b)  Permitted Uses : A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-1,R-1A, and RR-1 zoning districts. 
(2)  Two-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses (subject to supplemental regulation in Article XII, Section 12.07). 
(4)  Private recreational uses operated exclusively for private members and their guests and not for commercial purposes. 
(5)  Places of worship - minimum 12,000 SF lot. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses, which are customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot and not involved in the conduct of a business. 
(c)  Conditional Uses : The following uses may be permitted but shall comply with the provisions and procedures of Section 6.03, Procedures, and Approvals, (g) Conditional Use, of this ordinance. 
(1)  Day Care Center, adult. 
(2)  Day Care Center, child: Childcare centers as listed herein at 6.05 (e)(1), with all provisions except minimum area of site shall be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
(3)  Clubs, Lodges, Fraternities, and Community Centers. 
(4)  Assisted Living Facility. 
(d)  Site Development Regulations : 
(1)  Height Regulations : No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  Front Yard : 
a.  There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(3)  Side Yard : 
a.  There shall be two (2) side yards, one (1) on each side of the building, having a combined width of not less than twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot, provided that in no case shall either side yard be less than five (5) feet and provided further that the combined width on the two (2) side yards need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
(4)  Rear Yard : There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of the depth of the lot, provided, however, that the depth of such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
(5)  Lot Area : 
a.  Every lot area shall contain an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise provided herein. 
b.  The minimum required lot area per family shall be three thousand (3,000) square feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
(6)  Off-Street Parking : 
a.  The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as provided in Article VII - Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this ordinance. 
b.  All parking areas and/or drives, which abut a single-family residential district or a single-family dwelling, shall provide and maintain a six (6) foot high fence of solid wood, brick, or a combination thereof. 
Section 6.08 - Three-and Four-Family Residential District (R-3) 
(a)  Purpose : This district is to provide areas of medium density residential uses normally located in areas near public and commercial services and between commercial and low-density residential areas. Accessory uses and such nonresidential uses that are compatible with residential surroundings shall also be permitted. 
(b)  Permitted uses : A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Any use permitted in an R-2 District. 
(2)  Three- and four-family dwellings. 
(3)  Townhouses (subject to supplemental regulation in Article XII of this ordinance). 
(4)  Professional offices for lawyers, engineers, architects, accountants, real estate agents and insurance agents. 
(5)  Monopoles, aerials, antennas, masts, and communication equipment shelters subject to the requirements and restrictions found in Article 12.15 Telecommunications Towers. 
(6)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot and not involved in the conduct of a business. 
(7)  Accessory signs as permitted in R-1, R-1A and RR-1 Districts and nonilluminated accessory signs at professional offices not to exceed eight (8) square feet total. Accessory signs shall be limited in height to eight (8) feet above ground. 
(c)  Conditional Uses : The following uses may be permitted but shall comply with the provisions and procedures of Section 6.03, Procedures, and Approvals, (g) Conditional Use Permits, of this ordinance. 
(1)  Hospice 
(2)  Assisted living 
(3)  Clubs, Lodges, Fraternities, and Community Centers 
(d)  Site Development Regulations : 
(1)  Height regulations : No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height unless otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  Area regulations : 
a.  Front yard: 
i.  There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
ii.  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
b.  Side yard: 
i.  There shall be two (2) side yards, one (1) on each side of the building, having a combined width of not less than twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot, provided that in no case shall either side yard be less than five (5) feet and provided further that the combined width of the two (2) side yards need not exceed fifteen (15) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
ii.  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
c.  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) percent of the lot, provided however, that the depth of such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
(3)  Lot area : 
a.  Every lot shall contain an area not less than that specified below with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
b.  Lots occupied by three-family dwellings shall contain an area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet or not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per unit unless otherwise provided herein. 
c.  Lots occupied by four-family dwellings shall contain an area of not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet or not less than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) square feet per unit unless otherwise provided herein. 
(4)  Off-street parking requirements : 
a.  The off-street parking requirements shall be as provided in Article VII. 
b.  All parking areas and/or drives, which abut a single-family residential district or a single-family residence, shall be separated with a six-foot-high fence of solid wood or masonry from the said single-family district or single-family residences, unless otherwise provided herein. Such fence shall be maintained. 
Section 6.09 - Multi-Family Residential District (R-Mf) 
(a)  Purpose : To provide areas of medium density residential uses normally located in areas near public and commercial services and between commercial and low-density residential areas. Accessory uses and such nonresidential uses that are compatible with residential surroundings shall also be permitted. 
(b)  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Any use permitted in the R-2 Zoning District 
(2)  Three- and four-family dwellings 
(3)  Townhouses (subject to supplemental regulation in Article XII of this ordinance). 
(4)  Accessory buildings and uses, which are customarily incidental to any of the above uses when located on the same lot and not involved in the conduct of a business. 
(c)  Conditional Uses : The following uses may be permitted but shall comply with the provisions and procedures of Section 6.03, Procedures, and Approvals, (g) Conditional Use Permits, of this ordinance. 
(1)  Day Care Center, adult 
(2)  Day Care Center, child 
(3)  Club, Lodges, Fraternities Community Center 
(4)  Hospice 
(5)  Assisted living 
(d)  Site Development Regulations : 
(1)  Height Regulations : No building shall exceed sixty (60) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
(2)  Front Yard : 
a.  There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet. 
b.  On through lots the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(3)  Side yard : 
a.  For buildings not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, there shall be two (2) side yards, one (1) on each side of the building, having a combined width of not less than twenty (20) percent of the width of the lot, provided that in no case shall either side yard be less than five (5) feet and provided further that the combined width on the two (2) side yards need not exceed fifteen (15) feet. 
b.  For buildings exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, the width of each required side yard shall be increased by three (3) inches for each foot of building height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet. 
c.  On corner lots where the building is not in excess of thirty-five (35) feet in height, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. Where the building exceeds thirty-five (35) feet in height, the street side yard shall be increased by three (3) inches for every one foot of vertical height over thirty-five (35) feet. 
(4)  Lot Area : 
a.  Lots occupied by single-family dwellings shall contain an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
b.  Lots occupied by two-family dwellings shall contain an area of not less than three thousand (3,000) square feet per family. 
c.  Lots occupied by three-family dwellings shall contain an area of not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per family. 
d.  Lots occupied by four-family dwellings shall contain an area of not less than one thousand seven hundred fifty (1,750) square feet per family. 
e.  Lots occupied by five-family dwellings shall contain an area of not less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet per family. 
f.  Lots occupied by multiple-family dwellings shall contain an area as follows: 
i.  6 through 12 apartments - 1,500 square feet per family 
ii.  Thirteen (13) through twenty (20) apartments - 1,400 square feet per family 
iii.  Twenty (20) or more apartments - 1,300 square feet per family 
g.  Minimum lot dimensions of fifty (50) feet width and one hundred (100) feet depth shall apply to items (a.) through (f.) above. 
(5)  Off-Street Parking : 
a.  The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as provided in Article VII Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this ordinance. 
b.  All parking areas and/or drives, which abut a single-family residential district or a single-family residence, shall be separated with a six-foot-high fence of solid wood or masonry from the said single-family district or single-family residences, unless otherwise provided herein. Such fence shall be maintained. 
Section 6.10 - Commercial Districts (C-1, C-2) 
(a)  Neighborhood Commercial District (C-1) : 
(1)  Purpose : The district shall provide retail shopping and personal service uses, either as a unit or in individual parcels, to serve the needs of a relatively small area, primarily nearby low-density residential neighborhoods. The district regulations are such as to encourage compatibility with the residential surroundings. It is not the intent of this district to provide for any residential uses. 
(2)  Permitted Uses : 
a.  Retail Goods Establishment 
b.  Financial Institutions 
c.  Personal Services Establishment 
d.  Restaurant (except drive-thru and drive -in restaurants) 
e.  Day Care Center, Child - Childcare centers as listed in section 6.05 (e)(1) with all provisions except minimum area of site shall be twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
f.  Clinics under five thousand (5,000) square feet 
g.  Hospice 
h.  Laundromats 
i.  Dry cleaning establishments 
j.  Monopoles, aerials, antennas, masts, and communication equipment shelters subject to the requirements and restrictions found in Article XII, Supplementary Use and Performance Standards. 
k.  Semiprivate athletic clubs 
l.  Veterinary clinic, small animal (no kennel) 
m.  Business/Professional Offices 
n.  Private and semiprivate clubs 
o.  Trade Services Establishment 
p.  Social Services 
q.  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to the above uses. Any building used primarily for any of the above permitted uses may use no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the floor area for storage purposes incidental to each operation. 
(3)  Conditional Uses in C-1 : 
a.  Service Station/Convenience Store 
b.  Places of Worship: 
i.  Churches, temples, synagogues and other places of worship by organized religious sects which have a tax-exempt status granted by the United States Internal Revenue Service, provided such uses are located no less than three hundred (300) feet from any existing barroom, nightclub, liquor store, lounge, and exotic dance land use, as measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the place of worship to the nearest point of the property line of the adult licensed premises, and in accordance with Article VI, Section 6.03 (g) Conditional Use Permits. 
ii.  Residential uses, private school, recreational development, and licensed adult care that are not normally associated with worship are prohibited. Where a place of worship and/or the adult licensed establishment are part of a multi-use development, the minimum distance requirement shall be a straight-line measurement from the nearest point of the main entrance of the place of worship to the nearest point of the main entrance of the adult licensed establishment. 
iii.  The minimum lot area when combined or incorporated in a building of mixed use shall be consistent with the minimum lot area of the C-1, Neighborhood Commercial District. The minimum lot area for freestanding places of worship shall be no less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
[c.]  Existing nonconforming single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, three-family dwelling, and four-family dwelling may be enlarged, expanded, or altered, provided the following criteria are met: 
i.  The property owner must verify written documentation that the residential structure existed prior to December 4, 1978, or a change in zoning classification occurred after the structure was constructed. 
ii.  The applicant shall submit a notarized affidavit indicating the property has not been vacant for more than six (6) months. 
iii.  The applicant shall submit records from utility companies indicating usage for the past twelve (12) months for all meters on the property. 
[d.]  Theater 
[e.]  Assisted Living 
[(4)]  Site Development Regulations : 
a.  Height: No building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height unless otherwise provided herein. 
b.  Area Regulations: 
i.  Front yard: 
1)  There shall be a front yard having a depth of twenty (20) feet providing, however, that where structures located within fifty (50) feet on both sides of the propose use have observed a front yard line of less than twenty (20) feet, then the proposed use may be located in line with the most rearward of the two (2) adjacent structures, but not less than ten (10) feet. 
2)  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
ii.  Side yard: 
1)  No side yard is required except on the side of a lot abutting a residential district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than five (5) feet. Where a side yard is provided but not required, such side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
2)  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
iii.  Rear yard: A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts a residential district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. Where a rear yard is provided but not required, such rear yard shall not be less than three (3) feet in depth. 
c.  Lot area: Every lot shall contain an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
d.  Off-Street Parking: The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as provided in Article VII, Off-street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this ordinance. 
(b)  General Commercial (C-2) : 
(1)  Purpose : This district shall provide for the retailing of goods and the furnishing of major services on a larger scale than the Neighborhood Commercial District. These districts are generally located along major streets and at the intersections of major streets and should expand in depth rather than strip-like extensions along major streets. It is not the intent of this district to provide for any residential uses. 
(2)  Permitted Uses : 
a.  Any use permitted in a C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District 
b.  Reception Halls 
c.  Pool Halls 
d.  Recreation Facility, Commercial 
e.  Recreation Facility, Public 
f.  Automobile, motorcycle, boat and trailer sales, new, used, and rentals (see Article XII, Section 12.11 Special Regulations for Automobile Sales Establishments: New, Used, and Rental) 
g.  Bars, nightclubs, and similar establishments: Such uses shall be located a minimum of three hundred (300) feet from any residential zoned district, church, school, public library, nursery, day care center or recreational facilities as measured from the closest boundary line of the residential zoned district or the closest property line of the church, school, public library, nursery, day care center, recreational facility or premises licensed as a barroom, nightclub, liquor store, lounge or establishment offering or featuring exotic dancers or dancing 
h.  Check Cashing Establishment 
i.  Funeral homes, mortuaries and undertaking establishments 
j.  Gas Station Minimart 
k.  Gas Station, Limited-Service 
l.  Hospice 
m.  Hotels and motels 
n.  Veterinary clinic, small animal clinic (no open kennels are permitted on the premises). 
o.  Nurseries and garden centers 
p.  Educational Facility, vocational 
q.  Theaters 
r.  Pet Day Care Center 
s.  Drive-Thru Establishments 
t.  Children's Amusement Place 
u.  Tattoo Parlor 
v.  Bingo Halls, provided the following criteria are met to the satisfaction and approval of the head of the regulatory section of the public works department: 
i.  The bingo hall is not located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another bingo hall. 
ii.  The bingo hall will not have the propensity to downgrade the immediate neighborhood. 
iii.  The bingo hall will not produce any demonstrable noise. 
iv.  The bingo hall will not generate significant vehicular or pedestrian traffic. 
v.  The bingo hall is not in close proximity to any residential district more restrictive than RM. 
vi.  The bingo hall is not in contravention of any other regulations governing its location and operation. 
w.  Accessory buildings, such as warehouses and other uses customarily pertinent to the above uses when located on the same lot and provided that Articles or materials are not stored in an open area outside the buildings unless the area is enclosed within a solid fence of such height to adequately screen the area from public view. 
(3)  Conditional Uses : 
a.  Car Washes 
b.  Automobile Repair, Minor 
c.  Assisted Living 
d.  Places Of Worship 
i.  Churches, temples, synagogues and other places of worship by organized religious sects which have a tax-exempt status granted by the United States Internal Revenue Service, provided such uses are located no less than three hundred (300) feet from any existing barroom, nightclub, liquor store, lounge, and exotic dance land use, as measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the place of worship to the nearest point of the 
ii.  Residential uses, private school, recreational development, and licensed adult care that are not normally associated with worship are prohibited. Where a place of worship and/or the adult licensed establishment are part of a multi-use development the minimum distance requirement shall be a straight-line measurement from the nearest point of the main entrance of the place of worship to the nearest point of the main entrance of the adult licensed establishment. The minimum lot area when combined or incorporated in a building of mixed use shall be consistent with the minimum lot area of the C-2, General Commercial District. The minimum lot area for freestanding places of worship shall be no less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. 
e.  Amusement places 
f.  Hospital (PUD process) may be permitted but shall comply with the provisions and procedures of Section 6.03 (f) of this ordinance. 
g.  Pawnshop: 
i.  Upon review and approval in accordance with 6.03 (g) Conditional Use Permits Procedures, subject to, but not limited to the following requirements: 
ii.  No pawnshop use may be located closer than three hundred (300) feet from any parcel used or zoned for residential use. In addition, no pawnshop use may be located closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any other pawnshop use. Distances shall be calculated in a straight air-line measurement from the closest point of the lots upon which the structures are located without regard to intervening obstacles. 
iii.  In cases where an establishment occupies a multi-unit building, the distance separation criteria shall be measured from the main entrance of the use. 
iv.  A maximum of one (1) pawnshop is allowed within any single commercial center. 
v.  At least fifty (50) percent of the public space in the store shall be dedicated to the display of items for sale. 
vi.  No outdoor display, sales, or storage of any merchandise shall be permitted. 
vii.  Sale or display of firearms is prohibited. 
h.  Retail Goods Establishment: Stores or shops, except adult book/video stores, for the conduct of a retail business exceeding twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet of floor area may be approved by the City Council when they are satisfied that such an increase will not impact the intent of the district. Such stores or shops conducting retail business may also conduct wholesale operations, provided that such wholesale operations do not constitute more than twenty-five (25) percent of their annual gross revenues. 
I.  Existing nonconforming single-family dwelling, two-family dwelling, three-family dwelling, and four-family dwelling may be enlarged, expanded, or altered, provided the following criteria are met: 
i.  The property owner must verify written documentation that the residential structure existed prior to December 4, 1978, or a change in zoning classification occurred after the structure was constructed. 
ii.  The applicant shall submit a notarized affidavit indicating the property has not been vacant for more than six (6) months. 
iii.  The applicant shall submit records from utility companies indicating usage for the past twelve (12) months for all meters on the property. 
(4)  Site Development Regulations : 
a.  Height: No building or structure shall exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, except where structures abut a residential district or structure the height limitation shall be fifty (50) feet. 
b.  Area Regulations: 
i.  Front yard : 
1)  There shall be a front yard having a depth of twenty (20) feet providing, however, that where structures located within fifty (50) feet on both sides of the proposed use have observed a front yard line of less than twenty (20) feet, then the proposed use may be located in line with the most rearward of the two (2) adjacent structures, but not less than ten (10) feet. 
2)  On through lots the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
ii.  Side yard : 
1)  No side yard is required except on the side of a lot abutting a residential district or structure, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than fifteen (15) feet; only ten (10) feet is required along any distance of the side yard property line behind which there is no main building and no property line facing the main building. Where a side yard is provided, but not required, such side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
2)  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
iii.  Rear yard : A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts a residential district or structure, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than thirty (30) feet in depth. Where a rear yard is provided but not required, such rear yard shall not be less than three (3) feet in depth. 
c.  Lot area : Every lot shall contain an area of not less than five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet, unless otherwise provided herein. 
d.  Off-Street Parking : The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as provided in Article VII Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations, of this ordinance. 
Section 6.11 - Industrial Districts (S-I, L-I, H-I, A-HI) 
(a)  Special Industrial District (S-I) : 
(1)  Purpose : The district shall provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for certain types of business and manufacturing relatively free from offense, in modern landscaped buildings and to make available more attractive locations for these businesses and industries. This district provides a transition area between associated land uses. Residential uses are excluded, except for overnight facilities for watchman and/or caretaker employed on the premises. 
(2)  Special requirements : The uses permitted in this district shall be subject to the following special requirements: 
a.  All uses except horticultural nurseries shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. Where storage is incidental to the approved occupancy of the building, all products and materials used or stored shall be in a completely enclosed building or enclosed by a solid wood or masonry wall, or screening fence, not less than six (6) feet in height. Storage of all materials and equipment shall not exceed the height of the wall. 
b.  Storage of cars and trucks used in connection with the permitted trade or business is permitted only within the walled or screened area but not including storage of heavy equipment, such as road building or excavating equipment used in the business permitted on the premises. 
c.  No storage of materials or products shall be permitted in the required front yard. 
(3)  Permitted Uses : 
a.  Any use permitted in the C-2, General Commercial Zoning District. These uses are not permitted in the more intense L-I and H-I districts. 
b.  Mini Storage. 
c.  Catering and delicatessen business. 
d.  Semiprivate athletic clubs. 
e.  Automobile, motorcycle, boat and trailer sales, new and used, need not be enclosed and corresponding enclosed service and repair facilities, having no opening other than fixed windows within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district, provided further that no parts or waste material shall be stored outside the building, provided further that damaged automobiles and/or other vehicles awaiting repair must be stored in an area enclosed with a solid wood or masonry fence, minimum six (6) feet high to adequately screen the area from public view, and provided further that all vehicles on a used car lot must be in operating condition at all times. Subject to the requirements and restrictions found in Article XII, Supplementary Uses and Regulations. 
f.  Monopoles, aerials, antennas, transmission towers, masts, and communication equipment shelters subject to the requirements and restrictions found in Article XII, Supplementary Use and Performance Standards. 
g.  Automotive Repair, Major, provided all repair operations, mechanical and body, are conducted in a building, having no openings other than fixed windows within one hundred (100) feet of a residential district and provided further that no parts or waste material shall be stored outside the building, provided further that damaged automobiles and/or other vehicles awaiting repair must be stored in an area enclosed with a solid wood or masonry fence, minimum six (6) feet high, to adequately screen the area from public view, including any type motor or motorcycle repair. Passenger vehicle and small service vehicles only. Truck repair for trucks over one ton is prohibited. 
h.  Garages, parking, shall be enclosed. 
i.  Garages, storage, shall be enclosed. 
j.  Nurseries and flower gardening. 
k.  Bakery, wholesale or retail. 
l.  Arena and auditorium. 
m.  Contractors' office, shops, and storage yard. The office and shops must be in a completely enclosed building and any vehicles, articles or materials, which are stored in an open area outside the building, must be enclosed within a solid wood or masonry fence of such height, six (6) feet minimum, to adequately screen the area from public view. 
n.  Wholesale houses and distributors. 
o.  Warehouses. 
p.  Broadcast Studio. 
q.  Taxi cab company. 
r.  Research and Development. 
s.  Accessory uses and similar uses, accessory buildings and uses customarily pertinent to the above uses when located on the same lot and provided that articles or materials are not stored in an open area outside the building, unless the area is enclosed with a solid fence of such height to adequately screen the area from public view. 
(4)  Conditional Uses : (In accordance with Article VI, Section 6.03 (g)) 
a.  Bars 
b.  Stables, riding academies 
c.  Kennels 
d.  Cemeteries 
e.  Motion Picture/Production Studio 
f.  Indoor Gun Range 
(5)  Site Development Regulations : 
a.  Height Regulations - No building or structure shall exceed seventy-five (75) feet in height. 
b.  Area Regulations: 
i.  Front yard : 
1)  There shall be a front yard having a depth of twenty (20) feet providing, however, that where structures located within fifty (50) feet on both sides of the proposed use have observed a front yard line of less than twenty (20) feet, then the proposed use may be located in line with the most rearward of the two (2) adjacent structures, but not less than ten (10) feet. 
2)  On through lots the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
ii.  Side yard : 
1)  No side yard is required except on the side of a lot abutting a residential district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. Where a side yard is provided, but not required, such side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
2)  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
iii.  Rear yard : A rear yard is not required except where a lot abuts a residential district in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. Where a rear yard is provided but not required, such rear yard shall not be less than three (3) feet in depth. 
c.  Lot area: The lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet. 
(b)  Light Industrial District (L-I) : 
(1)  Purpose : The district shall provide for a wide variety of light manufacturing, fabricating, processing and other uses appropriately located near major streets or railroads for access and to control operations of industrial uses under such conditions to make them compatible with nearby commercial or residential districts. Residential uses are excluded, except for overnight facilities for watchman and/or caretaker employed on the premises. 
(2)  Permitted Uses : 
a.  Any use permitted in a S-I Special Industrial District, with the exception of C-2 uses 
b.  Food processing, minor 
c.  Light Manufacturing 
d.  Building material yard (including lumber) 
e.  Fabrication and Assembly 
f.  Carpet cleaning 
g.  Cleaning and pressing plant 
h.  Monopoles, aerials, antennas, transmission towers, masts, and communication equipment shelters subject to the requirements and restrictions found in Article XII, Supplementary Use and Performance Standards 
i.  Produce warehouse 
j.  Sheet metal shop 
k.  Truck and truck trailer repair 
l.  Truck stop: A truck stop facility shall not be located within five hundred (500) feet of any residence, residential district, other truck stop, public playground, or a building used exclusively as a church, synagogue, public library, school, or any property listed on the National Historic Registry. The measurement of this distance shall be a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the residence, residential district, other truck stop, and property on the National Historic Registry, public playground, church, synagogue, public library, or school. 
m.  Livery stables and riding academies 
n.  Motion picture studio 
o.  Sign fabrication and painting shop 
p.  Outdoor Storage Yards 
q.  Heavy Sales, Rental and Service 
r.  Cemeteries 
s.  Kennel 
t.  Accessory uses and similar uses, accessory buildings and uses customarily pertinent to the above uses when located on the same lot and provided that Articles or materials are not stored in an open area outside the building unless the area is enclosed with a solid fence of such height to adequately screen the area from public view. 
(3)  Conditional Uses : (In accordance with Article VI, Section 6.03 (g)) 
a.  Adult Uses only when located a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet from any residence, church, school, nursery, day care center, or recreational facility or other adult book/video store, or massage parlor, as measured from the closest property lines. 
b.  Ornamental iron fabrication, welding shop (enclosed and not over five thousand (5,000) square feet 
(4)  Site Development Regulations : 
a.  Height regulations: No building or structure shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in height. 
b.  Area regulations 
i.  Front yard: 
1)  There shall be a front yard having a depth of twenty (20) feet, providing however, that where structures located within fifty (50) feet on both sides of the proposed use have observed a front yard line of less than twenty (20) feet, then the proposed use may be located in line with the most rearward of the two (2) adjacent structures. 
2)  On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
ii.  Side yard: 
1)  A five (5) foot side yard is required except on the side of a lot abutting a residential district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. Where a side yard is provided, but not required, such side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
2)  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
iii.  Rear yard: A ten (10) foot rear yard is required except where a lot abuts a residential district in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. Where a rear yard is provided but not required, such rear yard shall not be less than three (3) feet in depth. 
c.  Lot area: The lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet. 
(c)  Heavy Industrial District (H-I) : 
(1)  Purpose : The district shall provide for industrial operations of all types except that certain potentially hazardous or obnoxious industries are prohibited. Residential uses are excluded, except for overnight facilities for watchman and/or caretaker employed on the premises. 
(2)  Permitted Uses : 
a.  Any use permitted in L-I Light Industrial District except for C-2 uses 
b.  Barge terminals 
c.  Manufacturing, heavy 
d.  Blacksmith 
e.  Monopoles, aerials, antennas, transmission towers, masts, and communication equipment shelters subject to the requirements and restrictions found in Article XII, Supplementary Use and Performance Standards 
f.  Railway yards and other appurtenances 
g.  Welding shop 
h.  Wharf 
(3)  Conditional Uses : (In accordance with Article VI, Section 6.03 (g)) 
a.  Adult Uses 
b.  Junk, wrecker and salvage yards-with minimum six (6) foot high wood or masonry fence to screen view of outdoor storage and work areas 
c.  Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses: In accordance with Article VIII of this ordinance. 
(4)  Site Development Regulations : 
a.  Height Regulations: No building or structure shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in height. 
b.  Area Regulations: 
i.  Front Yard: 
1)  There shall be a front yard having a depth of thirty (30) feet. 
2)  On through lots, the front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
ii.  Side Yard: 
1)  A five (5) foot side yard is required except on the side of a lot abutting a residence, commercial building, residential district, or commercial district, in which case there shall be a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet. Where a side yard is provided, but not required, such side yard shall not be less than three (3) feet. 
2)  On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet. 
iii.  Rear Yard: A ten (10) foot rear yard is required except where a lot abuts a residence, commercial building, residential district, or commercial district, in which case there shall be a rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth. Where a rear yard is provided but not required, such rear yard shall not be less than three (3) feet in depth. 
c.  Lot Area: 
i.  The lot area shall be a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum width of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet. 
ii.  Hazardous - Obnoxious Uses - The more restrictive area regulations outlined in Article VIII shall apply to hazardous obnoxious uses as listed therein. 
d.  Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations: The off-street parking and loading requirements shall be as provided in Article VII of this ordinance. 
(d)  Airport Heavy Industrial District (A-HI) : 
(1)  Purpose : This district shall provide for airports, airfields, airstrips, aviation-related facilities and compatible industrial operations of all types. The Council finds and declares that aviation-related uses and other uses compatible with such uses normally require compliance with certain conditions to ensure compatibility with other land uses in the district and in the City as a whole. Therefore, except as otherwise expressly stated, all uses in this district other than legal nonconforming uses are permitted only conditionally, as provided herein. Residential uses are expressly prohibited, except for airport hotel facilities and overnight facilities on the premises for employed public safety personnel, watchmen, and/or caretakers. 
(2)  Permitted and Conditional Uses : A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
a.  Any use permitted in L-I Light Industrial District. 
b.  The following uses can be permitted in the AH-I Aviation Heavy Industrial District if expressly approved by a conditional use ordinance, but are prohibited unless and until specifically authorized pursuant to such an ordinance of the Council of the City of Kenner adopted in accordance with Article VI, Section 6.03 (g) Conditional Use Permits. Any use appropriate to or constituting part of an airport and/or the following facilities and services when developed, maintained, and/or operated as components of an airport: 
i.  Airport terminals 
ii.  Restaurants, catering services, and/or other food service establishments 
iii.  Lounges, bars, and/or other beverage service establishments. 
iv.  Vehicle rental 
v.  Hotels 
vi.  Parking lots and garages 
vii.  Airport fences 
viii.  Interior airport roads 
ix.  Warehouses 
x.  Airport fire prevention, suppression, and training facilities 
xi.  Airport administration and security offices 
xii.  Taxiways, or any extension thereof 
xiii.  Airfields, or any extension thereof 
xiv.  Runways, or any extension thereof 
xv.  Aviation aprons, or any extension thereof 
xvi.  Airstrips, or any extension thereof 
xvii.  Rail terminals 
xviii.  Connections or intersections of the exits and/or entrances of garages and/or parking lots and/or of airport interior roads with City roads, streets, and/or other City public ways 
xix.  Tramways 
xx.  Intermodal transportation facilities 
xxi.  Air cargo facilities 
xxii.  Hangars 
xxiii.  Heliports 
xxiv.  Helistops 
xxv.  Aviation services 
xxvi.  Railroads, railway yards and other related appurtenances 
xxvii.  Fuel gas storage, if the use is developed in accordance with, and complies fully with, Article VIII of this ordinance regarding Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses 
xxviii.  Fuel gas distribution stations, if the use is developed in accordance with, and complies fully with, Article VIII of this ordinance regarding Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses 
xxix.  Gasoline storage and distribution, if the use is developed in accordance with, and complies fully with, Article VIII of this ordinance regarding Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses 
xxx.  Any utilities, roadways, lighting, signage, drainage and/or fuel facilities intended to or designed to serve or be an accessory to any other new use listed or described in Article VIII of this ordinance 
xxxi.  Electrical power plants, light and power substations, and other public utilities, drainage, sewage, waterworks, sewerage treatment plants and similar facilities 
xxxii.  Use, or designation or preparation for use, of any area of an airport for emergency purposes that may have the potential to affect the health, welfare, and safety of persons inside and/or outside the perimeter of an airport. Red label chemicals and products as defined by O.S.H.A. production and storage, if the use is developed in accordance with, and complies fully with Article VIII regarding Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses 
xxxiii.  Any other similar use which would be objectionable or obnoxious because of danger from radiation and/or explosion or because of the emission or creation of smoke, dust, fumes, odors, gas, noise vibration or similar conditions, if the use is developed in accordance with, and complies fully with Article VIII regarding Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses 
xxxiv.  Any other use which may by ordinance be specially authorized as a hazardous and obnoxious use in an H-I Heavy Industrial District, provided that such hazardous and obnoxious use may be authorized as a conditional use only if it meets the criteria set forth in Article VIII of this ordinance 
xxxv.  Metal works and machine shops 
xxxvi.  Cold storage warehouses 
xxxvii.  Pumping stations 
xxxviii.  Relay stations 
xxxix.  Produce warehouses and other warehouses if their use is related to air transportation 
xl.  Welding shops 
xli.  Major roadway construction 
xlii.  Any use which is permitted in an H-I Heavy Industrial District 
(3)  Site Development Regulations : 
a.  Height Regulations : No building or structure shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in height. 
b.  Area Regulations : Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, except as otherwise provided in this Article, no area regulations, no setback regulations, no yard regulations, no prohibitions on building more than one structure on a lot, and no prohibitions on building a structure on more than one lot shall apply to any land, parcel or lot in an AH-I Aviation Heavy Industrial District, except that on any lot or parcel of land in an AH-I Aviation Heavy Industrial District that fronts on and/or is bounded by any public way or that shares a boundary with property not located in an AH-I Aviation Heavy Industrial District, no structure shall be constructed, placed, or extended except in compliance with the setback requirements applicable in the H-I Heavy Industrial District. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Council, within its sound discretion may, by ordinance approving a conditional use, require (a) greater setback than that required by the H-I District regulations, and/or (b) subdivision or resubdivision as a condition precedent to the effectiveness of a conditional use permit. 
c.  Signs : Shall be in accordance with Article XI - General Sign Regulations. 
d.  Public Safety Hazard as Basis for Permit : Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary, construction, placement, expansion, modification, and/or establishment of a structure and/or use may be authorized by the Director of Code Enforcement and Inspections with the prior written approval of the Mayor of the City of Kenner, if an applicant for a permit proves to the reasonable satisfaction of said Director that said work and/or use is needed on an emergency basis to reduce or eliminate a "public safety hazard". As used in this section, a "public safety hazard", shall mean the existence of a condition or circumstances that are certified by the Federal Aviation Administration or by another federal or state regulatory agency acting in the area of its responsibility to constitute a condition or circumstances that pose a risk of loss of life and/or serious and substantial injury to persons and/or property. In order for such a condition and/or circumstances to constitute a "public safety hazard", the risk presented must be so imminent that the harm may result before the adoption of a conditional use ordinance can be considered by the Council and/or before such an ordinance could become effective. Conditions which may under particular circumstances qualify as a "public safety hazard" include, but are not limited to, conditions related to the imminent risk of explosion, fire, hurricanes and/or other serious storms, war, riot, and/or hazard to aircraft that are using structures that are either duly-authorized by a conditional use ordinance or are authorized to be used under the law applicable to legal nonconforming uses. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to new construction, expansion and/or conversion of runways, taxiways, or other facilities used for the landing, takeoff, or ground movement of aircraft. 
e.  Pre-Existing Structures : Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance to the contrary, nothing in this ordinance shall prevent, nor shall anything in this ordinance require obtaining the adoption of a conditional use ordinance as a prerequisite for, any changes of physical features and/or any changes of use within a structure that was in existence on the effective date of the ordinance by which this Article was adopted or that came into existence after that date pursuant to the authorization granted by a conditional use ordinance if, and only if, said work and/or use is established, developed, maintained and/or operated as a component part or accessory of a legal nonconforming use and/or of a duly-authorized conditional use and if, and only if, said work and/or use does not alter the footprint, increase the square footage, and/or increase the height of the structural elements of such a pre-existing structure. 
f.  Right of Access : Each and every conditional use ordinance adopted pursuant to the provisions of this Article shall be adopted and the conditional use authority thereby shall be granted subject to the condition supplied by operation of this subsection, that the property owner shall at all times ensure, subject to the reasonable privacy expectations of natural persons and/or artificial persons, that the Kenner police and fire departments and its other public safety officers and inspectors have the same right or privilege of access to any premises affected by such a conditional use ordinance, and to adjoining premises owned or operated by the same person or entity, public or private, as they normally have to other public and/or private premises in Kenner that are being put to uses permitted or conditionally permitted in a heavy industrial, commercial and/or AH-I district including, but not limited to hotels and other kinds of businesses. In particular, but without limitation of the generality of the foregoing provisions of this subsection, Kenner police, fire and safety personnel on a mission within the scope of their public duties shall upon request be granted access, subject to the reasonable privacy expectations hereinabove described, to all areas of the New Orleans International Airport that are either open to the public or restricted but controlled by a public body, including but not limited to the airfield, except that such access to areas of restricted access may be temporarily denied by the Director of aviation or his representative when, and only during a limited time when, such access would pose an unreasonable risk of harm to the Kenner police, fire and/or safety personnel and/or to others for reasons related to aviation operations. 
g.  Supplementary Standards : In addition to complying with the regulations of this Article, all uses of property within me AH-I Aviation Heavy Industrial District shall comply with all applicable and enforceable FAA regulations. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this ordinance and FAA regulations, the provisions of this ordinance shall prevail, except to the extent that federal law may require otherwise. 
Section 6.12 - Recreation District (RD) 
(a)  Purpose : This district shall provide space and facilities for both active and passive recreational purposes for the citizens of Kenner and visitors. It is also to provide open space and undeveloped areas to preserve environmentally sensitive areas and for water management and drainage retention purposes. 
(b)  Permitted Uses : No building shall be converted or erected for dwelling quarters; provided, however, dwelling quarters may be established in connection with any use permitted under this Article for watchmen and caretakers employed upon the premises. Any building or premises may be used for any other purpose not in conflict with any ordinance of the City of Kenner, Louisiana. 
(1)  Arenas and auditorium 
(2)  Baseball field 
(3)  Enclosed or open stadium 
(4)  Fairgrounds 
(5)  Football field 
(6)  Golf course 
(7)  Livery stable 
(8)  Marina 
(9)  Public swimming pool 
(10)  Racetrack 
(11)  Mobile homes, trailers, campers, and any similar type of portable structure or vehicle is allowed in connection with a recreational use only during the season or specific event when said vehicle or structure is first registered with the office of regulatory inspections and proper connections to all utilities including sewerage have been inspected by applicable agencies. Upon completion of said event or season, all such vehicles or structures must be removed within ten (10) days thereof. 
(12)  Monopoles, aerials, antennas, transmission towers, masts, and communication equipment shelters subject to the requirements and restrictions found in Article XII, Supplementary Use and Performance Standards. 
(13)  Any accessory uses and buildings incidental to any of the above uses. 
(c)  Permitted Signs : 
(1)  Illuminated or nonilluminated identification signs or structures pertaining to the permitted uses in the district, maximum area at each major entrance of the area to be one hundred (100) square feet. 
(2)  Building identification signs not to exceed sixty-four (64) square feet and directional signs not to exceed twenty (20) square feet per building and per use. 
(3)  Score boards, maximum area to be one hundred fifty (150) square feet 
(4)  Signs in this district as listed above but larger in area and higher than thirty-five (35) feet above ground shall be approved by the City Council. 
(d)  Site Development Regulations : 
(1)  Height Regulations : No building shall exceed one hundred (100) feet in height, except that any building in a RD Recreational District which adjoins or abuts on a residential district, shall not exceed forty-five (45) feet in height unless it is set back from all lot lines one foot for each foot of additional height above forty-five (45) feet; and provided further than the height of buildings, structures, poles, towers, trees and other airport hazards located in airport runway approach zones, as shown on the zoning maps of Kenner, Louisiana, shall not exceed a height established by a line beginning at the end of the runway and in alignment with the runway and extending outward and upward at a ratio of one foot vertical distance to forty (40) feet horizontal distance. In case of approaches to east-west runway, the ratio is 1:50. 
(2)  Area Regulations : Buildings hereafter constructed for uses permitted in this district shall be located so as to comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Minimum required depth of front yard shall be thirty (30) feet. 
b.  Minimum required depth of rear yard shall be thirty (30) feet. 
c.  Minimum required depth of each side yard which fronts on a railroad siding or waterway shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  Parking regulations : The parking regulations shall be as provided in Article VII - Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
Section 6.13 - Rivertown Historic District (RHD) 
(a)  Purpose and Intent : To maintain and improve the urban environment and economic viability, while helping to preserve and control the physical historic appearance and quality of construction within the District. 
(b)  Boundaries of the Rivertown Historic District : The following area of the City of Kenner is hereby designated as the "Rivertown Historical District", to-wit: Williams Boulevard extending from Airline Drive (North) to the Mississippi River (South), and the area bounded by Kenner Avenue (North), Mississippi River (South), Jackson Street (East), and Butler Street (West), as shown in Figure VI-1. The "Commercial Core" of the RHD, identified by the solid yellow boundary line in Figure VI-1, represents the largest concentration of nonresidential historic buildings in the District. 
Figure VI-1: Rivertown Historic District 

(c)  Permitted Uses : 
(1)  Pursuant to Section 6.10 (a)(2) - C-1 Neighborhood Commercial District, uses 'a' through 'q'; 
(2)  Single-family Residential 
(3)  Pursuant to Section 6.03.G, Conditional Use Permits 
a.  Places of Worship 
b.  Reception Halls 
c.  Clubs, Lodges, and Social Centers 
d.  Recreation Facility 
e.  Nurseries and garden centers 
f.  Pet Day Care Center 
g.  Multi-family Residential Uses 
h.  Mixed Use Developments 
Previously used single-family detached dwellings may be retrofitted to accommodate neighborhood commercial permitted uses in the Rivertown Historic District provided the following criteria are met: 
a.  The proposed use complies with all applicable land use and zoning regulations; 
b.  That the proposal use is harmonious with neighborhood commercial land use; 
c.  No use shall be approved that will cause excessive noise, smoke, fumes, obnoxious odors, vibrations, traffic or other nuisances to the adjoining properties; 
d.  That the commercial use not exceed twenty (20) per cent of the gross floor area; 
e.  That only persons living on the premises operate such a commercial use. 
New and existing buildings may incorporate a mixture of residential and commercial uses provided all applicable land use and zoning regulations are met. S-I, L-I, H-I, and AH-I industrial uses are prohibited. 
(d)  Height Regulations : No building or structure shall exceed forty-five (45) feet in height. 
(e)  Area Regulations : 
(1)  No area and setback regulations are required to be followed by buildings or structures located within the Commercial Core of the Rivertown Historic District. 
(2)  Buildings or structures located within the Rivertown Historic District but outside of the Commercial Core are required to follow the area and setback regulations of the district in which said buildings or structures are normally permitted or with the area and setback regulations approved by the City Council as part of a planned unit development unless otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
(f)  Intent of Rivertown Historic District Design Guidelines : 
(1)  The RHD design guidelines represent an effort to review the architectural style and substance, as well as the urban spatial impact of any new construction or renovation within the Rivertown Historic District. 
(2)  The implementation of the design guidelines will allow the Historic District Design Commission to make design, siting, and landscaping recommendations that must be met before the permitting process is initiated. 
(3)  While different zones, as identified in Figure VI-1, within the RHD accommodate different dominant uses, such as commercial development along Williams Blvd. and residential development elsewhere, the Design Guidelines bring these areas together through a common approach to quality design while respecting any land use, zoning, and other City regulations which are already in place. Each existing or proposed development site will be considered on equal terms and with impartial judgment from the Historic District Design Commission. 
(g)  Historic Architecture of the Rivertown Historic District : 
(1)  Design Guidelines for the RHD are based on the architectural context and history of Rivertown, in addition to the existing urban design features that allow a "small-town" feel with the advantage of a number of amenities located in a small, walkable, downtown area. 
(2)  Historical models that exist within the district include the following architectural styles. The residential "Ranch" and "Bungalow" styles are not appropriate within the Commercial Core. 

(h)  Scope of Rivertown Historic District Design Guidelines : The design guidelines and review will encourage gateway recognition for the Rivertown Historic District, and will ensure and allow for renovation and development consistent with the noted and desired existing characteristics of the District. 
(1)  The established guidelines and review will: 
a.  Address the architectural style and urban impact of any new development or alterations to existing buildings within the jurisdiction of the Design Guidelines; 
b.  Address material choices and colors; 
c.  Consider the contextual urban and architectural environment of each project; 
d.  Address site features and signage; 
e.  Consider non-Design Guidelines regulations, such as parking requirements, in order to assist the property owner in moving through the permitting process. 
(2)  Guidelines and Review will not: 
a.  Advise regarding traffic issues, but will consider non-Design Guideline regulations as stated above; 
b.  Provide a blueprint for project design; 
c.  Provide comprehensive design services. 
(i)  Jurisdiction of Rivertown Historic District Design Guidelines : The design guidelines shall be applicable to the areas of the RHD as described and shown in Section (b) and Figure VI-1. The "commercial core" area of the RHD is identified for which select guidelines herein are tailored to preserve the visual character of Kenner's most historic section of the District. 
(j)  Application Submittal Process : 
(1)  Historic District Design Review : Before the commencement of any work in the erection of any new building or in the alteration or addition to, or painting or repainting or demolishing of any existing building, any portion of which is to front on any public street or alley in the Rivertown Historic District, application by the owner or owner representative for a permit therefore shall be made to the Historic District Design Commission. 
The purpose of historic district design review is not to add an additional step to the permit process, but to assist the designer within the design and documentation process. The review body, or its agent, will be available to the designer to answer questions related to the design guidelines and the permit process. The review body will not design the project (or portion of the project), but will assist the designer to work within the intent of the Design Guidelines, and to rule on circumstances which make total compliance impractical, either because of site considerations or user design criteria. 
(2)  Review Process : 
a.  Project applicant shall submit documentation seeking a permit from the City of Kenner. 
i.  For clarity of review, all proposals brought before the committee must fully represent the architectural character and urban space to be created. As such, the following drawings must be submitted: 
1)  Elevations of all sides of any proposed building, including color and material indications 
2)  Site plan, showing building access and interface with the public domain (sidewalk/street) 
3)  Landscaping plan, including existing and planned additions 
4)  Floor plan for each building level 
5)  Roof plan 
b.  Initial review by City of Kenner Planning Department. 
c.  If submitted materials are satisfactory, they will be submitted to the Historic District Design Commission. 
d.  The Commission will be called to session to vote on the merits of the applicant's project. 
e.  On the day of review with the applicant present, the Commission will vote to approve or provide guidance on changes necessary for Commission approval. 
f.  If changes are necessary, the applicant may return to the Commission for a second hearing. 
g.  Upon approval of the Historic District Design Commission, and if such application and plans are determined to conform also to all other regulations, ordinances and laws of the City, the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall issue promptly a permit for such work and indicate on such permit the extent and nature of the work to be performed thereunder. 
(k)  Design Guidelines : 
(1)  Building Design Elements : 
a.  Buildings should maintain classic proportions. Smaller columns should be placed closer together for a more vertical proportion, and as the structure becomes more horizontal in scale, the supports (columns) should have additional mass. 
i.  Fascias of buildings may not exceed sixteen inches (16") in depth, including gutter; except for fascias used as a unifying design element for multi-tenant buildings, and for placement of signage for multi-tenants. No backlit fascias. 
ii.  Traditional fascia's should remain minimal (8"-12"), if a gutter is not used. 
b.  Compatibility with the environment. Buildings shall exhibit the ability to provide protection from rain, sun, and high humidity. 

Commercial: Traditional rigid awning provides cover from weather and protection from the sun; additional windows above still allow natural light to enter the first floor area

Residential: Brackets support porch roof overhang; high ceilings and tall windows allow for the movement of air and light; shutters can protect from weather and solar gain
c.  Entrances: each principal building shall have a clearly defined, inviting, highly visible customer entrance enhanced with distinguishing features (e.g. canopies, galleries, porticos, material plane changes). 
d.  All façades of buildings visible to the public shall maintain the same standard of design as the front façade, including: 
i.  Screening of utilities, equipment, and building services. 
ii.  Continuation of building design elements such as quality of materials, galleries, cornices, and treatment of openings. 
e.  Disruption of horizontal planes with vertical elements is required at least every 30 ft. of uninterrupted plane. This may include interruption by change in plane, material, opening, or more significant design element such as a tower or gable. 
i.  Shadows shall be considered as a design element. 
ii.  Smaller buildings shall reflect the design elements of historic styles, and larger buildings shall be divided into smaller elements in order to incorporate historic design context. 
iii.  It is incumbent on the designer to utilize historic context in the building design. Remember that the building should recognize the environment, and show respect for the surrounding area. For larger buildings, the most expedient way of achieving historic context is to break the façade into smaller elements, putting more emphasis on the entry with balancing sub-elements. 
f.  Disciplined visible structural vocabulary must be maintained. Arcades, galleries, and roofs shall not appear to levitate in space, but have a visible means of support with columns and/or brackets. No overhangs in excess of 3' allowed without a visible means of support. Rafter tails are encouraged on smaller overhangs. 
g.  Consistent design vocabulary for multiple structures on one property will be employed. A unifying element such as material, color, or form should be used for all structures. 
h.  No building with an industrial appearance is allowed, such as a pre-engineered metal building with metal siding, devoid of historic context. 
i.  Mansard roofs shall have a roof-like slope not greater than 12:12 or less than 4:12. 
j.  Buildings should have substance; design shall include base, intermediate, and cap. Changes in materials shall have a clear line of demarcation, either by offset, reveal, or border. 
(2)  Materials : Materials shall be reviewed for compliance with historic context. The following materials have historic context: 
a.  Walls: Wood, Brick, Hardiboard Siding, and Cement Plaster (stucco). Outside of the "Commercial Core Zone," Premium Vinyl may be used (virgin vinyl with no reground material, chalk, or other additives). 
b.  Roofing: Wood shakes, Slate/tile, Rigid Shingles with Ridge Tiles, Asphalt Shingles, Metal (Corrugated, V-crimp, and Standing Seam). 
(3)  Color : Colors shall be reviewed for compliance with historic context. 
a.  Façade colors shall be low reflective and subtle. The use of primary, high intensity or metallic color is prohibited outside of the sign face. 
b.  Any activity that involves changing color shall be reviewed by the Historic District Design Commission. 
c.  Accurate color samples coordinated with elevations of every building will be required to be submitted prior to any modification. 
d.  Though not ultimately limited to the colors below, applicants are encouraged to begin with the Sherwin Williams "Vieux Carré Exterior Colors" collection. The Sherwin Williams "American Heritage Collection" and Benjamin Moore's "Historical Colors" offer more variety, and may be used, subject to the final approval of the Commission. 
i.  Vieux Carré Exterior Colors 

ii.  Benjamin Moore's Historic Colors: http://www.benjaminmoore.com/en-us/for-architects-and-designers/color-gallery#&ce_vm=2&ce_col=HC 
iii.  Sherwin Williams' American Heritage Collection: http://www.ci.spencer.nc.us/vertical/sites/%7BB85238E8-43CC-4172-AB03-A2E1A50D5927%7D/uploads/SherwinWilliams-AmericanHeritageCollectionBrochure.pdf 
(4)  Canopies : 
a.  Free (or semi-free) standing canopies, such as those used as porte-cocheres, shall be of similar style and materials as the building. 
b.  Unless site conditions preclude, canopies shall be attached to and made an integral part of the main building. 
c.  Canopies shall have columns, beams, and/or brackets of sufficient scale to give a visible means of support. 
d.  Clearance under canopies shall not exceed sixteen feet (16'), and cantilevered overhangs shall not exceed fifteen feet (15'). 
(5)  Site Features : 
a.  Fence or hedge of not less than 30" or more than 48" in height along property lines of each public street is required in the Commercial Core, and encouraged elsewhere. Fence shall be wood picket, or wrought iron pickets with masonry columns. 
i.  The use of low fencing along the street lines helps define the public from the private, gives a scale to the sidewalks, and provides a screen for parking and services. The use of a hedge along the property line is acceptable in lieu of a fence. 
b.  Sidewalks of not less than four feet (4') in width connecting sidewalks in public right-of-way to the building entry is required for commercial properties. 
i.  This requirement is necessary for alternative access. In the event that sidewalks or bike paths have not yet been installed, the project should still provide walks to their proposed locations. 
c.  Sidewalks along commercial façades that feature a customer entrance connect parking areas and minimize pedestrian traffic within vehicular drives and parking areas. 
i.  This requirement is consistent with the American with Disabilities Act, and may be required under the Life Safety Code, in certain conditions. 
d.  Distinguish internal pedestrian walkways from driving surfaces through the use of special materials in commercial parking lots. 
i.  This requirement is also consistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act. Care should be taken not to use heavy textures on walkways, which could prove hazardous with small wheels on strollers, and wheelchairs. 
e.  Screen mechanical equipment, electrical entries, dumpsters, and equipment from the public view. Screening may be by fence, landscaping, or building element, such as a parapet. 
i.  Whenever possible, vending machines, ice machines, and restrooms shall be located in the main building. 
f.  Areas used for storage of vehicles or water-craft shall be screened with opaque fencing and/or landscaping. 
(6)  Signage : 
a.  General prohibition of miscellaneous signs : The display of signs of a miscellaneous character visible from the public streets, highways and alleys within the historic district of the City; except as otherwise provided in this section, and according to the rules and regulations herein provided for, is prohibited. 
b.  Signs to be displayed in certain places : No sign shall be displayed from the parapet or roofs of any building in the historical district. 
c.  Signs must conform to character of section : In addition to the prohibitions contained in this section, approval of the display of a sign in the historical district of the City shall be granted by the commission only when such signs and the plans therefor, so far as they relate to the appearance, color, size, position, method of attachment, texture of materials and design, conform to the quaint and distinctive character of the historical district or do not injuriously affect it or impair the value of the community of those buildings having architectural or historical worth. 
d.  What signs may advertise : No sign of any character shall be displayed in the historical district unless such sign advertises a bona fide business conducted in or on the premises and, if it does do so, not exceeding fifty (50) per cent of the area of such sign may be used to advertise products or commodities actually sold on the premises. 
e.  Signs no longer complying as to advertisements to be taken down : Any sign displayed which no longer advertises a bona fide business conducted upon the premises shall, upon notification by the Historic District Design Commission or its agent (who is hereby specifically authorized to so proceed) be taken down, removed or obliterated within five (5) days after such notification and failure to so comply on the part of the owner, occupant, agent or person having the beneficial use of any building or premises upon which such sign may be found shall subject such person to the penalty provided in section 6.13 (k)(12), General Penalty; Continuing Violations. 
f.  Only one sign per shop, etc. : One sign only shall be allowed to each store, shop, or bona fide place of business, and this sign shall be no larger than the maximum stipulated in this Article, regardless of the amount of front footage. 
g.  Concealment of architectural features : No sign shall be displayed from any building, balcony, gallery, canopy, shed, roof, door, or window, or placed in any manner whatsoever to disfigure or conceal any architectural feature or detail of any building. 
h.  Surface area of signs : The surface area of any sign shall be in direct proportion to the amount of front footage of each ownership and shall be as follows: 
i.  For single-faced signs, attached flat against the wall and including painted wall signs there shall be allowed thirty (30) square inches of sign surface area to each foot of lot frontage. 
ii.  For double-faced signs, suspended by brackets or arms perpendicularly from the wall of a building there shall be allowed sixty (60) square inches of sign surface to each running foot of lot frontage. The area of such a double-faced sign shall be taken to mean the sum of the areas of each face. 
iii.  In no case shall the area of any one single-faced or painted wall sign exceed eight (8) square feet, the maximum allowable for such a sign. 
iv.  In no case shall the area of any one single-faced or painted wall sign be less than two (2) square feet, unless by special permission of the Historic District Design Commission. 
v.  In no case shall the area of any one double-faced sign exceed a total for both of sixteen (16) square feet, the maximum allowable size for such sign. 
vi.  In no case shall the area of any one double-faced sign be less than four (4) square feet unless by special permission of the Historic District Design Commission. 
vii.  In the case where two (2) or more businesses are conducted on the premises of single ownership having a front footage of twenty-five (25) feet or less, the allowable sign area shall be increased by one and one-half (11/2) times. 
i.  Regulation of signs generally : In the case of illuminated signs, where space must be provided between two (2) parallel faces for the installation of lighting fixtures, these faces shall not be farther apart than eighteen (18) inches and such lighting fixtures and all light sources shall be a steady light concealed; (a) behind standard opal glass or other substance of equal or small light transmission factor; (b) by hoods; or (c) by any acceptable method of indirect lighting approved by the Historic District Design Commission. 
j.  Building code applicable to signs : All signs under this section shall be further governed by the existing regulations of the building code of the City, which are not in conflict with this section. 
k.  Application for signs to be submitted to commission : All applications for permits to display signs within the historic district of the City shall be submitted to the building inspector for approval before a permit therefor may be issued in conformity with section 6.13 (j), Application Submittal Process. 
l.  Form of application to display signs and accompanying drawings : Application for a permit to display signs in the historical district of the City shall be made to the commission upon forms furnished by the commission. Such an application shall also be accompanied by sketches and drawings in triplicate showing details of construction and foundation when required by the building code of the City and shall delineate the size, shape, design, coloring, lighting and position in relation to the building from or upon which it shall be displayed. 
m.  Violating signs, etc. to be removed : Any sign or exterior illumination of walls, exteriors, roofs, or appurtenances of buildings displayed after the effective date of this section and contrary to the provisions of this section are prohibited. 
(7)  Private Floodlights Prohibited : The public sidewalks, places and alleys, exteriors, roofs, outer walls and fences of buildings and other constructions and signs visible from any public street, place or position in the Kenner Historical District shall not be illuminated by privately-controlled floodlights or other illumination except as permitted by this Article. 
(8)  Overhang Balconies : No overhanging balconies or galleries of wrought or cast iron may be removed, but other new or additional balconies may be erected if: (a) supported by brackets or iron columns; (b) at least nine (9) feet above the level of the sidewalk; and (c) conform to the quaint and distinctive architecture of the Kenner Historical District. The permits for all such new construction or any renovation shall be subject to the requirements of this Article. 
(9)  Removal Of Sheds and Marquees : There shall be no restrictions against the removal of sheds supported by wooden columns and such sheds, as well as any marquees, may not be repaired when in dangerous condition, but must be removed. However, any changes may be made only after first securing a written order or permit required by this Article and may be executed only in accordance therewith. 
(10)  Stopping Work Commenced Without Permit : The Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall promptly stop any work attempted to be done without or contrary to a permit issued under this Article and shall promptly prosecute any person responsible for such a violation of this Article or engaged in such violation. Any officer or authorized agent of the commission shall exercise concurrent or independent powers with the building inspector in prosecuting violations of this Article and stopping work attempt to be done without or contrary to the permits required by this Article. 
(11)  Provisions of Article Prevail In Case of Conflict : The provisions of this Article shall govern and take precedence over any other provisions of any ordinances or codes of the City of Kenner. 
(12)  General Penalty; Continuing Violations : Whenever in this Article any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or whenever in this Article the doing of any act is declared to be unlawful, when no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this Article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) and by imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or both such fine and imprisonment. A provision for the revocation or refusal of a permit or other provision not imposing a fine or imprisonment shall not be deemed a provision for a specific penalty within the meaning of the foregoing sentence. Each day that any violation of any safety ordinance or regulation contained in this Article shall continue, shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 6.14 - Laketown District (LD) 
(a)  Purpose and Intent : To create an environment that promotes and enhances the public's use and enjoyment of Lake Pontchartrain and its shore in a way that preserves and/or recreates traditional lakeshore uses and provides an economic benefit to the City. It is the intent of this district designation to separate it from any other zoning classification and to locate uses, which allow and actually encourage accessibility to the water and accommodate a number of diverse uses as well as maintain and enhance the educational, cultural, and economic welfare of the public of the City. 
(b)  Permitted Uses : A building or land shall be used only for the following purposes: 
(1)  Marinas, public or private, providing open slips, boat houses, docks, warehouses, fuel docks, pump-out stations and/or related uses 
(2)  Boat sales 
(3)  Boat repair facilities and yards 
(4)  Boat storage, including dry storage sheds 
(5)  Restaurants except drive-in restaurants 
(6)  Bars, nightclubs, lounges, and liquor stores, without distance restrictions regarding other barrooms, nightclubs, and recreation facilities. 
(7)  Garages, parking 
(8)  Fuel docks 
(9)  Theaters 
(10)  Hotels 
(11)  Financial institutions 
(12)  Personal services establishments (Barbershops, beauty parlors, etc.) 
(13)  Retail commercial; those exceeding 25,000 square feet of gross floor area shall require City Council approval as per section 6.03(f), Planned Unit Developments. 
(14)  Offices, professional and business 
(15)  Semi-private athletic clubs 
(16)  Parks, playgrounds and similar recreational uses 
(17)  Yacht clubs 
(18)  Boat launches, public and private 
(19)  Multifamily dwellings, including condominiums 
(c)  Site Development Regulations : 
(1)  Height Requirements : No building or structure hereafter constructed shall exceed sixty-five (65) feet in height, unless otherwise approved by the City Council. 
(2)  Area Regulations : Buildings hereafter constructed for uses permitted in this district shall be located so as to comply with the following minimum requirements: 
a.  Lot Area-Every lot shall contain an area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. 
b.  Lot Width-a minimum width of fifty (50) feet 
c.  Lot Depth-a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet unless otherwise provided herewith 
d.  Where either a minimum lot depth or lot width is provided the other lot dimension must be of adequate size to produce a lot area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet 
(3)  Yard and Setbacks : 
a.  Front Yard: Minimum shall be thirty (30) feet 
b.  Rear Yard: Minimum shall be thirty (30) feet 
c.  Side Yards: Minimum required depth of each side yard which fronts on a railroad siding or waterway shall be thirty (30) feet 
(4)  Off-Street Parking and Loading Requirements : As set forth in Article VII of this ordinance. 
(5)  Sign Requirements : As set forth in Article XI of this ordinance. 
(6)  Landscaping Requirements : As set forth in Article IX of this ordinance 
Section 6.15 - Mixed Use District (MU) 
(a)  Purpose : The provisions of this district shall establish and define the uses of land and the character of the improvements and structures allowed on the land in a manner that allows a balanced mix of uses in a pedestrian-friendly environment. 
The following are key concepts that should be acknowledged through development practices within this district: 
(1)  Residential uses in conjunction with nonresidential activities, preferably located above retail and office establishments 
(2)  All types of residential uses, including single-family homes, townhouses, and loft-style multiple family units 
(3)  Central green spaces 
(4)  Traffic flows that enable people to move freely without the use of an automobile by emphasizing the pedestrian 
(5)  Outside spaces, such as small parks, courtyards, outdoor seating areas; and 
(6)  Building design standards to ensure aesthetic, functional and material quality 
(b)  Mixed-use development types : The adopted plan shall identify the appropriate mixed-use type for the Mixed Use (MU) districts. These types may include the following: 
(1)  Live/work unit : A type of mixed-use development that combines work and living quarters in the same building that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity by a single household. A live/work unit consists of the following: 
a.  Living/sleeping area, kitchen, and sanitary facilities in conformance with the local and state Building Code; and 
b.  Adequate working space accessible from the living area, reserved for, and regularly used by, one or more of the persons residing in the space. 
(2)  Commercial/residential unit : A type of vertical mixed-use development where nonresidential and residential uses are located in the same building and where the dwelling units are typically located on the upper levels and the nonresidential uses are located on the lower levels. Persons residing in the residential component do not necessarily work in or own any portion of the nonresidential component. This product type may also be designed so that nonresidential and residential uses are located adjacent to one another on the same or adjoining lots of the same development site and in separate buildings. 
(c)  Permitted Uses : 
Table VI-1: Permitted Uses 
Uses Ground Level Above 
Ground Level References Residential Dwelling, Single-family Dwelling, Two-family Dwelling, Three Family P Dwelling, Four Family P Dwelling, Multi-Family P Apartment P P Townhouse P P Apartment Hotel P Boarding/Lodging House P Commercial Child Care Center P Live/Work Units P P Business/Professional Offices P P Medical Clinic or Office P P Retail Sales and Services 1 P C Temporary Outdoor Retail 2 Semi-Private Athletic Clubs P Institutional Library P Museum P House of Worship Park/Playground Theaters and Auditoria P Public or Private School P Garden or Nursery Club, Lodges, Fraternities P P Industrial Artisan Manufacturing C Accessory Home Occupation P Monopoles/Antennas C Community Garage 3 C C Recreational Facilities 3 C C P = Permitted Use C = Conditional Use 1 As permitted in C-1, Neighborhood Commercial 2 Not to exceed thirty (30) days per calendar year 3 Only as an accessory to multiple dwellings  
(d)  Lot size and Maximum Allowable Density and Intensity : This district is intended to promote mix-use neighborhoods that provide a variety of residential, commercial, office, and recreational options. Within the Mixed Use district, there are no minimum lot size requirements. 
Residential density and nonresidential intensity shall be calculated by multiplying the following density and intensity factors by the gross area of the Master Plan: 
(1)  Residential density shall not exceed 20 units per gross acre. 
(2)  Nonresidential intensity shall be not less than a floor area ratio of 0.5 and shall not exceed a floor area ratio of 1.5. 
(3)  For mixed-use developments, floor area ratio may not exceed 2.0. 
(e)  Maximum building height : 
(1)  No building, or part thereof, shall be erected or altered in the Mixed Use (MU) district such that it exceeds five (5) stories, including the ground level. Mezzanines and lofts shall be considered a story. 
(2)  Freestanding structures, such as monopoles and antennas shall have a maximum height of seventy-two (72) feet. Structures, which are within 150 feet of a single-family residential district boundary, shall have a maximum height of thirty-five (35) feet. Structures that are between 150 feet and 300 feet from a single-family residential district boundary shall have a maximum height of fifty-two (52) feet. 
(f)  Yard areas/building setbacks : All required yard areas shall be clear of all structures and shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with the landscaping provisions of Article IX Landscape Regulations of the UDC. 
(1)  Front Yard: Every building within the Mixed Use (MU) district shall have a minimum front setback of ten (10) feet and a maximum setback of twenty (20) feet from the property line adjacent to the public street right-of-way. 
(2)  Side yard: Every building within the Mixed Use (MU) district shall have a minimum side yard setback of ten (10) feet from adjacent property lines. 
(3)  Rear yard: Every building within the Mixed Use (MU) district shall have a minimum rear yard setback of ten (10) feet from the adjacent property line, provided however, a minimum twenty (20) foot rear yard setback is required from the property line adjacent to a public street right-of-way. 
(4)  Adjacent to R-1, R-1A and RR-1, single-family zoned property. Every building within the MU district built on property adjacent to single-family zoned property shall have a minimum setback of one (1) foot in distance from the adjacent single-family zoned property line for every two (2) feet of building height. 
(5)  Adjacent to R-2, two-family zoned property. Every building within the MU district built on the property adjacent to a two-family zoned property shall have a minimum setback of one (1) foot in distance from the adjacent two-family zoned property line for every four (4) feet of building height. 
(g)  Open space and landscaping : 
(1)  Minimum open space: A minimum of ten (10) percent of the net area of the MIXED USE (MU) master plan shall be open space. 
(2)  Calculation of open space: The following shall be counted as open space: 
a.  Plazas 
b.  Sidewalks that are a minimum of 6 feet wide 
c.  Turf and landscape areas 
d.  Fountains, benches, and similar landscape features 
e.  Covered arcades 
f.  Gazebos 
(3)  Landscaping of open space area: Open space shall be planted and maintained in accordance with Article IX, Landscape Regulations of the UDC. 
(4)  The Mixed Use (MU) district master plan shall contribute to the establishment or enhancement of community and public spaces by providing space(s) that include, but are not limited to the following: patio seating area, pedestrian plaza with benches, covered/shaded playground area, water feature, clock tower or similar focal feature or amenity. Any such area shall have direct access to the sidewalk network and be placed in a visible location that is convenient for use as a gathering area. 
(5)  Urban recreational experience : 
a.  At least 5 percent of the net area of the master plan shall be designed to provide both an active and passive family-friendly urban leisure and recreational experience, including, but not limited to: street furniture; shade; grass; informal seating and climbing opportunities such as stairs, fountains or planters that have capped sides that are not more than 2 feet in height; sculptures that provide seating opportunities; plazas, interactive water features, drinking fountains, and changes in elevation. 
b.  At least 40 percent of the area described in paragraph 'a.' above, shall be provided in locations that are proximate to a primary street. 
(h)  Site design and performance standards : 
(1)  Limitation on retail floor area : 
a.  The maximum gross floor area for any individual retail establishment shall not exceed 15,000 square feet. 
b.  The three (3) individual retail establishments with the largest floor areas shall not have a combined gross floor area of more than 30,000 square feet, collectively. 
(2)  Limitation on ground floor residential area : 
a.  In the aggregate for the entire MU district, no more than 70 percent of the ground floor area shall be used for residential dwellings (including townhomes); and 
b.  Dwelling units shall not be located on the ground floor of mixed-use buildings. 
(3)  Townhomes : 
a.  Townhomes shall be designed and developed such that no more than two (2) adjacent townhomes are substantially alike in terms of façade, materials, color, or roof. 
b.  Townhomes shall be developed in groups of no less than three (3) and no more than eight (8) units that are attached by common walls. 
(i)  Design of Pedestrian, Bicycle, and Vehicular Facilities : All designs regarding mobility within a MU district shall prioritize the safety of all users, with particular focus given to the more vulnerable users - pedestrians, disabled people, and cyclists - rather than speed of access. Safety is of the utmost priority and takes precedence over vehicular access. 
(1)  Design of pedestrian and bicycle connections : The following requirements shall be met: 
a.  Covered pedestrian access shall be provided between parking structures and the front of the principal adjacent buildings that they are intended to serve. 
b.  Sidewalks shall be provided alongside all public streets in order to maintain a safe and consistent pedestrian environment. 
c.  If there is insufficient right-of-way to accommodate the minimum sidewalk and buffer widths, new developments shall either dedicate public rights-of-way or provide easements for bicycles and pedestrians to the extent necessary to provide the required widths. 
d.  Pedestrian access points outside of the public rights-of-way to adjacent lots shall be provided to facilitate pedestrian circulation between developments. 
e.  All on-site pedestrian walkways located in vehicle use areas shall be distinguished from driving surfaces to enhance pedestrian safety and comfort. 
(2)  Design of structured parking : Structured parking shall be designed and configured so that parking structures are not a material part of the physical character of the district, as follows: 
a.  Structured parking shall not have vehicular access points on any primary street within the MU district; 
b.  Structured parking should not be designed with more than one dead-end aisle; and 
c.  Structured parking shall be screened as follows: 
i.  Intervening buildings or "wraps" composed of permitted uses other than parking shall screen ground-level views of parking structures from primary streets within the MU district and from public streets outside of the MU district. In addition or in the alternative, permitted uses other than parking may be located in the ground level of parking structures to disguise their use as parking. 
ii.  Any sides of a parking structure that are exposed to secondary, residential, or service streets shall be designed so that use of the structure for parking is not obvious except at points of ingress and egress. 
(3)  Location and design of off-street surface parking lots : 
a.  Surface parking spaces shall be located to the rear and sides of buildings wherever feasible. No off-street surface parking lots shall be located between the front façade of any building(s) and the primary adjacent street. 
b.  Surface parking lots and maneuvering areas shall not be located between a primary building's entrance and an abutting minor arterial or collector street, except where the applicant has demonstrated that no other alternative is available. 
c.  Surface parking lots and maneuvering areas located to the side of a building cannot occupy more than 50 percent of a site's frontage onto a minor arterial or collector street. 
d.  Wherever possible, parking lots and maneuvering areas on corner lots should not be located adjacent to intersections. 
e.  Provide smaller, more dispersed surface parking lots instead of one large parking area. 
(j)  Building design standards : 
(1)  These building design standards are intended to : 
a.  Strengthen Kenner's physical character and help buildings to better function in Kenner's environment; 
b.  Create buildings with appropriate human scale; 
c.  Ensure that buildings contribute to the creation of a pedestrian-friendly environment through the provision of glazing, shading, and shelter at the pedestrian level; 
d.  Lessen the impact of branded architecture that does not speak to the City's physical character and conditions; and 
e.  Increase the quality, adaptability, and sustainability in Kenner's building stock. 
(2)  Glazing on building façades : Glazing provides interest for the pedestrian, connects the building exterior and interior, puts eyes on the street, promotes reusability, and provides a human-scale element on building façades. Projects subject to this section shall meet the following minimum glazing requirements, but glazing shall not be limited to the areas discussed: 
a.  On the façade facing the principal street: 
i)  At least 40 percent of the wall area that is between two and ten feet above grade shall consist of glazing (Figure VI-2); and 
ii)  The second floor must provide a minimum of 25 percent glazing between three and eight feet, as measured from that story's finished floor level. 
Figure VI-2: Facade Measurements 

b.  On all other publicly visible façades, at least 25 percent of the wall area between two and ten feet above grade must consist of glazing. This requirement shall not apply if the building code prohibits windows on such façades. 
c.  If a single-story building has a façade taller than 20 feet, the façade area above 15 feet is subject to the same window requirement as the second floor requirement in subsection ii. 
d.  Any façade that is built up to an interior mid-block property line is not required to have glazing on that façade if no prohibitions and no contractual or legal impediments exist that would prevent a building being constructed on the adjacent property up to the wall of the façade. 
e.  Metal clad siding is prohibited. 
(3)  Primary entrance design : Primary entrance design shall consist of at least three of the following design elements at the primary entrance (none of which can be trademarked design features), so that the primary entrance is architecturally prominent and clearly visible from the abutting street: 
a)  Architectural details such as arches, friezes, tile work, murals, or moldings. 
b)  Integral planters or wing walls that incorporate landscape or seating. 
c)  Enhanced exterior light fixtures such as wall sconces, light coves with concealed light sources, ground-mounted accent lights, or decorative pedestal lights. 
d)  Prominent three-dimensional features, such as belfries, chimneys, clock towers, domes, spires, steeples, towers, or turrets. 
e)  A repeating pattern of pilasters projecting from the façade wall by a minimum of eight inches or architectural or decorative columns. 
(4)  Roof design : The roof design shall consist of at least one of the following design elements, none of which can be trademarked design features: 
a.  Parapets with horizontal tops having height changes of at least one foot occurring horizontally no less than every 100 feet. 
ii)  Parapets that do not have horizontal tops must have pitched or rounded tops with a pattern that repeats or varies no less than every 100 feet. 
iii)  All parapets must have detailing such as cornices, moldings, trim, or variations in brick coursing. 
b.  Sloping roofs with at least two of the following design elements: 
i)  Slope of at least 5:12. 
ii)  Two or more slope planes. 
iii)  Overhanging eaves extending at least three feet beyond the supporting wall. 
(5)  Sustainable roof : A "sustainable roof" is roofing that has one of the following: 
a.  For a minimum of 75 percent of the total roof surface, a Solar Reflectance Index (SRI) of 78 or higher for a roof with a slope of 2:12 or less, or 29 or higher for a roof with a slope greater than 2:12; or 
b.  For a minimum of 50 percent of the total roof surface, a vegetated roof; 
c.  For a minimum of 50 percent of the total roof surface, rainwater collection system or grey water system such as a cistern, for reuse of water or delayed release to help reduce pressure on the municipal stormwater system; or 
d.  For a minimum of 75 percent of the total roof surface, a combination of a vegetated roof with rainwater collection system and SRI-compliant roof meeting the SRI standards in subsection 'a.' above. 
Figure VI-3: Sustainable Roof 

(k)  Lighting standards : 
(1)  Submission of plans and evidence of compliance with Sec. 12.13, Exterior Lighting : 
a.  All site plan applications shall include a description of all lighting fixtures not affixed to buildings, both proposed and those that will remain on the site after completion of the project. For new fixtures, the description may include, but is not limited to, catalog cuts and illustrations by manufacturers (including sections where required), that demonstrate compliance with the standards of this subchapter. For lighting fixtures affixed to buildings, such information shall be provided as part of the building permit application. 
b.  Lighting fixtures not affixed to buildings shall not exceed a height of thirty (30) feet in height. 
(2)  Fully shielded and full cut-off light fixtures required : The following outdoor lighting applications shall be illuminated by fixtures that are both fully- shielded and full cut-off: 
a.  Interior street system and pedestrian lighting; 
b.  Parking lots; 
c.  Pathways; 
d.  Recreational areas; and 
e.  Building overhangs and open canopies. 
(3)  Lighting of building façades : Buildings and structures shall be illuminated by fixtures that are both fully shielded and full cut-off. Building façade lighting may only be used to highlight specific architectural features such as principal entrances and towers. 
(4)  Directional luminaries : Directional luminaries may be used to illuminate signs and flagpoles. Such luminaries shall be installed and aimed so that they illuminate only the specific object or area and do not shine directly onto neighboring properties, roadways, or distribute excessive light skyward. 
(5)  Lamp or fixture substitution : Should any outdoor light fixture or the type of light source therein be changed after site plan or building plan approval has been granted, a change request must be submitted to the Director of Planning for approval, together with adequate information to assure compliance with this subchapter, which must be received prior to substitution. 
(l)  Compatibility standards : The following standards are intended to ensure compatibility of uses in the Traditional Neighborhood District. 
(1)  Restriction on activities : Commercial uses within a mixed-use development project containing residences shall be designed and operated, with hours of operation limited, so that residents are not exposed to offensive noise, including noise from traffic, trash collection, routine deliveries, or late night activity. Deliveries from heavy trucks at the project site between 8:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. should be expressly prohibited. 
(2)  Noise and ground borne vibrations : All residential and commercial development within the Mixed Use (MU) district is subject to the City's regulation of unnecessary noise in accordance with Section 7-166, Article IX of the Kenner Code of Ordinances. Residential uses should be oriented away from odor-generating structures and loading docks used by heavy trucks. 
(3)  Lighting : Outdoor lighting associated with commercial uses should not adversely impact adjacent residential uses, but should provide sufficient illumination for use, access, and security. Such lighting should not blink, flash, or oscillate. 
(4)  Windows : Residential building windows abutting commercial uses should not directly face windows of these adjacent properties unless privacy tinting, architectural elements, structures, landscaping, or other features provide adequate screening and privacy protection. 
(5)  Security : Residential units should be designed to ensure the security of residents through the provision of secured entrances and exits that are separate from the non-residential uses on the same site. Residential units should be directly accessible to parking areas. Non-residential and residential uses should not have common entrance hallways or common balconies. These separations should be shown on the development plan and the separations should be permanently maintained. 
Section 6.16 - Batture District (BD) 
[(a)]  Description : This district is composed of lands that lie outside the protective levees between the crest of the Mississippi levee and the water level of the Mississippi River. Land uses permitted in this district are limited to temporary development consistent with traditional development in these areas and will be under conditions that will reduce the possibility of flooding due to abnormal high water in the Mississippi River. 
[(b)]  Permitted uses : 
(1)  Barge mooring and holding facilities 
(2)  Boat houses and boat docks for recreational purposes 
(3)  Clubs, private or service 
(4)  Farming, including the usual farm buildings and structures, and animal raising, trapping and fishing 
(5)  Golf courses and golf practice ranges. 
(6)  Community centers and buildings used exclusively by the federal, state or local government for public purposes except correctional institutions or mental hospitals 
(7)  Nature or natural parks 
(8)  Private and public parks or playgrounds 
(9)  Private gardens, truck gardens, greenhouses, and nurseries for the propagation and cultivation of plants, only when such plants, flowers, and produce are not offered for sale. 
(10)  Public buildings and institutions of a religious eleemosynary, philanthropic, or similar natures 
(11)  Public and private forests, parks, parkways, wildlife reservations or similar conservation projects 
(12)  Government structures and land 
(13)  Public utility structures. See Article XII, Supplementary Use and Performance Standards. 
(14)  Riding stables and kennels when located on a tract of at least ten (10) acres and having no structure, pen, or corral housing animals closer than two hundred (200) feet to a property line. 
(15)  Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to any of the above uses. 
(16)  Boat or ship repair are not permitted unless such repair constitutes an emergency. There shall be no storage or overnight parking of any vehicles on the property. 
[(c)]  Site Development Regulations : 
(1)  Height regulations: No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
(2)  Yard regulations: No front, side or rear yard is required 
(3)  Lot Area: No minimum lot area is required 
[(d)]  Sign regulations : 
(1)  Number: One (1) on-premises sign shall be permitted. 
(2)  Sign area: The sign shall have a maximum area of twelve (12) square feet. 
(3)  Prohibited signs: The following signs shall be prohibited: 
a.  Flashing signs and signs with animated and scintillating lights. 
b.  Electronic variable message signs. 
c.  Off-premises signs. 
[(e)]  Off-street parking Requirements : 
    Shall be provided as set forth in Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations. 
Article VII. - Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations 

Section 7.01 - Intent and Purpose 
    The off-street motor-vehicle parking, bicycle parking, and loading regulations of this Article are intended to provide off-street parking and loading areas, and provide the appropriate number of spaces in proportion to the demands of the proposed use for the following purposes: 
(1)  To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the City by ensuring the compatibility of required parking areas with surrounding architecture and land uses. 
(2)  To establish a comprehensive system of controls governing the design, construction, location, installation, maintenance, and number of required off-street parking spaces. 
(3)  To create a more attractive business and economic climate by enhancing and protecting the orderly and effective use of parking. 
(4)  To properly regulate the number of required off-street parking spaces so as to provide for the needs of occupants, customers, visitors or others involved in use or occupancy of any building, structural improvement or place of assembly. 
Section 7.02 - General Provisions 
(a)  Existing Facilities : 
(1)  No land shall be used or occupied and no structure shall be erected or used unless the off-street parking spaces required herein are provided. Such parking spaces are not required for any structure or use existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance; however, the parking spaces as specified herein shall be provided for any enlargement to any such existing structure or use. 
(2)  If a building permit was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and if substantial construction has begun within one-hundred and eighty (180) days of the issuance of a permit, the number of off-street motor-vehicle, bicycle, and loading spaces that is required by the building permit shall supersede what may be required by this Article. 
(b)  Damage or Destruction : In the event that a structure is damaged to an extent of less than fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, the off-street motor vehicle, bicycle and loading spaces may be restored in the same amount prior to damage. However, it is not necessary to restore or maintain spaces in excess of the amount required by this Ordinance. 
(c)  Change in Intensity of Use : Whenever the intensity of a use is increased based on an increase in the number of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other unit of measurement used to calculate the number of required number of vehicle and bicycle parking spaces, additional spaces shall be provided for that increase, except as described below: 
(1)  Whenever there is an increase in the intensity of a use that creates a need for additional vehicle parking spaces of ten percent (10%) or more, the additional spaces are required. No additional vehicle parking spaces are required if the greater intensity would result in an increase of spaces of less than ten percent (10%). This also applies to a simultaneous increase in intensity of a group of uses on the same lot which together result in a need for an increase in vehicle parking spaces of ten percent (10%) or more. The ten percent (10%) threshold is calculated by dividing the number of additional spaces required due to the increase in intensity divided by those spaces required before the increase. 
(d)  Provision of Additional Vehicle Spaces : 
(1)  Nothing in this Article prevents the voluntary establishment of additional off-street vehicle and bicycle parking spaces above that required by this Ordinance, unless the Ordinance specifies a maximum number of vehicle spaces in Section 7.04. There is no limit on the number of bicycle parking spaces that may be provided. 
(2)  All regulations governing the location and design of additional facilities shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance. 
(3)  Where a use exceeds the minimum number of vehicle spaces required by Section 7.04, the area used for additional spaces may be constructed of permeable paving. 
(e)  Shared parking requirements for mixed-use developments : 
(1)  Shared parking for mixed-use developments is based on the fact that certain uses operate at different times over a twenty-four-hour period with their greatest demand for parking occurring during mutually exclusive times. These uses are, therefore, able to share parking spaces during particular times and under certain conditions, the total number of parking spaces otherwise required for individual uses may be reduced. 
(2)  For purposes of these requirements, shared parking for mixed-use developments refers to two (2) or more land uses occupying the same lot or occupying contiguous lots with parking located on the same lot or contiguous lot upon which the uses sharing the parking are located. Shared parking refers to the use of the same off-street parking stall to satisfy the off-street parking requirements for two (2) or more uses. The following conditions shall apply to all shared parking for mixed-use developments. 
(3)  Shared parking is permitted by agreement only. The agreement must: 
a.  Be in writing and executed by all owners of the properties affected; 
b.  Specify the parking being shared and the hours of operation by the uses involved; 
c.  Be enforced by the Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement and the City Attorney; 
d.  Be recorded in the office of the clerk of court by the owner(s) of the property affected and a copy furnished to the Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement and the Director of Planning and Zoning. 
e.  An affidavit stating that the shared parking agreement is valid and no change in use or hours of operation of the affected properties has occurred shall be submitted annually to the Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement. 
f.  A violation shall occur if a use is operated at a time other than during the hours of operation specified in the shared parking agreement. The Director of inspection and code enforcement shall revoke the certificate of use or occupancy for any use operated in violation of a shared parking agreement. 
(4)  No variances or exceptions from the parking requirements of this ordinance shall be granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustments. 
(f)  Prohibited Use of Parking Spaces : The sale, repair or dismantling or servicing of vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies, or the display of goods in off-street parking areas is prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by this ordinance. Off-street parking areas associated with residential and commercial developments are not to be used for the permanent storage of fleet vehicles. 
Section 7.03 - Computation of Parking and Loading Requirements 
    This section describes how the number of motor vehicle, bicycle, and loading spaces are calculated based upon the requirements of this Article. 
(1)  Where multiple uses with different parking requirements occupy the same structure or lot, the required vehicle and bicycle parking and loading spaces is the sum of the requirements for each use computed separately, unless otherwise permitted by this Ordinance. 
(2)  Space allocated to any off-street loading space may not be used to satisfy the requirement for any off-street vehicle or bicycle parking space or access aisle or portion thereof. Conversely, the area allocated to any off-street vehicle or bicycle parking space may not be used to satisfy the replacement for any off-street loading space or portion thereof. 
(3)  A fraction of less than one-half (1/2) is disregarded, and a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more is counted as one (1) parking or loading space. 
(4)  For uses where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or open floor areas, every eighteen (18) linear inches of benches, pews, or permanent seating areas, or five (5) square feet of open floor area used for seating is counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining the required number of spaces or as reflected in the most recent version of the International Building Code by the International Code Council. 
Section 7.04 - Required Off-Street Motor Vehicle and Bicycle Parking Spaces 
(a)  General Requirements : 
(1)  The minimum number of off-street vehicle and bicycle parking spaces to be provided for a principal use is listed in Table VII-1: Off-Street Parking Requirements, except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. All off-street parking shall be completed prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. The location, size, and all other design and construction elements of all required parking spaces shall be provided at the time of issuance of the building permit. 
(2)  Table VII-1 lists parking requirements for the principal uses listed in the zoning districts. In some cases, uses that are considered part of a generic use category are listed with specific vehicle parking requirements. These specific uses are listed only for the purposes of this section and do not indicate whether such uses are permitted or special uses within any district. 
(3)  For uses not specifically mentioned in this section, the requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities for a similar use specifically mentioned in this section shall apply as determined by the Director of Planning. 
(b)  Maximum Vehicle Parking Limitations : The following vehicle parking maximums are applicable to all surface parking lots: 
(1)  When new vehicle parking areas are constructed for shopping centers or fast food restaurants, the number of vehicle parking spaces provided may not exceed one-hundred twenty-five percent (125%) of the required minimum. 
(2)  When new vehicle parking areas are constructed for all other uses, the number of vehicle parking spaces provided may not exceed one-hundred fifty percent (150%) of the required minimum. 
(3)  Parking maximums do not apply in the S-I, L-I, H-I, and AH-I Districts. 
Table VII-1: Off-Street Parking Requirements 
Use Minimum Required 

Vehicle Spaces Additional Requirements Airport Terminal Building 1 per 400sf GFA* of terminal building Amusement Park 1 per 200sf GFA* Bowling Alley 2 per lane Dance, Exhibition or Reception Hall 1 per 60sf GFA* Theater/Auditorium/Sports Arena/Place of Public Assembly 1 per 4 seats for first 400 + 1 per 6 seats after first 400 Bar or Pool Hall 1 per 150sf GFA* Animal Hospital and Kennels 1 per 300sf GFA* Business and Professional Offices 1 per 300sf GFA* Clinics 1 per 400sf GFA* Clubs and Lodges/Bingo Hall 1 per 60sf GFA* Day Care Centers (adult or child) 1 per 350sf GFA*, 3 spaces minimum 1 space for each employee Dwellings: Single-family 2 per dwelling unit Two to Four Family 1 per dwelling unit Multi-Family (5+) 1.5 per dwelling unit 1 bicycle space/unit - suggested Townhouses 1 per dwelling unit Assisted 1 per dwelling unit Educational Facility Primary 1 per classroom and office Secondary 8 per classroom plus 1 per 500sf GFA* of office 4 bicycle spaces per classroom - suggested University 10 per classroom Vocational 10 per classroom Hospital 1 per 4 beds 1 per staff doctor, 1 per 4 employees Hotel/Motel 1 per room 1 per 4 employees General Retail and Sales 1 per 300sf GFA* General Trade and Repairs 1 per 500sf GFA* Libraries and Museums 10 spaces minimum plus 1 space per 400sf GFA* above 2,000sf Manufacturing and Industrial Establishments 1 per employee 1 space for each company vehicle operating from premises Marina 1 per 2 slips Nursing Homes 1 per 6 beds Personal Service Establishment 1 per 200sf GFA* Places of Worship 1 space per 8 seats in main auditorium or 1 per 60sf GFA*, whichever is greater Restaurants 1 per 150sf GFA* or 1 per 3 seats, whichever is greater Drive-Thru Up to 500sf GFA*: 2 spaces 
501 to 1000sf GFA*: 5 spaces 
1000+ sf GFA: 10 spaces Plus 3 stacking spaces per drive-through lane Fast Food/Specialty 1 per 200sf GFA * 3 stacking spaces per drive-through lane Full Service 1 per 200sf GFA* Warehouses 1 per employee during largest shift, 1 per company vehicle on premises, 3 minimum  
*GFA - Gross Floor Area 
Section 7.05 - Required Off-Street Loading Spaces 
(a)  Off-street loading spaces shall be provided for a use that distributes or receives materials or merchandise by truck or other commercial vehicles in accordance with Table VII-2: Off-Street Loading Requirements except as otherwise provided in this ordinance. 
(b)  No structure is required to provide more than five (5) loading spaces. 
(c)  Structures that are fifty (50) years old or more and were originally constructed without loading areas are exempt from the off-street loading requirements. Any additions or enlargements to such structures require the addition of one (1) off-street loading space. 
(d)  In the case of multi-tenant developments, required loading spaces are calculated on the basis of each individual tenant. If the floor area of each individual use is below the minimum for required loading spaces, but the aggregate floor area of all uses is greater than such minimum, then at least one (1) but no more than two (2) off-street loading spaces shall be provided. In such cases, the Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement may make reasonable requirements for the location of required loading spaces. 
(e)  In the case of commercial uses that utilize outdoor space for the storage and/or display of saleable goods, such as in the case of automotive sales, at least one (1) off-street loading space must be provided. 
(f)  If a use increases, the floor area by twenty-five percent (25%) or more, accessory off-street loading spaces are required in accordance with Table VII-2. However, no structure is required to provide more than five (5) loading spaces. 
Table VII-2: Off-Street Loading Requirements 
Use Type Number of Required Spaces Multi-Family Dwelling 20,000-50,000sf GFA 1 loading space 50,001-100,000sf GFA 2 loading spaces Each additional 40,000sf of GFA above 100,000sf 1 additional loading space Commercial and Institutional Uses 5,000-10,000sf GFA 1 loading space 10,001-30,000sf GFA 2 loading spaces 30,001-50,000sf GFA 3 loading spaces Each additional 20,000sf of GFA above 50,000sf 1 additional loading space Industrial Uses 5,000-10,000sf GFA 1 loading space 10,001-30,000sf GFA 2 loading spaces Each additional 40,000 of GFA above 30,000sf 1 additional loading space  
    Interpretation of the chart : The loading space requirements apply to all districts but do not limit the special requirements, which may be imposed in the district regulations. 
Section 7.06 - Design of Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces 
(a)  Design Review Required . A design review shall be conducted by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement prior to any construction, alteration, or addition of any motor-vehicle parking lot or structure providing ten (10) or more motor-vehicle parking spaces. For the purposes of this section, construction, alteration, or addition includes: 
[(1)]  All paving of previously unpaved surfaces. 
[(2)]  Replacement of pavement with new binder and surface courses. 
[(3)]  Construction of curbing. 
[(4)]  Installation of new parking lot landscapes. 
Construction, alteration, or addition does not include maintenance activities such as replacement of existing landscaping, repair of existing curbing, ordinary repairs, sealing, restriping, or placement of surface course pavement over previously paved areas. 
(b)  Permitted Motor Vehicle Parking Locations : 
(1)  Residential Uses : 
a.  All required off-street motor-vehicle parking spaces for residential uses and the residential component of mixed-use developments shall be located on the same lot as the building or use served. 
b.  For single-family and townhouse dwellings, required motor-vehicle parking spaces are permitted in private driveways or parking pads, but shall not encroach onto the public right-of-way. Tandem motor vehicle parking is permitted for residential uses but both spaces shall be allotted to the same dwelling unit and located on the same lot as the dwelling. 
c.  Parking spaces for single-family dwellings, and two-family dwellings, and in the R-1 and R-1A single-family residential zoning districts, and the R-2 two-family residential zoning district, may be designed so that vehicles back out onto a public street. In all other residential districts, such design is prohibited. 
d.  Parking is prohibited between the street curb and the nearest point of the front façade of any building if: 
i.  On a corner lot, the building is within ten (10) feet of the front property line. 
ii.  On a non-corner lot, the building is within five (5) feet of the front property line. 
iii.  This does not include permitted driveways. 
e.  All driveways shall have access to a legal parking space as required by this Ordinance. 
(2)  Non-Residential Uses : 
a.  Off-site motor-vehicle parking for a non-residential use may be located no more than three hundred (300) feet from the use served. Off-street vehicle parking spaces are subject to the following standards: 
i.  The three hundred (300) foot distance is measured in a radius beginning from the perimeter lot lines of the off-site vehicular parking lot. 
ii.  Off-site parking for a non-residential use is a permitted use in a non-residential district and a conditional use in a residential district. 
iii.  Accessory off-street parking lots serving non-residential uses in a residential district require a conditional use permit and are subject to the following requirements: 
1)  The parking lot shall be accessory to and used in connection with one (1) or more non-residential uses located in an adjoining district. 
2)  The parking lot shall be used solely for the parking of passenger automobiles. 
3)  Each access driveway from said parking lot shall be at least fifteen (15) feet from any lot line for a property located in a residential district. 
b.  Parking is prohibited between the street line and the nearest point of the front façade of any building or within five (5) feet of the front property line when located on a corner lot for any non-residential uses. 
c.  Parking spaces designed so that vehicles must back out onto public streets are not permitted. 
(c)  Dimensions of Motor Vehicle Parking Spaces : 
(1)  Off-street motor-vehicle parking spaces shall be designed in accordance with Table VII-3: Off-Street Motor Vehicle Parking Dimensions (Standard Space). 
Table VII-3: Off-Street Motor Vehicle Parking Dimensions (Standard Space) 

Parking Angle Stall Width (W) Stall Length (L) Aisle Width 
(A) Single Loaded 
Module b Width 
(SL) Double Loaded 
Module b Width 
(DL) 0 8.5' 21' 12'/24' a 20.5'/32.5' a 29'/41 a 45 8.5' 18' 13' 32' 51' 60 8.5' 18' 18' 38' 58' 75 8.5' 18' 20' 40.8' 61.6' 90 8.5' 18' 24' a 42' a 60' a a Two-way traffic permitted. b A module is defined as a drive aisle with automobiles parked on each side of the drive aisle.  
(2)  All motor-vehicle parking spaces shall have a minimum vertical clearance of seven feet six inches (7 '6"). 
(d)  Access Requirements for Off-Street Vehicle Parking Areas : 
(1)  Each off-street motor-vehicle parking space shall open directly upon an aisle or driveway of adequate width to provide access to a motor-vehicle parking space. 
(2)  All required off-street motor-vehicle parking facilities shall have vehicular access from a dedicated and accepted for maintenance street or cross-access connection. 
(3)  Within off-street parking lots and structures, one-way traffic aisles shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width and two-way traffic aisles shall be a minimum of twenty-four (24) feet in width. Furthermore, all aisles shall be designed in accordance with Figure VII-1: Sight Distance Triangle for Parking Structure Driveways. 
(4)  For parking structures that provide a deceleration lane leading to the entrance, the entrance ticket dispensers or access card point, including gates, shall be located at a distance sufficient to accommodate two (2) spaces for motor vehicles a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length for each space. When a deceleration lane is not provided, the entrance ticket dispensers or access card points and gates shall be located at a distance sufficient to accommodate four (4) spaces for vehicles a minimum of twenty (20) feet in length for each space. 
(5)  A sight-distance triangle shall be provided for each driveway access point for a parking structure. The triangle is measured from the point where each side of the driveway intersects the property line. At the point of intersection at each side of the driveway and the property line, a line of ten (10) feet in length shall be drawn toward the interior of the structure to form the sight-distance triangle. Parking, fencing, landscape, or other obstructions taller than one (1) foot in height that would block the view of the driver are prohibited in the sight-distance triangle. (See Figure VII-1: Sight Distance Triangle for Parking Structure Driveways) 
Figure VII-1: Sight Distance Triangle for parking Structure Driveways 

(e)  Surfacing : 
(1)  All surface parking lots shall be paved with a durable, all-weather material, or pervious paving. All uneven slabs shall be resurfaced to provide a smooth surface. 
(2)  All single-family and two-family dwellings are permitted to construct driveways that consist of two (2) concrete wheel strips, each of which is at least eighteen (18) inches wide and at least twenty (20) feet long. A permeable surface, such as turf, shall be maintained between such wheel strips. (See Figure VII-2: Parallel Parking Strips) 
(3)  Shells, gravel, crushed stone and bare earth are permitted paving materials for low volume parking areas or vehicle storage areas for spaces exceeding the minimum required spaces, pending design review by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
Figure VII-2: Parallel Parking Strips 

(f)  Striping : Off-street parking areas shall be marked by painted or paver lines, curbs, or other means to indicate individual spaces, and maintained in clearly visible condition. Signs or markers should be used as necessary to insure efficient and safe circulation within the lot. Vehicle parking spaces for handicapped persons shall be identified with the appropriate sign and visible at all times of the year, regardless of plant growth or similar conditions. 
(g)  Curbing and Wheel Stops : Wheel stops or curbing shall be provided to prevent vehicles from damaging or encroaching upon any adjacent parking or loading space, sidewalk, landscaped area, or parking lot island, fence, wall, or building. Within non-residential or mixed-use development parking lots, box curbs at least six (6) inches in height are required. 
(h)  Drainage and Maintenance : 
(1)  Off-street parking facilities shall be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion resistant material in accordance with applicable City specifications. Post construction stormwater run-off shall not exceed pre-construction stormwater run-off and shall be retained on the development site to prevent damage to abutting property as per Article X: Stormwater Management. 
(2)  Additions to existing parking lots of fifteen (15) or more motor-vehicle parking spaces shall be designed to filter or store the first one (1) inch of rainwater during each rain event. This can be accomplished through the use of pervious paving, rain gardens, bioswales, detention areas, constructed wetlands, and other methods deemed appropriate by the Planning Department and the Department of Public Works, as indicated in Landscape and Stormwater section. Parking lots for single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings of six (6) units or less are exempt from this requirement. 
(3)  Off-street parking areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and debris-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee. A minimum of one (1) litter receptacle shall be included in any parking lot. 
(i)  Lighting : Adequate lighting shall be provided if off-street parking spaces are to be used at night. All lighting shall be arranged to eliminate glare on residential property by location of light fixtures or use of fixtures designed to eliminate direct view of luminaries in fixtures from residential property. 
(j)  Landscape and Screening : All parking lots shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with Article IX: Landscaping Regulations. 
(k)  Accessible Vehicle Parking Requirements : All parking lots shall comply with the "ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities" regulations issued by federal agencies under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) for the amount and design of accessible vehicle parking spaces required in parking lots and structures. 
(l)  Hydraulic Lifts : If a parking facility or garage utilizes hydraulic lifts to move vehicles, all hydraulic lifts shall be located within the parking structure. 
(m)  Pedestrian Walkway Design within Parking Areas : 
(1)  Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems shall be provided where possible. 
(2)  Clearly delineated crosswalks of paving, brick paver, bituminous brick pattern stamping, or painted striping shall connect landscaped areas and parking lot islands to building entrances to improve safe passageway for pedestrians. Curb cuts shall be included on landscaped areas or islands where such crosswalks are located. 
(3)  The use of pervious paving for pedestrian circulation systems is encouraged. 
(4)  Parking areas for developments with over fifty (50) parking spaces must have distinct and dedicated pedestrian access from the building entrance to parking areas and public sidewalks, according to the following standards: 
a.  One walkway can serve as a collector for up to four (4) bays of parked cars. 
b.  The walkways should be a minimum of four (4) feet wide, allowing an additional thirty (30) inches on each side for overhanging of automobiles. 
c.  Pedestrian walkways shall be clearly differentiated from driveways, parking aisles, loading spaces, and parking spaces through the use of elevation changes, a different paving material, or similar method. 
d.  Where a pedestrian walkway is parallel and adjacent to an automobile travel lane, it must be raised and separated from the automobile travel lane by a raised curb at least four inches high, bollards, or similar method. 
e.  In a retail development, pedestrian staging areas are designed and required in order to separate automobiles circulation from pedestrian movement. Such landscaped areas or parking lot islands shall be ten (10) feet in width. 
f.  A bump-out area shall be provided at the building entry in order to slow vehicle speeds in the lanes next to the building entry, and at designated pick-up and drop-off areas. Pick-up and drop-off lanes shall be parallel to vehicle circulation lanes. 
For integration of pedestrian walkways with required landscaping, see Section 9.07 (d) for specific landscape requirements. 
Figure VII-3: Pedestrian Walkways 

Section 7.07 - Design of Bicycle Parking Spaces 
    If a development provides bicycle parking spaces, the following guidelines apply: 
(a)  The bicycle parking area shall be convenient to building entrances and street access, but may not interfere with normal pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
(b)  Bicyclists should not be required to travel over stairs to access parking. 
(c)  All bicycle spaces should be located on the same lot as the use or within fifty (50) feet of the lot when on private property. 
(d)  Bicycle parking spaces should be located no more than fifty (50) feet from the principal building entrance and at the same grade as the sidewalk or an accessible route. 
Section 7.08 - Design of Off-Street Loadings Spaces 
(a)  Location : All off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use served. No off-street loading spaces may project into a public right-of-way. No off-street loading space is permitted in a required front yard. 
(b)  Dimensions : 
(1)  All required off-street loading spaces shall be a minimum of twelve (12) feet in width, a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and have a vertical clearance of at least fourteen (14) feet. 
(2)  Loading spaces for a funeral home may be reduced in size to ten (10) feet by twenty-five (25) feet and vertical clearance reduced to eight (8) feet. 
(3)  Structures that are fifty (50) years of age or older, at the time of adoption of this ordinance, and maintain loading spaces that do not comply with the dimensions of this section, are deemed legally conforming in terms of loading space dimensions. If new loading spaces are constructed, such spaces may be designed to match the dimensions of existing loading spaces rather than the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Surfacing : All off-street loading spaces shall be paved with a durable, all-weather material or an approved permeable paving system. Chapter 13, Article IV; City of Kenner Code of Ordinances. 
(d)  Drainage and Maintenance : Off-street loading facilities shall be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable City specifications. Off-street loading areas shall be maintained in a clean, orderly, and debris-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee. Any packing or other material associated with loading and unloading shall be contained within the loading area. 
(e)  Access Control and Signs : Each required off-street loading space shall be designed with adequate means of vehicular access to a dedicated for maintenance street, in a manner that will minimize interference with traffic movement. Directional signs leading to loading areas shall be in accordance with Article XI: General Sign Regulations. 
(f)  Lighting : Illumination of an off-street loading facility shall be arranged to deflect the direct rays of light away from adjacent properties and streets. 
(g)  Landscape and Screening : All loading facilities shall be landscaped and screened in accordance with Article IX: Landscaping Regulations. 
Section 7.09 - Driveway Design 
(a)  Driveway Design : 
(1)  Except for loading berths, driveways are limited to twenty-four (24) feet in width. Driveways shall be a minimum of eleven (11) feet for one-way drives, and a minimum of twenty-two (22) feet for two-way drives. Driveways in excess of twenty-four (24) feet in width may be approved by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement when necessary due to the special access required by the type of development. 
(2)  More than one driveway may occur on any piece of property provided that each driveway is separated from the abutting driveway by a landscaped island of at least eight (8) feet in width. 
(3)  Driveways must start no less than four (4) feet from an interior property line in all multi-family (R-MF) and non-residential zoning districts. 
(4)  Driveways on corner lots must start no less than six (6) feet from a corner property line in all residential districts except multi-family (R-MF). For multi-family (R-MF) and non-residential districts, driveways may not start less than twenty (20) feet from a corner property line. 
(b)  Cross-Access Servitudes : 
(1)  Adjacent commercial uses that possess dedicated parking areas are encouraged to provide a cross-access drive to allow circulation between sites. For new commercial, office, and service uses, a system of joint use driveways and cross-access servitudes is encouraged where feasible. Commercial property owners are encouraged to pursue cross-access with neighboring property owners at the time of development. If cross access is provided, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall require that the property owner provide proof that adjacent property owners have been contacted in writing regarding the provision of cross-access. (See 
(2)  Joint-use driveways and cross-access servitudes shall incorporate the following: 
a.  A minimum width of twelve (12) feet with no adjacent parking to ensure two-way travel aisles to accommodate automobiles, service vehicles and loading vehicles. 
b.  Bump-outs and other design features to make it visually obvious that the abutting properties are tied together. 
c.  A unified access and circulation plan for coordinated or shared parking areas. 
(3)  Pursuant to this section, property owners who establish cross-access servitudes shall: 
a.  Record a servitude allowing cross-access to and from properties served by the joint use driveways and cross-access servitude. 
b.  Record a servitude that remaining access rights along the roadway will be dedicated to the City, and that any pre-existing driveways will be closed and eliminated after construction of the joint-use driveway. 
c.  Record a joint maintenance agreement defining the maintenance responsibilities of each property owner. 
Figure VII-4: Cross Access Servitudes 

Section 7.10 - Vehicle Stacking Spaces for Drive-Through Facilities 
    Every drive-through facility shall provide a minimum of three (3) vehicle stacking spaces per bay, unless otherwise required by Figure VII-5 of this Ordinance. Vehicle stacking spaces provided for drive-through uses shall be: 
(a)  A minimum of nine (9) feet in width, as measured from the outermost point of any service window to the edge of the driveway, and eighteen (18) feet in length. (See Figure VI-5: Stacking Spaces) 
(b)  Placed in a single line behind the drive-through facility. 
(c)  Located so that, when in use, they do not obstruct ingress or egress to the site and do not obstruct access to required parking or loading spaces. 
(d)  Stacking spaces shall begin behind the vehicle parked at a last point of service, such as a window or car wash bay. 
(e)  No stacking spaces are permitted between the front of the building and the adjacent public right-of-way. 
Figure VII-5: Stacking Spaces 

Section 7.11 - Storage of Commercial and Recreational Vehicles 
    The following restrictions apply to the parking or storage of commercial vehicles, including school buses, on property located in a residential zoning district. 
(a)  Commercial Vehicles : 
(1)  This provision shall not apply to owner-operators who have continuously parked their vehicle on their premises since the 14th day of July 1980, and has parked their vehicle in accordance with the following requirements. 
(2)  No vehicles licensed or required to be licensed with license plates exceeding the ten thousand (10,000) pounds classification, school bus license plate, or private bus plate, shall be parked on any developed or undeveloped lot in any residential district, except for vehicles engaging in loading, unloading, or current work being done to the adjacent premises. 
(3)  Any person who is granted any rights under the above section shall lose any rights granted and shall be prohibited from parking said vehicle if: 
a.  Owner-operator should sell said vehicle and not acquire another; or, 
b.  The owner-operator shall cease to park said vehicle for a continuous period of six (6) months; or, 
c.  The owner-operator is convicted twice within a two-year period for violating any provisions of this ordinance. 
(4)  At no time shall anyone granted any rights under this ordinance be allowed to park more than two (2) commercial vehicles, nor may any rights granted be transferred to any other person. 
a.  No more than one (1) registered school bus shall be parked on the residential site. Households with two (2) school bus drivers, each with a registered school bus functioning since July 14, 1980, shall be allowed to continue to park a maximum of two (2) school buses per residential site in accordance with the following regulations. 
b.  Each school bus shall be parked outside of the front yard area within the rear or side yard area only, excluding the side yard of corner lots on the side of the residential site abutting the side street. A side yard of an interior lot that is used to accommodate the parking of a school bus shall be at least nine (9) feet in width. 
c.  Parking of the school buses shall not occupy the required off-street parking space on a residential site. 
d.  Each school bus must be properly screened by vegetation or by an opaque fence not to exceed a height of seven (7) feet and consisting of wood, brick or masonry. 
e.  No junked, derelict, or inoperable school buses shall be parked on a residential site. 
f.  School buses shall not be parked on any street immediately adjacent to any residential site in accordance with Section 15-51.1 of the Kenner Code of Ordinances. 
g.  Minor repairs and maintenance shall be screened so as not to be visible from the street and shall only be conducted in the side or rear yard outside of the area between the front property line and the front line of the main building. Any repairs and maintenance shall be conducted so as not to cause excessive noise or odor, and shall only be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. Only the following minor repairs and maintenance may be conducted by residents on school buses authorized to be parked on a residential site: 
i.  Exterior and interior cleaning of the bus; 
ii.  Replacing of windshield wiper blades; 
iii.  Replacing of light bulbs or other signaling devices; 
iv.  Replacing of batteries and belts; 
v.  Changing or topping off of fluids, in compliance with section 9 1/2-8 of the Kenner Code of Ordinances, which prohibits the disposal of greases, oils and waste by-products into subsurface or open drainage systems; 
vi.  Changing of tires, not to include breaking down or repair of tires; and 
vii.  Replacement of brake shoes and pads. 
(5)  For the purpose of this section, the term "residential site" shall mean a single lot or parcel of land, under single ownership with continuous frontage, and which is improved with a residential dwelling. 
(6)  Nothing contained in these regulations shall prohibit a religious institution or school from parking school buses, owned by the religious institution or school or operated under contract to the religious institution or school, on the religious institution or school grounds. 
(b)  Recreational Vehicles : Recreational vehicles and recreational watercraft may be parked or stored on the sites of single-family, two-family, and three- and four-family dwellings including manufactured homes and townhouses, subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  At no time shall parked or stored recreational vehicles and recreational watercraft be occupied or used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes. 
(2)  Setback requirements: 
a.  Recreational vehicles not parked or stored inside of a fully enclosed garage shall be parked or stored completely behind the front building line of the principal structure or not less than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line, whichever is closest to the front lot line. 
b.  If a variance is granted to the building line or setback requirement for recreational vehicles, they shall comply with the screening requirements of subsection (7) and shall in no case be parked in a required front yard. 
c.  Recreational vehicles seven (7) feet or less in height shall be located no less than three (3) feet from a side or rear lot line, unless screened from view of the abutting property in accordance with subsection (7). Recreational vehicles shall be measured from grade to their top edge and shall exclude any minor incidental projections; projections included in the measurement of height shall be considered as substantial by the discretion of the Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement. 
d.  Recreational vehicles over seven (7) feet in height shall be located no less than five (5) feet from a side or rear lot line and shall be screened from view of the abutting property and the abutting street right-of-way in accordance with subsection (7). 
e.  On corner lots, recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored closer to the abutting side street than the side building line of the principal structure unless screened in accordance with subsection (7). 
(3)  Recreational vehicles and recreational watercraft may be parked anywhere on the premises for loading or unloading purposes no longer than twenty-four (24) hours and shall not extend into any public right-of-way. In situations such as hurricanes or similar weather phenomenon, that necessitates an evacuation, the Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement may waive the limitation on hours for loading and unloading in this section. 
(4)  All recreational vehicles and recreational watercraft shall be in an operable condition and parked or stored on a surface that is maintained in good condition, free of weeds, dust, trash, and debris. Recreational watercraft parked or stored in front of the front building line of the principal structure shall be parked or stored on a hard surface and limited to twenty-five (25) feet in length. 
(5)  The accessory buildings regulations set forth in Section 12.06 and the following additional criteria shall apply: 
a.  Applicant shall present to the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement a valid Louisiana motor vehicle or boat registration to demonstrate the need for exception to Section 12.06. 
b.  The height of the garage door of a detached or attached accessory building in which the recreational vehicle or recreational watercraft is parked or stored shall not exceed a height of thirteen (13) feet. 
c.  Private garage structures over thirteen (13) feet shall be setback from the minimum side and rear yard setbacks for accessory structures one (1) foot for every additional one (1) foot or fraction thereof in height over thirteen (13) feet until the minimum side or rear yard setback requirement of the principal structure is reached, and in no case shall exceed nineteen (19) feet in height in a required yard. 
d.  Exterior wall material of garages shall be composed of residentially compatible materials as defined in Section 3.02 (c). 
(6)  Notwithstanding the regulations of Section 12.03 (b), the following regulations shall apply for detached carports and shelters housing recreational vehicles and recreational watercraft shall comply with the following criteria: 
a.  Detached carports and shelters shall not exceed thirteen (13) feet in height or a length of forty (40) feet if located in a required side or rear yard unless an applicant presents to the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement a valid Louisiana motor vehicle or watercraft registration to demonstrate the need for additional height or length. 
b.  Detached carports and shelters over thirteen (13) feet shall be setback from the minimum side and rear yard setbacks one (1) foot for every additional one (1) foot or fraction thereof in height over thirteen (13) feet until the minimum side or rear yard setback requirement of the principal structure is reached, and in no case shall exceed nineteen (19) feet in height in a required yard. 
c.  Any vertical surfaces shall be constructed of residentially compatible materials as defined in Section 3.02 (c). 
(7)  Screening requirements: 
a.  Recreational vehicles must be screened by a living fence (trees, shrubs, hedgerow, etc.) or an opaque wood, brick, vinyl or masonry fence with a minimum height of six (6) feet or any combination thereof. 
b.  Living fences shall be at least two (2) feet in height when planted and must be at least a height of six (6) feet within two (2) years and create a continuous opaque buffer. 
c.  Recreational vehicles stored completely underneath a freestanding carport or shelter in which at least the two (2) longest sides are covered halfway from the structure's peak height to grade are exempt from the screening requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,229, § 1, 3-9-17; Ord. No. 11,394, § 2, 4-5-18) 
Section 7.12 - Parking in Front Yards 
(a)  Limitation on Pavement of Required Yard Areas : The pavement of a required front yard shall be limited to forty (40) percent of the required front yard area. The pavement of the side yard required on the side street of a corner lot shall be limited to forty (40) percent of the required side yard area. Pavement includes the placement of impermeable material on the surface of the land such as brick, stone, asphalt, or concrete. A green area of living planted materials shall be provided between the public right-of-way and structure or paved area. The area utilized for a fence, chain wall or masonry fence shall be excluded. 
(b)  Parking in Front Yards : 
(1)  Off-street parking spaces shall not be located between a street line and the nearest point of the front façade of any building, except as otherwise specified in this section (see diagram below): 
Figure VII-6: Permanent Location of Off-Street Parking 

    Diagram illustrating the permitted location of off-street parking with respect to the front façade of a building* 
Figure VII-7: Permanent Location Off-Street Parking 

(2)  In the C-1, C-2, MU and S-I, L-I, H-I Districts, required off-street parking spaces may be located in a required front yard provided the spaces are so arranged as to preclude backing out on a public street. 
(3)  In any district where a parking structure is permitted to project into a required front yard, off-street parking spaces may be located within the structure. 
(4)  Driveway space for access to parking areas or drive-in service facilities may be located in a required front yard. 
(5)  A circular drive shall not be permitted in the front yard in a residential district unless all of the following are met: 
a.  An area is provided in the drive for a parking space that does not encroach into the required front yard setback; 
b.  There is a minimum of three (3) feet between the drive and the side lot lines; 
c.  The lot width is fifty (50) feet or greater; 
d.  Approval is received from the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement regarding curb cuts, and; 
e.  The required setback areas continue to meet the standards of subsection (b)(1) above. 
Article VIII. - Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses 

Section 8.01 - General 
(a)  The regulations in this Article qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in the ordinance. 
(b)  Any use determined to be hazardous or obnoxious based on the criteria within this Article are permitted only in Heavy Industrial (H-I) districts. Such uses are prohibited in all other districts. 
Section 8.02 - Established Hazardous or Obnoxious Uses 
(a)  The uses listed below are considered hazardous or obnoxious uses and must be approved by the City Council after a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Article VI, Zoning, prior to the issuance of a construction permit or a certificate of occupancy. 
(1)  Fuel gas storage (not service stations or gas stations) 
(2)  Fuel gas distribution station 
(3)  Gasoline storage and wholesale distribution. (Does not include service stations or gas stations) 
(4)  Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of Paris manufacture or storage 
(5)  Gas manufacture 
(6)  Gravel pits. 
(7)  Refining of petroleum or its products 
(8)  Sand and gravel pits 
(9)  Land and gravel storage yard 
(10)  Reserved 
(11)  Vulcanizing and galvanizing shops 
(12)  Oil, gas and mineral exploration 
(13)  Sand blasting as a primary occupation 
(14)  The production and/or storage of red label chemicals and products as defined by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA). 
(15)  Any other similar use which would be objectionable or obnoxious because of danger from radiation, explosion or because of the emission or creation of smoke, dust, fumes, odors, gas, noise, vibration or similar conditions as determined by the Director of the City of Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(b)  Any use that requires permitting from the US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality (LADEQ) or is listed on the EPA's Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) must obtain a Determination of Hazardous and Obnoxious Use in accordance with the provisions of this Article. If such review finds proposed use to be hazardous or obnoxious, then the proposed use must be approved by the City Council after a public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Article VI prior to the issuance of a construction permit or a certificate of occupancy. 
(c)  A Neighborhood Early Notice Conference, as stated in Article VI, Section 6.01(c) is required for any proposal if the development site is within one thousand (1,000) feet of a residential zoning district 
Section 8.03 - Basic Requirements for Hazardous and Obnoxious Uses 
    The uses determined to be hazardous or obnoxious uses must be approved by the City Council, subject to compliance with the following criteria, after public hearing in accordance with the provisions of Article VI, Section 6.02 (e), prior to the issuance of a construction permit, or a certificate of occupancy. 
(a)  The proposed use shall be compatible with and shall not adversely affect other property in the area and in no case will the proposed use be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of any structure used for human occupancy, provided, however, that this occupancy provision shall not apply to occupancy required for the processing, receiving or storage of the hazardous or noxious material. The distance shall be measured radially from the property lines. 
(b)  The minimum site area shall be fifty thousand (50,000) square feet and the structure coverage shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the site area. 
(c)  The building or buildings occupying the hazardous or obnoxious use shall be set back from all property lines a distance of not less than one hundred (100) feet. 
(d)  The street system, ingress and egress, off-street parking, loading and pedestrian ways shall be adequate and in accordance with the Code of Ordinances of the City of Kenner. 
(e)  Adequate safeguards shall be provided to limit toxic, noxious, or offensive emissions of smoke, gas, gases, vibration, light, noise, glare, dust and odors, or other toxic, noxious, or offensive fumes, ground pollutants or pollutants of any kind. Safeguards regarding the foregoing shall be presented to the City and shall minimize adverse impacts and nuisances in accordance with the best available technology. 
(f)  Open space shall be maintained by the owner/developer sufficient to provide ready access to fire and emergency equipment. 
(g)  The proposed use shall comply with all current regulations including, but not limited to, those set forth by the Environmental Protection Agency, Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, Jefferson Parish and the City of Kenner. 
(h)  Any proposed change in use or processing, including any changes in the use of the products or products themselves, which may affect emission data previously submitted, shall require City Council approval in accordance with this section. 
(i)  An adequate on-site system shall be provided to contain run-off and any hazardous materials stored on site shall be contained in such a way to prevent the run-off, leakage, or discharge of these materials. 
(j)  All new and renovated service stations and related establishments shall be required to install monitoring wells. 
(k)  All facilities with below ground storage sites shall provide monitoring wells. 
(l)  All monitoring wells shall be sampled every three (3) months by the owner/operator to measure leakage or seepage of the contents stored in the underground storage facility. The laboratory report shall be provided to the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement for each quarterly sampling. 
(m)  An environmental impact statement must be provided when requested from the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement, Fire Department or Wastewater Operations Department. 
(n)  A proposed use, which includes the use of propane gas, must specify in the ordinance that any individual pumping said propane gas shall be certified to do so. 
(o)  The ordinance proposing a hazardous or obnoxious use shall include a section requiring the applicant or current owner to submit an inventory list of all hazardous materials on the site to the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement on an annual basis, from the date of adoption of the ordinance. 
(p)  Approval by the City's Wastewater Operations Department of a spill prevention plan, when required. 
(q)  In the event that any of the above standards or regulations is in conflict with each other or any other section of this code, the more restrictive standard or regulation shall govern. 
Article IX. - Landscaping Regulations 

Section 9.01 - Intent and Purposes 
    The landscaping requirements established by this Article are intended to: 
(a)  Enhance the aesthetic appearance of developments throughout the City by providing standards related to the quality and functional aspects of landscaping. 
(b)  Increase compatibility between abutting land uses and between land uses and public rights-of-way by providing landscape screening or buffers. 
(c)  Protect public health, safety, and welfare by preserving and enhancing the positive visual experience of the built environment, providing appropriate transition between different land uses, preserving neighborhood character, and enhancing pedestrian and vehicular traffic safety. 
(d)  Provide for the conservation of water resources through the efficient use of irrigation, appropriate mix of plant materials, recycling water elements, and regular maintenance of landscaped areas. 
(e)  Reduce the urban heat island effect, enhance the local microclimate, and increase biodiversity. 
Section 9.02 - Enforcement of Provisions 
    No building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued for any lot or use subject to the requirements of this Article unless all the requirements of this Article have been met. Failure to implement the landscape plan, or to maintain the lot or use in conformance with the landscape plan, is cause for revocation of the certificate of occupancy and/or the application of fines and penalties, as established in Article IV Administration and Enforcement, of this Ordinance. In addition, all landscape is subject to periodic inspection. 
Section 9.03 - Integration with Stormwater Management 
    With the understanding that landscaping is critical to proper stormwater management, it is highly recommended that both this and the following chapter, Article X: Stormwater Management, be read in their entirety before beginning any site planning so that stormwater management practices are incorporated into landscaping in the most efficient and cost effective manner possible. 
Section 9.04 - Landscape Management Plans 
(a)  Applicability : The provisions of the landscape section apply to: 
(1)  All new development projects with the exception of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multifamily dwellings of five (5) units or less. 
(2)  Existing development other than single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multifamily dwellings of five (5) units or less that requires the issuance of a building permit for a building addition or renovation amounting to more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the existing street façade. 
(3)  Issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy 
(4)  Development, redevelopment or re-paving of vehicular use areas (parking lots), or vehicular use area additions of one (1) or more parking spaces with the exception of single-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, and multifamily dwellings of five (5) units or less. 
(b)  Landscape Plan Submission and Approval : 
(1)  Three (3) sets of each plan must be submitted to the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. The Director shall approve each plan in consultation with a landscape architect and/or civil engineer licensed in the State of Louisiana prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(2)  In addition to meeting the requirements herein, each plan must include any criteria that may be required by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department. If disapproved, justification must be given to the applicant. 
(3)  All reviewed plans will be returned to the designer marked "approved" or "approved as noted" or "denied." Rejected plans may be returned to the department for re-evaluation once noted corrections are made. 
(4)  A copy of each approved plan will be archived to ensure that it was implemented as permitted and maintained as required. 
(5)  Where City Council approval is required, such as a conditional use, the applicable landscape plan must be approved the Department of Planning prior to any Council action. If changes occur to the plan after approval, the changes must not compromise the original plan. 
(c)  Content of Landscape Plan : 
(1)  Landscape plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect or landscape horticulturist licensed in Louisiana. A landscape plan shall contain the following information: 
a.  The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed structures, property lines, servitudes, easements, parking lots and drives, roadways and rights-of-way, sidewalks, signs, refuse disposal and recycling areas, bicycle paths and parking facilities, fences, utilities on and off site, recreational facilities, drainage facilities, and other freestanding structures, as determined necessary by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
b.  The location, quantity, size, condition, and name, both botanical and common, of all existing plant materials and trees, and a description of all tree preservation measures. 
c.  The location, quantity, size, name, and condition of all plant material and trees in the right-of-way, and indicating plant material and trees to be retained and removed. 
d.  The location, quantity, size, and name, both botanical and common, of all proposed plant material including, but not limited to, shade and evergreen trees, shrubs, groundcover, annuals, perennials, and turf. 
e.  Irrigation or watering system plans, if applicable 
f.  The existing and proposed grading of the site indicating contours at one (1) foot intervals 
g.  Elevations of all proposed fences, walls, steps, and fixed retaining walls on the site 
h.  Sight triangles at all vehicular driveways 
i.  Current land use of adjacent properties 
j.  A summary tabulation of all landscape requirements 
k.  Elevations, cross-sections, and other details as deemed necessary by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department 
l.  Any other requirement deemed necessary by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement needed to determine compliance with this Article 
(2)  When the final landscape plan is submitted, a date for completion of all plantings and related work must be included on the plan. Landscaping must be installed and completed in accordance with the submitted plan prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(3)  All landscape plans must contain the following landscape and buffer maintenance agreement notation: 
a.  The owner is responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping. 
b.  All plant materials must be maintained in a healthy and growing condition as is appropriate for the season of the year. 
c.  Plant materials, which die, must be replaced with similar healthy plant materials. 
d.  All landscaping must be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This includes mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding, and other such activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. 
e.  Landscaped areas must be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other such material or plants not part of the landscaping. 
f.  All sight triangles shall be maintained in accordance with AASHTO standards as per the latest edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
(d)  Minor Changes to Approved Landscape Plans : Minor changes to the landscape plan that do not result in a reduction in the net amount of plant material as specified on the approved landscape plan or a reduction in the net amount of water detained or stored and filtered on-site may be approved by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department. Changes to the size and amount of plant materials of an approved landscape plan are not considered a minor change. Major changes shall be approved by the body initially granting approval of the landscape plan. 
(e)  Alternative Compliance : 
(1)  The landscape standards contained in this Article are intended to encourage development, which is economically viable and environmentally sensitive. The standards are not intended to be so specific as to inhibit creative development. Project conditions associated with individual sites may justify approval of alternative methods of compliance with the landscape standards. Conditions may arise where normal compliance is impractical or impossible, or where maximum achievement of the City's objectives can only be obtained through alternative compliance. 
(2)  Requests for alternative compliance will be accepted for any permit application to which the requirements of this Article apply, when one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Topography, soil, vegetation, drainage, or other site conditions are such that full compliance is impractical. 
b.  Improved environmental quality would result from the alternative compliance provisions of this Article. 
c.  Spatial limitations, unusually shaped pieces of land or unusual servitude requirements may justify alternative compliance. 
d.  Public safety considerations made alternative compliance necessary. 
(3)  A request for alternative compliance must be submitted to the Director of the Department of Planning when the landscape plan is submitted. 
a.  The Director of the Department of Planning, in consultation with the Director of the Inspections and Code Enforcement department, may not reduce the requirements of this Article by more than fifty (50) percent. 
b.  Requests for alternative compliance must be accompanied by sufficient written explanation and landscape plan drawings to allow appropriate evaluation and decision by the Director of the Department of Planning in consultation with the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
Section 9.05 - Installation and Maintenance of Plant Materials 
(a)  Installation : 
(1)  All landscape materials shall be installed in accordance with the current planting procedures established by the "Louisiana Nurseryman's Manual for the Environmental Horticultural Industry," latest edition, as published by the Louisiana Nursery and Landscape Association. All plant materials shall be free of disease and installed so that soil is of sufficient volume, composition, and nutrient balance to sustain healthy growth. 
(2)  All planting materials shall be of good quality and meet American Association of Nurserymen (AANS) Standards for minimum acceptable form, quality, and size for species selected. 
(3)  Soil must be fertile, friable soil typical of locality. It must be well drained, clean, and free of clay, stones, and weeds. Construction sand/soil will not be approved as a suitable planting medium. 
(4)  A minimum two-inch mulch dressing is required for all plantings. Mulch should be kept away from direct contact with tree trunks. Rock and gravel are not acceptable forms of mulch. The use of cypress mulch is prohibited due to environmentally destructive harvesting practices. 
(b)  Protection of Existing Vegetation : All construction projects due shall abide by Section 9.09, Tree and Shrub Plantings on Public Property and will preserve existing, non-invasive plant material wherever feasible. 
(c)  Maintenance : The technical requirements for the maintenance of plant materials and landscape areas are as follows: 
(1)  The developer, his successor, agent and/or property owner, is responsible for the maintenance, repair and replacement of all landscape materials that are required by this comprehensive landscape ordinance. Maintenance includes but is not limited to weeding, irrigating, fertilizing, pruning, and replacement of dead or dying plants. 
(2)  Landscape maintenance specifications require that all landscaping must be maintained in a sound manner and in accordance with accepted maintenance procedures as established by the Louisiana Nursery and Landscape Association. 
(3)  All plant materials and planted areas must be tended and maintained in a healthy growing condition and kept free of refuse and debris. Plant materials that exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease, and/or damage must be appropriately treated, and dead plants must be replaced. 
(4)  Care must be taken to protect all trees and landscape materials while performing routine maintenance operations (i.e. grass cutting, trenching, etc.). 
(5)  The removal of any trees or landscape materials for the purpose of flood or drainage requirements must be replaced by a similar tree or plant material as required by the provisions of this comprehensive landscape ordinance. 
(6)  All plantings are subject to periodic inspections by the City of Kenner. 
(7)  The property owner of land abutting a constructed public right-of-way is responsible for landscaping and maintenance of any right-of-way area between the front property line and the street curb. 
(8)  Trees which overhang sidewalks at curbs must be trimmed to a minimum height of six (6) feet six (6) inches above grade. 
(9)  Trees which overhang streets must be trimmed to maintain clearance at a minimum height of fifteen (15) feet above grade or conform to the latest edition AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Traffic Officials) A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets, whichever is greater. 
(10)  Tree topping is prohibited 
(11)  Diseased or Hazardous Plants: 
a.  The Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement has the authority to require that property owners treat or allow the City to treat trees or shrubs suffering from transmittable diseases or infestation of pests. 
b.  If the disease or pests warrant drastic action to curb the spread to healthy trees or shrubs, or if the tree represents a public hazard, on the advice of the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement, the property owner may be required to cut and destroy the trees or shrubs or allow the City or its agent to do so, charging the actual cost involved to the property owner. 
c.  If the property owner refuses to pay any such charges, the charges will be treated as grass or weed charges, following the procedures set forth in Kenner Code of Ordinances 91/2-7(f), 91/2-7(g) and 91/2-7(h), including liening the owner's property and including the charges on the ad velorum tax bill. 
(12)  Sight Triangles: As per Section 7.06 (d)(5), and in addition, must conform to AASHTO (American Association of State Highway and Traffic Officials) standards as per the latest edition of A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets. 
(13)  Watering: 
[a.]  Operation of Automatic Irrigation Systems. Whenever possible, automatic irrigation systems should be operated between the hours of four (4) and six (6) A.M. 
[b.]  Maintenance of Irrigation Systems. Irrigation systems must be constantly maintained to eliminate waste of water due to seasonal change, loss of heads, broken pipes, or misadjusted nozzles. 
[c.]  Manual Watering. When no irrigation system is provided, the owner of the property is responsible for the provision of adequate water to required plant materials. 
Section 9.06 - General Landscape Design Standards 
Landscape plans, as described above, shall be prepared by a landscape architect or landscape contractor licensed in Louisiana, and evaluated and approved based on the following design criteria: 
(a)  Scale and Nature of Landscape Material : The scale and nature of landscape materials shall be appropriate to the size of the site and related structures. 
(b)  Selection of Plant Material : Plant material shall be selected for its form, texture, color, pattern of growth, and suitability to local conditions. The use of invasive plant species is strictly forbidden. All landscape plans shall incorporate at least thirty percent (30%) of native trees and shrubs into required plant materials to provide habitat for wildlife and reduce irrigation requirements. 
(c)  Trees : 
(1)  All single trunk trees must have a minimum caliper of two (2) inches immediately after planting. 
(2)  Multi-trunk trees must have main stems with a minimum one (1) inch caliper per trunk immediately after planting. All multi-trunk trees must have a minimum of three (3) trunks. The multi-trunk tree must measure a minimum of ten (10) to twelve (12) feet tall immediately after planting. All tree heights must be measured from the top of the root ball to the tip of the branch. 
(3)  Palm trees count toward Class "B" tree requirements only. Only cold hardy species acclimated to growing in this climate are permitted. All palm trees must have a minimum height of fourteen (14) feet trunk height, measured from the ground line, which should be at or near the top of the root zone, to the base of the heartleaf. 
(4)  Tree species must be selected or located in such a manner that will not interfere with overhead utility lines. 
(5)  Trees must be planted in a bed with a minimum planting area of sixty (60) square feet. 
(6)  Recommended species list. The Department of Planning will provide species recommendations upon request. 
(7)  A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of required trees must be "Class A." 
(8)  Class A trees are any self-supporting woody plant of a species that normally grows to an overall height of fifty feet (50') or more. 
(9)  Class B trees are any self-supporting woody plant of a species that normally grows to an overall height of greater than twelve feet (12'). 
(10)  Palm trees can only be used for up to thirty-three percent (33%) of the total tree requirements. 
(d)  Shrubs : 
(1)  Shrubs must be a minimum 3-gallon well-rooted container stock. 
(2)  Unless otherwise noted, all shrubs must be planted a minimum of three feet (3') on center. 
(3)  Shrubs used for screening or buffering purposes must obtain a minimum mature height of thirty-six inches (36"). 
(e)  Perennials and Groundcover : Groundcovers (other than turf grass) must be minimum four-inch container stock, spaced a maximum of eight (8) inches on center. Two and one-half (21/2) inch container stock may be substituted and spaced a maximum of six (6) inches on center. Vines and ground cover plants should show a number of vigorous runners or a well-developed crown. 
(f)  Mulch : A minimum two-inch mulch dressing required for all plantings. Mulch should be kept away from direct contact with tree trunks. Rock and gravel are not acceptable forms of mulch. The use of cypress mulch is prohibited due to environmentally destructive harvesting practices. 
(g)  Detached Signage : All detached signage must include a three-foot deep, twelve-inch tall minimum planting bed on all sides of the sign. This planting requirement does not apply toward other planting requirements. 
(h)  Irrigation : The use of drip irrigation systems is encouraged. Irrigation design and installation must meet the requirements of the Louisiana Horticultural Commission. 
(1)  An irrigation system is required for all commercial, institutional, public, and semipublic land uses. 
(2)  The Director of Planning may require a fully automated irrigation system with a rain sensor. 
(i)  Waste Water Prevention : Water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation is prohibited. Water waste from irrigation is defined as runoff that leaves the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent properties, non-irrigated areas, walks, or roadways. Overspray and runoff are not considered water waste from irrigation if either one of the following conditions is met: 
(1)  The landscape area is adjacent to semi-pervious or pervious surfaces. 
(2)  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscape. 
(j)  Stormwater Best Management Practices : The City encourages the use of stormwater best management practices (BMP), such as retention basins, detention reservoirs, bio-swales, planted buffers, rain gardens, infiltration trenches, grass filters, porous paving, underground stormwater collection chambers and other on-site stormwater management practices to improve water quality, reduce stormwater runoff and flood hazards. 
In order to comply with federal, state, and local regulations for urban stormwater management, a stormwater management plan shall be submitted as part of any new development, including redevelopment, of a site of seven thousand (7,000) square feet or more of impervious surface, or any new development, including redevelopment, of a site of one (1) acre or more in size. 
Single-family, two-family, and multi-family dwellings of five (5) units or less do not required a stormwater management plan, but shall comply with all other applicable federal, state, and local stormwater ordinances. 
Section 9.07 - Technical Landscape Design Standards 
This section provides the technical requirements for the installation of plant materials and landscaped areas. 
(a)  Site Square Footage Requirement : 
(1)  For all residential, commercial and special districts excluding R-1, R-1A, RR-1 and R-2: 
a.  There must be one (1) tree for each five thousand (5,000) square feet, or fraction thereof, of developed site area. On sites with buildings exceeding fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, fifty (50) percent of the required trees shall be Class A. 
b.  There must be one (1) shrub for each one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
(2)  Industrial and Airport related districts: 
a.  There must be one (1) tree for each twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) square feet, or fraction thereof, of developed site area. 
b.  There must be one (1) shrub for each three thousand (3,000) square feet. 
(b)  Greenbelts : A greenbelt is the required landscaping space adjacent to the property line of any public right-of-way of which the developed site fronts. Such areas must be landscaped based on the following criteria. 
The first five (5) feet extending from the property line along developed public rights-of-way must be landscaped in accordance with provisions set forth below. 
(1)  The greenbelt must contain : 
a.  A minimum of one (1) tree for every forty (40) linear feet of street frontage, or fraction thereof, measured at the property line. The required trees may be located anywhere within the above area. Corner lots with frontage on more than one (1) street must calculate the street planting requirements along the entire street frontage. 
b.  A minimum of one (1) shrub per ten (10) linear feet of right-of-way frontage. Shrub and non-turf ground cover plantings must cover forty (40) percent of the greenbelt. The required shrubs and ground cover can be arranged in any manner. 
c.  A minimum of seventy-five (75) percent of the greenbelt must have a ground cover or grass and other plant materials. The remaining twenty-five (25) percent may be covered with rock, stone, bark, etc., and other impermeable features including sidewalks and points of ingress and egress. 
(2)  The greenbelt requirement is in addition to the site square footage requirement. 
(3)  The greenbelt may contain earth berms, masonry walls, pedestrian walkways, site furniture, signage, site lighting, irrigation systems, fountains, play equipment, drainage facilities including micro detention/retention basins, detention/retention ponds and any other appropriate landscape features as approved by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement in consultation with the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
(4)  Retaining existing vegetation, either as lone growing specimens or groves of trees, within the greenbelt is highly encouraged. As an incentive to preserve existing non-invasive healthy trees and specimen shrubs found growing within the site area, credit for trees, shrubs and ground covers will be given as outlined in section (d) Landscape standards, (6) Tree preservation towards standards set forth in section (d) Landscape standards, (3) Landscape requirements. Underbrush and non-native weeds may be removed. 
(c)  Residential Buffer Zone : 
(1)  For the side and rear property lines abutting a residential zone or structure, one (1) tree is required for every ten (10) feet (or portion thereof) of common property line. Each tree must be spaced evenly along the common property line and must be planted in a strip of not less than five (5) feet wide. Each planting area must be landscaped with ground cover or other landscape material excluding paving in addition to the required tree. 
(2)  Prescribed fences or walls must be constructed in a continuous, unbroken barrier for the purpose of buffering off-street parking or other vehicular use areas exposed to the abutting property. The barrier must be between the common lot line of the abutting property and the off-street parking and/or other vehicular use area. 
a.  Walls must be constructed in a durable fashion with a finished opaque surface of brick, stone, or other decorative masonry material approved by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
b.  Fences must be constructed in an opaque durable fashion with weather resistant wood or vinyl and be of a consistent pattern. All materials used in the construction of a fence must be designed and intended for such use. 
c.  The Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement may approve a buffer fence/wall constructed of other materials, including earth berms, provided the materials and finish used will provide generally the same degree of opacity, durability, and aesthetic compatibility with adjoining residential areas as weather resistant wood. A finished side of all walls or fences must face the common property line boundary. 
i.  All berms must be planted with both shrubs and groundcovers to leave no bare earth. 
ii.  All shrubs must be of a size and species that can be expected to materially screen the development site within two (2) years of planting. 
iii.  The slope of a berm must be no greater than 3:1; Berms must be a minimum of three (3) feet in height or greater. 
iv.  Berms may be curvilinear in design. Combined fence and berm height at any point must meet minimum height requirements. 
d.  Chain link and/or welded wire fences are not acceptable buffer fence materials. 
(d)  Landscaping of Vehicular Use Areas and Parking Lots : 
(1)  A minimum of eight (8) percent of the vehicular use area of the interior of the lot must be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and groundcover other than turf grass for the purpose of guiding and separating vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
(2)  Such landscaping must be distributed within the vehicular use area in such a manner that no parking space is further than fifty (50) feet from a Class A or B tree. 
(3)  Perimeter of lot : 
a.  The perimeter(s) of the lot adjacent to public rights-of-way must be landscaped as required in section 9.07 (b), greenbelt requirement inside the property line. Trees must be located between the property line abutting the right-of-way and the off-street parking or other vehicular use area. 
b.  Adjacent to non-residential use: 
i.  A three-foot wide minimum landscape strip for effective buffering of the vehicular use area must be provided from streets and other views, including adjacent vehicular use areas. 
ii.  One (1) tree must be provided for each forty (40) feet of the common property line along the rear and side property lines. Such trees must be between the common lot line of the abutting property and the off-street parking or other vehicular use area. 
iii.  A hedge, wall, earth berm, or other durable landscape barrier with a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches in height along public rights-of-way and alongside and rear property lines, must be placed along the perimeter of said landscape strip. 
iv.  If said barrier consists of nonliving material, one (1) vine or shrub must be planted every ten (10) feet and abutting the barrier. 
v.  The remainder of the required strip must be planted with grass, ground cover or other landscape material exclusive of paving. 
vi.  Properties zoned industrial (S-I, L-I, H-I, AH-I) are permitted to plant the three-foot wide landscape strip with grass or groundcover in lieu of the thirty-six (36) inch in height landscape barrier along the side and rear property lines. 
(4)  Interior of lot : Interior lot landscaping must be provided by landscaped islands, peninsulas, or medians within the vehicular use area. 
a.  For vehicular use areas of twelve (12) to one hundred (100) parking spaces, one (1) interior Class A tree or two (2) interior Class B trees for every twelve (12) parking spaces or fraction thereof. 
b.  For vehicle use areas of over one hundred (100) parking spaces, one (1) interior Class A tree or two (2) interior Class B trees for every ten (10) parking spaces or fraction thereof. 
c.  In large parking lots with over one hundred (100) parking spaces, all double sided parking rows must have a terminal-planting island. 
d.  Any parking island, peninsula, or planting space internal to a vehicular use area must have a minimum width of five (5) feet and a minimum area of sixty (60) square feet of non-paved area if it is to contain a tree or trees. Change required width based on location of parking island and size of parking lot. 
e.  Provide a continuous landscape strip between every four (4) rows of parking. This should be a minimum of five (5) feet in width to accommodate a low hedge and shade trees. 
f.  Interior islands, peninsulas, or green space provided around a tree (or trees), for which preservation credits are to be given, must provide a non-paved area no nearer than three (3) feet from the tree(s) drip line to insure the survival of the preserved tree(s), subject to the approval of the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
g.  In large parking lots, separate pedestrian walkways must be provided to allow safe movement within the lots. These walkways should generally be oriented perpendicular to and between parking bays. Adjacent to the walks, trees should be planted. See Section 7.06 (m). 
h.  All such landscaped areas must be protected from vehicular access to these areas with six-by-six-inch raised vertical face curbs. 
i.  Residual areas not used for vehicular use or access must be landscaped. 
i.  Underground electric conduit, underground drain lines, communications cables, irrigation lines and the like must be installed within underground utility chases located within the first one-third ( 1/3 ) of the width of the available planting space along the curb or walkway edge within medians, neutral grounds, peninsulas, divider islands and interior islands so as not to interfere with tree installation. Offsets into the center of such spaces will be allowed if design dictates placement of light standards and other fixtures within the center of the space. 
(e)  Loading Areas and Service Bays : All service bays, loading and unloading areas, trash receptacles and dumpster areas must be screened by an opaque fence with a minimum height of seven (7) feet and consisting of wood, brick, vinyl or masonry. A thirty-six (36) inch minimum tall hedge or vines along all common property lines is also required. The fence and planting requirements may not be applied toward other landscape requirements. Exceptions may be made by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department in consultation with the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement for sites where spatial conditions do not allow for such screening. 
(f)  Utility Service Area : Utility service areas must be screened with plantings that will reach a mature height equal to that of the utility service area in three (3) years. This planting requirement does not count toward other planting requirements. Exceptions may be made in limited situations where plantings cannot obtain such heights. Example: cell phone towers. 
(g)  Display/Outdoor Sales Area : 
(1)  Defined as all areas used for the display and/or sales of any and all types of vehicles or equipment, whether such vehicles or equipment are self-propelled or not. 
(2)  All display/outdoor sales areas must conform to the same screening and tree planting standards as set forth for vehicle use areas. 
(3)  No singular point within a display/outdoor sales area may be more than fifty feet (50') from the nearest tree. 
Section 9.08 - Tree Preservation 
(a)  Tree Removal Permit : The tree removal process has been established to allow for a review of site development alternatives that would encourage the preservation of existing, significant trees. A tree removal permit is required prior to clearing any tract of land when one (1) of the following conditions is present: 
(1)  Tree clearing is proposed for land zoned for commercial, office, industrial or institutional development(s) and the site contains tree(s) with twelve-inch DBH or greater; or 
(2)  Tree clearing is for proposed residential development(s) greater than one (1) acre. 
(b)  Tree Preservation : A tree preservation plan is required in order to receive credit towards the landscaping requirements. The following tree preservation requirements must be followed for a proposed commercial, office, industrial, institutional, or residential development in order to receive credit. 
(1)  The owner is encouraged to preserve as many existing trees and shrubs as possible in the design and implementation of the landscape plan. 
(2)  Tree credit rate for each tree preserved is determined by this schedule: 
Table IX-1: Tree Preservation Credit Schedule 
Existing Drip line OR Existing Trunk Diameter (DBH) 

of Preserved Tree(s)** Number of Tree Credits 50 feet or greater in spread 26 inches or greater in diameter 5 40-49 feet in spread 20 inches in diameter 4 20-39 feet in spread 9-19 inches in diameter 3 6-10 feet in spread 3-8 inches in diameter 2  
*Drip line diameter measurement is rounded off to the nearest foot. 
**Diameter of trunk (DBH) of preserved tree is rounded off to the nearest inch. 
a.  All other trees preserved will receive one (1) credit with the exception of Chinese Tallow (Sapium sebiferum), Black Willow (Salix nigra), Cottonwood (Populus deltoids), Camphor Tree (Cinnamomum camphora) and other trees with life spans of twenty (20) years or less or invasive species. 
b.  Each tree credit is equal to one (1) Class A tree or two (2) Class B trees. 
c.  Following the issuance of a building permit, trees not designated for tree preservation on an approved landscape plan may be removed. 
d.  It is the responsibility of the owner to use reasonable care to maintain preserved trees. If a preserved tree dies within eight (8) years, it is the responsibility of the owner to replace that tree with the number of trees credited on a Class A or B matching basis within six (6) months. The owner is responsible for maintaining all plant materials required by this Article in good condition. 
e.  The tree preservation plan must include the location, size, and condition of each tree to be preserved, along with an indication of proposed development features, which may impact such trees, any other pertinent information as required by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement to evaluate existing and proposed conditions. 
f.  The tree preservation plan must include a detailed description of all methods to be used to ensure the survival of all trees scheduled for preservation credit, including information required by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement to interpret the intent and methodology proposed. 
g.  All tree preservation methodology must conform to the standards of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry, the Louisiana Horticulture Commission and the International Society of Arboriculture, or their successor agencies or organizations. 
(c)  Tree Protection During Construction : 
(1)  The area beneath the canopy of a tree shall be designated as a tree protection zone and kept safe from harmful impact during site development and construction. 
(2)  In the erection of any building or structure, the builder, contractor or owner thereof must place tree guards or barriers around all the nearby trees belonging to the City to prevent injury to them, and may not place building materials or trash upon public property without the permission of the Directors of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement and Department of Public Works. 
(3)  Contractors and others doing work on neutral grounds, either for excavation or other projects for which permission has been granted by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement, must give a bond to the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement in an amount sufficient to guarantee the payment of all costs for repairing any settlement or other damage or deterioration that takes place in the neutral grounds as a result of the project undertaken by them. The Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall determine this amount in accordance with the Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, current edition. 
(4)  Trees designated on the tree protection plan as protected trees must be completely enclosed by a fence at least of five (5) feet high, and approved by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. The limits of the tree fence must extend to the drip line. Tree fence location must be as described on the tree protection plan. 
(5)  In the event that a point of ingress/egress is required through a grove of trees to be preserved and all alternative routes have been investigated, the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department may allow a temporary pathway through the grove. Such a route will be as narrow as practical, temporarily covered with twelve-inch minutes gravel to protect tree roots from heavy machinery, and enclosed by protective fencing on both sides. A licensed arborist must be hired in order to properly prune tree branches damaged by construction equipment. 
(6)  Tree protection fencing must be in place prior to any clearing or site work. Tree protection fencing must remain in place until all construction has been completed or final acceptance has been issued, whichever is last. 
(7)  Tree protection fencing must carry durable signs designating the area as "Tree protection zone. No entry unless authorized by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement". Such signs must be spaced around the perimeter of all tree protection zones with a maximum spacing of twenty-five (25) feet. Signs must be a minimum eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches in size and must be firmly affixed to the tree protection fence. 
(8)  Any violation of a tree protection zone will subject the owner to the loss of tree preservation credits and will require the suspension of all work until a revised landscape plan is approved for the project. 
(9)  Tree protection zones must explicitly follow the terms and conditions of the approved tree preservation plan for that project or site. Any variation must receive the prior approval of the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(10)  The Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement may order additional tree protection measures if site conditions warrant them. 
Section 9.09 - Tree and Shrub Plantings on Public Property 
(a)  General Provisions : 
(1)  No person is permitted to cut, disturb, or interfere in any way with the roots of any public tree. 
(2)  Placement of decorations, wire, rope, signs, posters, barricades, and other fixtures on trees is prohibited. 
(3)  Injury to trees, including the misuse or removal of any device placed to protect any tree, is prohibited. 
(4)  Piling of building materials, debris or any other material about any tree or other vegetation is prohibited. 
(5)  Paving or placing of gravel or other such material under a tree canopy is prohibited unless approved by the Director of the Planning and Zoning Department. 
(6)  Dumping, pouring, or spilling of oil, concrete mix, salt or salt water or other substances upon any tree, including the root system, is prohibited. 
(7)  The Department of Planning shall designate the type of vegetation for all public property. 
(8)  The Director of Public Works may order that a tree or vegetation that was planted on public property be removed from the public property at the expense of the person or entity, which planted such tree or shrub. 
(9)  Any person who injures, damages or destroys any tree, or other vegetation or property on public property under the care of the City of Kenner, shall promptly notify the Department of Public Works of such fact and that person shall, within such reasonable time as specified by the Department of Public Works, repair or replace such damaged tree, other vegetation or property to the satisfaction of the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(b)  Permit for Tree and Shrub Planting, Pruning, Removal and Other Maintenance : 
(1)  No person, including public utility companies, is permitted to remove any tree or shrub growing within a dedicated street area of a public right-of-way or other public property without a permit from the Director of the Department of Public Works. Unless a permit is obtained from the Director of the Department of Public Works, it is unlawful to cut, trim, remove, spray, treat or plant any tree, shrub, hedge, or other plant upon a public right-of-way or other public property within the City. Violation of this section of the comprehensive landscape ordinance will subject the owner to penalties as outlined in Section 9.09 (e) Enforcement, Appeals, and Penalties. 
a.  In cases where a private person or company has maintained public property prior to the effective date of this ordinance, the private person or company shall be exempt from the permit requirement for the maintenance of the property, including grass cutting, trimming, spraying, treatment and replacement of dead plants. This exemption does not apply to the removal of trees or to new tree or shrub planting. 
b.  Exemption: If a public utility company has a franchise agreement with the City of Kenner, it shall be exempt from the permit requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  An application for a permit to plant, remove, prune or trim any tree or other vegetation in or on public property shall set forth the location in which the vegetation is to be planted, removed from or trimmed and be submitted to the Department of Public Works. 
(3)  The application must include a notarized affidavit in which the applicant agrees to compensate the City for any damages to public property and to waive all claims against the City for personal and property damage sustained by the applicant that may be related in any way to said permit and also agree to indemnify the City against any claims of third parties for personal injury and property damage that may be related in any way to said permit. 
(4)  The application permit fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per permit for all activities involving trees and shrubs with trunks less than four (4) inches in diameter. A separate permit shall be required for each tree or shrub with a trunk four (4) inches or greater in diameter. 
(5)  A permit may be conditioned on the furnishing of a bond or other adequate financial assurance for the payment of damages incurred as a result of a permit violation. 
(6)  Approval of a tree or shrub removal permit by the Director of the Department of Public Works may be conditioned on replacement with a new tree or shrub of an approved variety if it is found that such replacement is necessary to maintain an ornamental tree system on the street, block, park or other public property. 
(7)  Approval by the Director of the Department of Public Works will be given for tree removal when it is found that the particular tree should be removed or is unsafe because of growth which cannot be corrected by proper trimming, because of damage caused by the elements or because of age, disease or other debilitating cause, because of insecure root system which might cause the tree to fall, because of existing or potential interference with street use, because of root interference with subsurface sewer or utility facilities which reasonable root pruning may not correct, or because of any other conditions which he finds whereby such removal will be in the public interest. 
(8)  All requests for permits required by this Article and denied by the Department of Public Works will be accompanied by a list of reasons for denial. 
(9)  If the Department of Public Works refuses to grant a permit, the permit applicant may ask for the request to be reconsidered by the Director of the Department of Public Works within thirty (30) days from the date on which the written refusal was issued. 
(c)  Public Utilities : 
(1)  Public utility companies shall submit an annual trim plan by January 31 of each year to the Kenner Planning Department. 
(2)  The Louisiana Horticulture Law found in La. Rev. Stat. 3:3801 et seq., as amended, and the rules and regulations of the Louisiana Horticulture Commission govern the requirements for licensure of Utility Arborists. 
(3)  La. Rev. Stat. 3:3808, and the Horticultural Commission Regulation, Louisiana Administrative Code 7:XXIX.117 (I), authorize licensed Utility Arborists to recommend or execute the removal of trees or portions of trees along utility rights of way. Utility Arborists may not use climbing irons in any trees, which are not to be removed except in remote locations where other practical means of tree trimming are not available or as provided in Louisiana Administrative Code 7:XXIX.117.E.3. Utility Arborists are required to carry insurance as provided in Louisiana Administrative Code 7:XXIX.117.E.2.a. Utility Arborists must prominently display the license during all work. All recommendations and pruning practices must meet the standards outlined in the Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices, latest edition document number A300, published by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(4)  Failure to comply with the standards set forth in this section will result in penalties as outlined in La. Rev. Stat. 3:3810 and R.S. 3:3811. 
a.  In the case of an emergency, public utility companies may perform a minimum such pruning or digging measures that are necessary to restore or to avoid the loss of service or to abate imminent endangerment to human life without a permit under the following conditions: 
b.  All pruning or digging within the root system of a tree or shrub shall be done in accordance with the rules, of good arboricultural practice as set forth in the publication Tree Care Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance - Standard Practices, latest edition document number A300, published by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
c.  Any emergency work must be subsequently brought up to appropriate standards to the greatest extent possible, as determined by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. Such remedial work must be commenced as soon as possible. 
d.  Notwithstanding the above, said permission need not be obtained by a public utility in connection with providing a service line or drop in the provision of utility service provided at the request of any of its customers. 
(d)  Parkway Trees and Shrubs : All persons who are property owners or their agents may trim trees and other vegetation located on public property immediately in front or side of their property between the owner's private property line and the street right-of-way without a permit from the Director of Public Works. By trimming trees and other vegetation on said public property, such persons who are property owners and their agents shall thereby assume full liability for all damages to public property, that result from the action of said property owners or their agents that is related in any way to the trimming of trees and other vegetation on the public property and to fully indemnify the City including related court costs and attorney fees for any such damages or claims. Persons who are property owners or their agents shall be required to get a permit from the Director of Public Works to plant or remove trees or vegetation on public property other than grass, flowers or shrubs whose maximum size shall be less than thirty inches (30") in height. No permit fee shall apply to any permit issued to the owners of residential property who reside at such property as outlined in the above Exception; however, approval(s) and indemnification as outlined above shall apply to such permits. 
(e)  Enforcement, Appeals and Penalties : 
(1)  If a person or entity who causes damage to trees, shrubs or ground cover on public property fails or refuses to repair or replace the damaged or destroyed trees or other property within a reasonable period time as determined by the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement, the Director of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall do or cause to be done the necessary repairing or replacement, and the costs of this work shall be recovered from the person responsible for the damage or destruction by proper action of law. In any such action, Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, current edition, shall form the basis of establishing any monetary damages due for damage or destruction to the tree. 
(2)  Willful destruction of trees on public property shall render the person responsible liable for the actual cost of replacement, in addition to a fine of two hundred ($200.00) dollars for a small tree and five hundred ($500.00) dollars for a large tree, or be imprisoned no more than thirty (30) days, or both. In addition to the fine, the responsible party shall replace the damaged tree(s) with a specimen(s) of equal size and caliper, as approved by the Director of the Department of Planning, including a five (5) year warranty. If it is not possible to replace the tree with a tree of equal size, the difference in cost shall be met through the planting of as many additional trees as are required to match the monetary value of the destroyed tree. Guide for Plant Appraisal, published by the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, current edition, and shall form the basis of establishing any monetary damages due for damage or destruction to the tree. 
Article X. - Stormwater Management 

Section 10.01 - Intent and Purposes 
    The stormwater management requirements established by this Article are intended to reduce urban runoff and mitigate the effects of new development, redevelopment, or infill development on the existing drainage system by ensuring the preservation of permeable surfaces and requiring the installation of stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs) to slow surface flow of stormwater runoff and promote filtration, plant uptake, absorption and infiltration into sub-soils to reduce subsidence rates. 
Section 10.02 - Enforcement of Provisions 
(1)  No building permit or certificate of occupancy may be issued for any lot or use subject to the requirements of this Article unless all the requirements of this Article have been met. Failure to implement the stormwater management plan, or to maintain the lot or use in conformance with the stormwater management plan, is cause for revocation of the certificate of occupancy and/or the application of fines and penalties, as established in this Ordinance. In addition, all landscape is subject to periodic inspection. 
(2)  Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, any development that requires a stormwater management plan shall have a landscape architect and/or civil engineer licensed in Louisiana certify with signature and seal in an affidavit that the stormwater management measures have been installed in accordance with all approved plans and specifications. 
Section 10.03 - Integration with Landscaping 
    With the understanding that landscaping is critical to proper stormwater management, it is highly recommended that both this and the previous chapter, Article IX: Landscaping Regulations, be read in their entirety before beginning any site planning so that landscaping design measures are incorporated into stormwater management in the most efficient and cost effective manner possible. 
Section 10.04 - Stormwater Management Plans 
(a)  Applicability : 
(1)  In order to comply with federal, state, and local regulations for urban stormwater management, a stormwater management plan shall be submitted as part of any new development, including redevelopment, of a site of seven thousand (7,000) square feet or more of impervious surface, or any new development, including redevelopment, or a site of one (1) acre or more in size. 
(2)  Single-family and multi-family dwellings of five (5) units or less do not require submittal of a stormwater management plan, but shall comply with all other applicable federal, state and local stormwater ordinances. 
(b)  Stormwater Plan Submission and Approval : Three (3) sets of each plan must be submitted to the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. The Director shall approve each plan in consultation with a landscape architect and/or civil engineer licensed in the State of Louisiana prior to issuance of the building permit. 
(1)  In addition to meeting the requirements herein, each plan must include any criteria that may be required by the Director of the Department of Planning. If disapproved, justification must be given to the applicant. 
(2)  All reviewed plans will be returned to the designer marked "approved" or "approved as noted" or "denied." Rejected plans may be returned to the department for re-evaluation once noted corrections are made. 
(3)  A copy of each approved plan will be archived to ensure that it was implemented as permitted and maintained as required. 
(4)  For new developments that require final action by the City Council, the applicable stormwater plan must be approved by the Department of Planning prior to Council action. If changes occur to the plan after approval, the changes must not compromise the original plan. 
(c)  Content of Stormwater Management Plan : Stormwater management plans shall be prepared by a landscape architect and/or civil engineer licensed in Louisiana. A stormwater management plan, including the pre-development runoff rate and the post-development runoff rate, shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The location of the property and adjacent developments and infrastructure. 
(2)  Existing site conditions, including a description and map of land cover, contours, soil types, and estimated pollutant load. 
(3)  Description and development plan of the proposed development, including land cover, contours, and empirically expected pollutant load. 
(4)  All storm drainage systems, including existing and proposed drain lines, culverts, catch basins, headwalls, hydrants, manholes, and temporary and permanent stormwater Best Management Practices (BMPs). 
(5)  All pertinent calculations and specifications used in the design and construction of the permanent stormwater BMPs to retain, detain, or filter the first one (1) inch of stormwater runoff during each rain event. Safeguards to prevent short-circuiting of permanent stormwater BMPs shall be designed into the system. Capacities of BMPs shall show surface and sub-surface volumes (in aggregate, chambers, cisterns, etc.) in gallons. 
(6)  Plan implementation, including BMP installation methods, phases, and timelines for installation and maintenance of BMPs. 
(7)  A plan showing site sub-catchment areas, retention BMP areas and capacities, detention BMP areas and capacities, conveyance BMPs, and stormwater runoff treatment train of BMPs in which runoff is filtered through a series of BMPs before entering the City drainage system (surface or sub-surface). 
(8)  Description of how the proposed drainage and temporary and permanent stormwater BMPs will be maintained. 
(9)  The estimated cost of proposed drainage and temporary and permanent stormwater BMPs. 
(d)  Alternative Compliance : 
(1)  The standards contained in this Article are intended to encourage development which is economically viable and environmentally sensitive. The standards are not intended to be so specific as to inhibit creative development. Project conditions associated with individual sites may justify approval of alternative methods of compliance with the landscape standards. Conditions may arise where normal compliance is impractical or impossible, or where maximum achievement of the City's objectives can only be obtained through alternative compliance. 
(2)  Requests for alternative compliance will be accepted for any permit application to which the requirements of this Article apply, when one (1) or more of the following conditions are met: 
a.  Topography, soil, vegetation, drainage, or other site conditions are such that full compliance is impractical. 
b.  Improved environmental quality would result from the alternative compliance provisions of this Article. 
c.  Spatial limitations, irregularly shaped lot, or unusual servitude requirements may justify alternative compliance. 
d.  Public safety considerations make alternative compliance necessary. 
(3)  A request for alternative compliance must be submitted to the Director of the Department of Planning when the landscape plan is submitted. 
a.  The Director of the Department of Planning, in consultation with the Director of the Inspections and Code Enforcement department, may not reduce the requirements of this Article by more than fifty (50) percent. 
b.  Requests for alternative compliance must be accompanied by sufficient written explanation and landscape plan drawings to allow appropriate evaluation and decision by the Director of the Department of Planning in consultation with the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
c.  Upon review of the request, a determination will be made by the Director of Planning, who shall inform the applicant, by letter, of the determination. 
Section 10.05 - Stormwater Management Requirements 
(a)  Stormwater Management Measures : 
(1)  Effective on-site stormwater management is supported by a combination of stormwater BMPs, as outlined in (1)d(b), guided by the following strategies: 
a.  First, create conditions that allow detention and infiltration of stormwater runoff on-site through the use of pervious paving, open vegetated areas, green roofs, blue roofs, and other methods that allow water to permeate back into the ground. 
b.  Next, additional stormwater runoff should be detained, stored, infiltrated, and/or filtered through the use of BMPs. 
c.  Finally, runoff in excess of the first one (1) inch shall exit the site through surface or subsurface drainage. 
(2)  Infiltration practices shall be utilized to reduce runoff volume increases, stabilize subsoils, and recharge shallow groundwater. 
(3)  Best Management Practices (BMP) shall be employed to minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff prior to discharge into a separate storm drainage system or water body. 
(4)  All stormwater management facilities shall be designed to provide an emergency overflow system, and incorporate measures to provide a non-erosive velocity of flow along its length and at any outfall. 
(5)  The designed release rate of any stormwater structure shall be modified if any increase in flooding or stream channel erosion would result at a downstream dam, highway, structure, or normal point of restricted stream flow. 
(b)  Stormwater Best Management Practices : Stormwater Best Management Practices (BMP) minimize runoff, increase infiltration, recharge groundwater, and improve water quality. In order to accomplish the performance standard required by this section, stormwater BMPs shall be used. Stormwater BMPs shall be designed as described in Bayou Land RC&D's "Stormwater BMP Guidance Tool." Alternate BMPs may be considered but shall be approved as part of the stormwater management plan. The following list of stormwater BMPs are not prescriptive, but provide guidance for establishing a site-specific stormwater management regime, and include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Bioswales: Bioswales are vegetated swales planted with native plants or ornamental grasses. They transport water, allow some to infiltrate, and can be designed as a landscape feature. Bioswales are not grassed but are planted with a variety of wetland plant species that flower, fruit, and have ornamental qualities. 
(2)  Circular Depressions: Circular grassed depressions are similar to rain groves, but are smaller and contain only grass within the depressions. It is preferable to use multiple circular grassed depressions. Circular grassed depressions should be six (6) inches deep and range in diameter from thirty-six (36) inches to seventy-two (72) inches. 
(3)  Constructed Wetlands: Constructed wetlands, such as wet ponds, are commonly used on large development projects such as golf courses, shopping centers, business parks, and industrial sites. These wetlands shall be designed as part of an integrated drainage system, built around lakes and ponds that may include detention areas, retention areas, irrigation ponds, or low-lying areas that collect and store stormwater. 
(4)  Detention/Retention Basins: Wet retention basins are constructed, naturalistic ponds with a permanent or seasonal pool of water (also called a "wet pool" or "dead storage"). Aquascape facilities, such as artificial lakes, are a form of wet pool facility that can incorporate innovative design elements to allow them to function as a stormwater treatment facility in addition to a water feature. 
Dry extended detention (ED) basins are basins whose outlets have been designed to drain from a full condition within thirty-six (36) to forty-eight (48) hours to allow sediment particles and associated pollutants to settle and be removed. Dry ED basins to not have a permanent pool and are designed to drain completely between storm events. The slopes, bottom, and forebay of dry ED basins should be vegetated. 
(5)  Disconnected Roof Tops, Recycling, and Irrigation: A disconnected rooftop is one where stormwater falling on a building roof is captured and prevented from being added to stormwater runoff from a construction site. Since the water is relatively clean, it can be reused for certain domestic use or recycled through an irrigation system for evaporative disposal or to feed moisture to landscape beds, lawns, and tree stands. 
(6)  Ditch Gardens: Louisiana ditch gardens are a variant of a bioswale that increases water quality. These are constructed by designing long thin but shallow depressions that can be planted with Louisiana wetland plants that trap sediments, infiltrate water, and clean water of pollutants. 
(7)  Flow Diffusers: Flow diffusers consist of several design features that can accept channelized flow and convert it to sheet flow to disengage the erosive power of running water. Examples of flow diffusers include turf grass panels, vegetative meadows, shallow stone filtration trenches, or basins reinforced with very low earth berms. 
(8)  French Drains, Infiltration Trenches, and Dry Wells: Infiltration trenches are excavated into the ground either horizontally or vertically and filled with stone aggregate to capture and allow exfiltration of stormwater runoff into the surrounding soils from the bottom and sides of the trench or well. Pollutant removal is achieved by filtration of the runoff through the stone aggregate and soil, as well as biological and chemical activity within the soil. This is called a French drain in Louisiana, and can be fitted with an outflow if soil types warrant such treatment. 
(9)  Grassed Swales: Grassed swales are designed conveyance devices used to transport water over the surface of the ground to a point of disposal that may be a catch basin, ditch, water body, or a stormwater BMP that will filter, infiltrate, evaporate, and clean the water of TSS, solid waste, and other pollutants. Swales are often appropriate along property lines, public streets, and around buildings. 
[(10)]  Habitat Preservation and Protection Areas: Habitat Protection Areas (HPA) are large tree protection areas in which a complete habitat of plants, soils, water regimes, animal life, and nutrients work together to produce clean air, pure water, rich soils, and a population of animal life living and growing off of the biological productivity and diversity. 
[(11)]  Permeable Pavers, Porous Surfaces, Grass Paving, and Structural Soils: Porous paving reduces site runoff and allows the infiltration of stormwater. Structural soils are designed to bear the weight of heavy construction such as parking lots, terraces, and courtyard, but also provide void space for tree roots and stormwater infiltration. 
[(12)]  Planted Stormwater Buffers: Planted stormwater buffers can absorb stormwater falling on development sites. Planted buffers can improve internal drainage and be linked for maximum stormwater collection during rainfall events. Buffers can be built for stormwater management along roadways, at property edges, parallel to walkways, driveways, structures, and almost any place on a development site in which open space can be found that can be planted. 
[(13)]  Preserved Forest Floors: Rain falling on the tree canopy is managed as soon as raindrops fall on leaves and continues until the roots uptake the water hours after the storm event. This preserves trees and manages stormwater, as well as preserves natural habitat and remnant forest stands on development sites. 
[(14)]  Preserved Wetlands: Wetlands are characterized as vegetated parcels of land that have standing water for part of the year. Wetlands are also delineated according to existing vegetation and soil types. The Army Corps of Engineers designate a wetland as any low area meeting certain jurisdictional requirements of water, soil, and vegetation. Wetlands within cities are often low areas that trap and hold rainfall and release it at very slow rates of water flow. 
(15)  Rain Gardens: Rain gardens are small shallow depressions planted with a variety of native or ornamental plants that can treat small amounts of runoff to improve water quality. Rain gardens are generally small collections of water loving plants planted on a low site area that naturally collects rainfall. 
(16)  Rain Groves: Rain groves are miniature forests that provide multiple services. They provide habitat for birds and other fauna that live close to developed areas. A rain grove will intercept runoff to provide a suitable habitat to grow a variety of wetland trees and shrubs. 
(17)  Rooftop Runoff Management: Rooftop runoff management captures stormwater through a variety of techniques, including green roofs, blue roofs, cisterns, and rain barrels. 
(18)  Sand Filters: Sand filters are depressions, trenches, barriers, or sand lens constructed of porous mineral matter that improve groundwater recharge to filter, clean, and trap waterborne pollutants. 
(19)  Stream Bank or Riparian Buffers: A stream bank buffer is a protected area along a water body, such as a stream, bayou, pond, or lake, where development is restricted or prohibited. They can vary in width from twenty (20) feet to two hundred fifty (250) feet. The widths of the buffer zone is dependent upon the size of the stream, its drainage load, and overflow characteristics, although other factors such as slope, soils, and amount of vegetation are considered. 
(20)  Tree Protection Areas: Tree Protection Areas (TPA) are small Habitat Preservation Areas (HPA) that are set aside as an area around the trunk of a tree to be preserved on a development site. The purpose of the TPA is to protect the critical root zone (CRZ) of the tree and to prevent damage or interference during construction. This area is established in relation to the tree size, diameter of the crown, diameter of the tree at DBH, and location of feeder roots where most of the water and plant nutrients are absorbed. 
(21)  Cisterns and Underground Stormwater Chambers: Aboveground stormwater cisterns and underground stormwater chambers are effective long-term stormwater management systems. They are primarily used for landscape irrigation with grey water, or to temporarily store and release at a predictable rate of stormwater flow. 
Article XI. - General Sign Regulations 

Section 11.01 - Purpose and Intent 
    The purpose of this Article is to establish a comprehensive system of sign controls governing the display, design, construction, location, installation, and maintenance of signs to: 
(1)  Comply with and to implement the goals and recommendations of the City of Kenner Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Promote and protect the health, safety, and welfare of the City by ensuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding architecture and land uses. 
(3)  Create a more attractive business and economic climate by enhancing and protecting the orderly and effective display of signs. 
(4)  Discourage an excessive number of signs, and unsightly and inappropriate signs. 
(5)  Protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from the indiscriminate use and placement of signs, structurally unsafe signs, signs, which obscure the vision of pedestrians or motorists, and signs which compete or conflict with necessary traffic signals and warning signs. 
(6)  Avoid visual clutter that is potentially harmful to traffic and pedestrian safety, property values, business opportunities, and community appearance. 
Section 11.02 - General 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the following regulations shall apply to signs in all districts: 
(1)  The requirements of this Article apply to all signs, sign structures, awnings, and other types of sign devices located in the City of Kenner. 
(2)  Where there is a conflict between a land use regulation and a structural regulation, or other conflicts not otherwise addressed by this section, the most restrictive applies. 
(3)  Where this Article is silent, or where the rules of this Article do not provide a basis for concluding that a sign is allowed, said sign is therefore prohibited. 
(4)  No sign shall be erected to prevent free ingress or egress from any door, window, or fire escape; and, no sign of any kind shall be attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(5)  No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets, in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of position, it may interfere with or obstruct the view of traffic sight lines or traffic control devices. If located within direct line of vision of a traffic control device, no flashing or intermittent red, green, or amber illumination shall be used. 
(6)  Directional or informational signs of a public or quasi-public nature not exceeding four (4) square feet in area may be permitted in any district on approval of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. Any illumination shall be non-flashing, uncolored and confined to the face of the sign. No advertising matter whatsoever shall be permitted on signs of this type. 
(7)  Whenever a sign becomes structurally unsafe, or endangers the safety of a building or premises, or endangers the public safety, the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall give written notice to the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises on which the sign is located that such a sign be made safe or removed within ten (10) days of issuance of written notice. 
(8)  Any business or outdoor advertising sign legally existing prior to the adoption of these provisions and which does not conform to these provisions, shall not be altered, or changed in overall dimensions, except to conform to the provisions of this Section. If damaged to an extent in excess of one-half (1/2) of its current replacement value, it shall not be rebuilt, provided that nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs, repainting, or posting of such signs or structures. 
(9)  Unless otherwise provided by these provisions, all signs shall be constructed and erected in accordance with all applicable building codes for the City of Kenner. 
Section 11.03 - Administration and Enforcement 
(a)  Sign Permit Required : It is unlawful for any person to erect, relocate, or structurally alter any sign without first obtaining a sign permit in accordance with these sign regulations, unless specifically permitted as an exempt sign by this Article. The Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement may revoke any sign permit where there has been a violation of the provisions of this ordinance or misrepresentation of fact on the sign permit application. 
(b)  Master Sign Plan Required : 
(1)  When more than one (1) wall, projecting, awning or canopy sign is proposed on any multi-tenant building, the applicant must submit a master sign plan for review by the Director of the City of Kenner Department of Planning and Zoning or the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement, whichever is required. 
(2)  A master sign plan must provide a coordinated design for all building-mounted signs and include, at a minimum, criteria and specifications for general appearance, format of message, font size and style, lighting, location and construction materials. 
(3)  Where signs are located on the wall of a multi-tenant shopping center, they must be located at a generally uniform height on the building wall and may not cover or overhang any architectural feature. 
(c)  Sign Permit Application Process : 
(1)  Before any permit is issued, an application shall be filed, together with two (2) sets of drawings and/or specifications (one (1) to be returned to the applicant) as may be necessary to fully advise and acquaint the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement with the location, construction, materials, manner of illumination, and/or securing or fastening, the number of signs applied for, and the wording of the sign or advertisement to be carried on the sign, except in the case of general advertising signs or accessory signs where the copy or advertising is anticipated to be changed periodically and where such wording or advertising is not needed in computing the area of the sign. 
(2)  All signs, which are electrically illuminated by neon or by any other means, shall require a separate electrical permit and inspection. 
(3)  All signs shall be erected on or before the expiration of six (6) months from the date of issuance of the permit; otherwise, the permit will become null and void and a new permit shall be required. Each sign requiring a permit shall be clearly marked with the permit number and name of the person or firm placing the sign on the premises. 
(4)  No permit will be issued for any sign that does not conform to the size, location and other criteria in this sign ordinance. 
(d)  Computation of Sign Dimensions : 
(1)  Computation of Sign Area 
a.  The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all lettering, background, emblem, logo, corporate banding, representation, or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight (8) lines drawn at right angles. 
Figure XI-1: Sign Area Computation 

b.  Sign area calculations do not include any supports or bracing. (Figure XI-1: Sign Area Computation) 
c.  The sign area of a three-dimensional, free form, or sculptural (non-planar) sign is calculated as 50% of the sum of the area of the four vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign. (Figure XI-2:3-D Sign Area) 
Figure XI-2: 3-D Sign Area 

(2)  Measurement of Sign Height 
a.  Sign height is measured as follows: When measuring sign height, the height of the entire structure, including decorative elements, must be included. (Figure XI-3: Sign Height) 
b.  For freestanding signs, height is calculated as the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the sign. 
c.  For signs attached to buildings, height is calculated as the vertical distance from the base of the building to which a sign is attached to the highest point of the sign. 
Figure XI-3: Measuring Sign Height 

d.  Sign clearance is calculated as the vertical distance from grade or the base of the building to which the sign is attached to the lowest point of the sign. (Figure XI-3: Sign Height) 
(e)  Exempt Signs and Activities : The following sign activities do not require a permit: 
(1)  Changing of advertising copy or message on an existing legally permitted or legal nonconforming changeable copy sign or similar approved sign. 
(2)  Painting, repainting, cleaning, changing permitted items of information, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign, not involving structural changes or changes in the electrical components of the sign without altering the operation of the sign. 
(3)  Except in a residential district, temporary non-illuminated signs not more than sixty-four (64) square feet in area erected in connection with the new construction work and displayed on the premises during such time as the actual construction work is in progress, one (1) such sign for each street frontage. 
(4)  Non-illuminated sign, not exceeding ten (10) square feet in area with letters not exceeding one (1) foot in height, painted, stamped, perforated, or stitched on the surface area of an awning, canopy, roller curtain, or umbrella. 
(5)  Cornerstone or tablet of bronze, brass or other noncombustible material when built into or attached to the wall of a building or structure, which states only the name of the building or structure, its use, the date of erection, names of owner, architect, municipal number, public officials or which gives information commemorating a person or event. 
(6)  For signs necessary for the identification, location, or content on appurtenant structures and equipment, such signs shall be permitted when attached flat against such structures and equipment but shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
(7)  Temporary political signs, maximum thirty-two (32) square feet. 
(8)  Flags, pennants, or insignia of any governmental or nonprofit organization, when not displayed in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. The flagpole shall not exceed the allowed height in the district. 
(9)  Official traffic signs or sign structures and provisional warning signs or sign structures, when erected or required to be erected by a governmental agency and temporary signs indicating danger. 
(10)  Signs directing and guiding traffic on private property that do not exceed four (4) square feet in size, each and that bear no advertising message or logo. 
(11)  Signs not exceeding four (4) square feet in size that are customarily associated with residential use and that are not of a commercial nature, such as signs giving names of occupants, signs on mailboxes and newspaper tubes, and signs posted on private property relating to private parking or warning the public against trespassing or danger from animals. 
(12)  Hanging signs located below a canopy or awning that are at most 18 inches in height or five (5) square feet in area, provided there is no more than one such sign per customer entrance and the sign maintains a clear height of eight (8) feet above the ground. 
(f)  Prohibited Signs : The following types of signs are prohibited within the City of Kenner: 
(1)  Abandoned sign 
(2)  Audible signs 
(3)  Beacons 
(4)  Off premises outdoor advertising signs except as allowed in Section 11.04 (a) of these sign regulations 
(5)  Signs having flashing, blinking, or fluttering lights which change light intensity, brightness or color 
(6)  Inflatable signs except for use in conjunction with grand openings and special events limited to two (2) times per year for a maximum of two (2) days each time (permit required) 
(7)  Lasers 
(8)  Portable or trailer signs 
(9)  Revolving or rotating signs 
(10)  Roof signs 
(11)  Search lights 
(12)  Signs resembling traffic control devices or emergency devices 
(13)  Signs which encroach into a public right-of-way, except subdivision name signs, when approved as part of a subdivision approval process 
(14)  Signs on vehicles when the vehicle is placed in a location not normally expected for such vehicles, and the location apparently has the primary purpose of attracting attention or providing advertising in addition to that permitted for legal wall and/or freestanding signs on the site 
(15)  Snipe signs, when in the public right-of-way, unless specifically permitted 
(16)  Any sign not expressly permitted by this ordinance 
(g)  Nonconforming Signs : 
(1)  All signs legally existing prior to the adoption of this Article and not conforming to these provisions will be allowed to remain (Nonconformity does not include UL - Underwriters Laboratories - requirements). 
(2)  No legal nonconforming sign may be enlarged or altered in a way, which would increase its nonconformity with the provisions of this Sign Code. 
(3)  No conforming sign or sign structure shall be permitted to be erected for the same occupancy with an existing nonconforming sign until the nonconforming sign has been removed or brought into conformance with the provisions of this Article. 
(4)  Nonconforming signs shall be removed if any one of the following conditions occurs: 
a.  The sign is relocated on the same premises, moved to different premises, or replaced. 
b.  The structure, height, or size of the sign is altered in any way. 
c.  The sign is damaged to an extent of one-half (1/2) of its current replacement value. Such sign shall not be rebuilt and shall be removed. Replacement value shall be determined by the property owner obtaining the cost of the sign's replacement value from several sign companies. 
d.  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs or repainting of such signs or structures. 
(5)  Nonconforming temporary signs shall conform to all provisions of this Article upon its adoption. These signs shall be removed within ten (10) days of official notification of nonconforming status by the governing authority. 
(6)  Removal by Abandonment or Change of Business 
a.  Any nonconforming off-premise (Billboard) sign, the use or copy of which is discontinued or removed for a period of six months, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such sign, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not thereafter be re-established. Abandonment or obsolescence of a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign. 
b.  Any nonconforming on premise sign, the use or copy of which is discontinued or removed for a period of six months, regardless of any intent to resume or not to abandon such sign, shall be deemed to be abandoned and shall not thereafter be re-established. Abandonment or obsolescence of a nonconforming sign shall terminate immediately the right to maintain such sign. 
(7)  Any period of such discontinuance caused by government actions, strikes or acts of God, without any contributing fault by the nonconforming user/owner, shall not be considered in calculating the length of discontinuance for the purposes of this paragraph. 
(8)  Removal by Damage or Destruction - Any nonconforming off-premise sign which is partially damaged or destroyed by any means, to beyond fifty percent (50%) of its current market or replacement value, that is nonconforming to the requirements of this ordinance, shall not be restored, but shall be removed or reconstructed in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance. If a nonconforming sign is damaged in such a manner that the estimated expense of repairs exceeds fifty percent (50%) of its replacement value, the sign must be removed. 
(9)  Removal When Not Repaired Within 60 days - Any nonconforming sign removed for any reason, including voluntary removal, whose reconstruction has not commenced within 60 days shall not be permitted to be replaced unless the replacement sign conforms with all requirements of this Sign Code. A nonconforming sign repaired within 60 days may only be reconstructed or repaired to its original condition as to height, area and in the same location. 
(h)  Enforcement : The provisions of these Sign Regulations shall be enforced by the City of Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(1)  Enforcement of Removal - If any sign is not removed as required by this section, the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall initiate the necessary proceedings to secure removal of such illegal or nonconforming sign, or secure compliance with the provisions of this Sign Code. 
(2)  Upon the determination of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement that a sign remains nonconforming after termination of the allowable time periods provided for above, the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement (or his/her designee) shall notify the sign owner and/or the owner of the land on which the nonconforming sign is located and such owner shall have 30 days after such written notice within which to remove said sign or to appeal the administrative decision to remove said sign(s). 
(3)  The removal expense may be made a lien upon such real property by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement sending by certified mail to the owner of such real property, a notice of lien for the cost of such removal. All costs associated with obtaining said lien shall be part of the cost of such removal. 
(i)  Amortization of Legal Non-Conforming Signs : 
(1)  Legal nonconforming on-premises signs - All legally nonconforming on-premises signs not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this Sign Code may be continued until: 
a.  The nature or the name of the business changes or the sign is changed or modified either in shape, size or legend, as provided for in these regulations; or 
b.  Three (3) years from the date that this adopted code first becomes applicable to the sign, but only if the area of the sign exceeds by greater than fifteen percent (15%) the sign area which otherwise would be applicable under the provisions of this code. 
(2)  Legally nonconforming off-premises signs - All legally nonconforming off-premises signs not otherwise prohibited by the provisions of this Sign Code may be continued until five (5) years from the date that the adopted code first becomes applicable to the sign. 
Section 11.04 - Permanent Signs 
(a)  General Outdoor Advertising Sign (BILLBOARD) Regulations : 
(1)  Only one (1) general advertising sign is permitted every one thousand (1,000) feet distance measured radially. Corner lots can have general advertising signs on only one (1) street. 
(2)  City Council Approval - General advertising signs can be either single- or double-faced; however, they are permitted only upon approval by the City Council when the Council is satisfied that the following criteria are met: 
a.  No general advertising sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet of any public park or playground of more than one (1) acre, any residential district or any residential structures, measured radially from the outer extremities of the sign. 
b.  No general advertising sign shall be located in such a manner as to obscure, obstruct, or otherwise physically interfere with the clear or unobstructed view of an official traffic sign, signal, or device, or obstruct or physically interfere with the driver's view of approaching, merging, or intersecting traffic. 
c.  No general advertising sign will be injurious to other property or improvements in the area in which the sign is located, or cause any diminution or depreciation of property values of any surrounding property. It would be the responsibility of the person claiming such injury, diminution, or depreciation to prove same by clear and convincing evidence. 
d.  All other provisions for locating a general advertising sign in the City of Kenner are met. 
e.  All applications for general advertising signs are processed by the Department of Planning in accordance with procedural requirements in Section 9.02 for advertising, public hearings and planning and zoning commission review. 
(3)  General outdoor advertising signs are permitted only in S-I, L-I and H-I Districts and only on lots of record or approved building sites having frontage on an accepted for maintenance street. These signs shall not be located on alleys. 
(4)  Maximum length shall be forty (40) feet and maximum area shall be four hundred and twenty (420) square feet. Maximum height shall be sixty-five (65) feet. No variance or exceptions to this provision shall be granted by the City Council for billboards. 
(5)  General advertising signs shall not be permitted along canal banks or within canal rights-of-way unless a letter of no objection is obtained from the Jefferson Parish Department of Public Works in regards to the specific location requested. 
(6)  The City of Kenner shall not issue a permit for a general advertising sign until after the applicant has been issued the applicable state permit, and has received written approval or letter of no objection from the New Orleans Aviation Board and the Federal Aviation Administration. 7460-1 - Notice of proposed construction or alteration. 
(7)  Final inspection/approval for electrical service shall not be granted until the applicant has provided an as-built survey, certified by a registered land surveyor, verifying that the structure has been built in accordance with the approved permit application; the plan shall show the height, length, sign area, location of the structure, and the dimensions from all property lines. 
(8)  Electronic Billboards shall follow the provisions in section 11.04 (a) and section 11.04 (e) of these sign regulations. 
(b)  Attached/Wall Signs : 
(1)  General Regulations : 
a.  Wall signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall at no less than seven (7) feet above the ground. Wall signs shall be affixed flat against the building wall and shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the building wall. 
b.  No wall sign affixed to a structure, including sign support structure, may project beyond the ends or top of the wall to which it is attached. On existing structures, a parapet wall shall not be constructed for the sole purpose of increasing the allowable height of a wall sign. For new construction, when a sign is to be mounted on a parapet wall, that parapet wall shall be consistent with the architectural design of the building, including building materials. Wall signs may not be attached to un-reinforced masonry parapets. 
c.  Wall signs shall not cover windows, doors, or architectural features. 
(2)  Number and Location : 
a.  No variance may be obtained for sign area requirements of this Article. 
b.  Maximum sign area: 
i.  Three (3) square feet per linear foot of primary building frontage elevation area consisting of the wall on which the business or development has its main entrance; or 
ii.  Twenty percent (20%) of the building frontage elevation area on which the sign is to be located. 
iii.  No single attached sign shall exceed three hundred (300) square feet. 
c.  Illuminated signs inside of windows, within five (5) feet of such windows shall be included in the computation of aggregate sign area, and in addition shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the total glass area of the window in which the signs are placed. 
d.  On corner properties, one (1) additional attached sign shall be permitted on a secondary building frontage elevation area provided the total area of the sign does not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the allowable sign area as for single frontage properties. 
e.  Developments meeting the following minimum setback schedule shall be allowed a larger attached sign area. 
i.  Permitted dimensions. Projecting wall signs shall be affixed flat against the building wall and shall not project more than eighteen (18) inches from the building wall. 
ii.  Permitted height. Attached signs shall be safely and securely attached to the building wall at no less than seven (7) feet above the ground. No attached sign shall be erected above the roof ridgeline of the main building. 
iii.  Awning and marquee signs. Awning or marquee sign area shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet per sign. 
Minimum Setback Maximum % of Primary Building Elevation Area 100-199 Feet 20% 200+ Feet 25%  
(c)  Freestanding (Detached) Sign Regulations : 
(1)  Only one (1) freestanding sign is permitted per street frontage. Where bulletin board signs are permitted, such sign will count as a freestanding sign. 
(2)  No part of a freestanding sign may project or otherwise encroach into a public right-of-way. 
(3)  Illumination: Freestanding monument signs may be internally or externally illuminated. Freestanding pole signs may only be internally illuminated. 
(4)  Permitted Sign Area. 
a.  Maximum of one (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage along the adjacent public right-of-way, or three hundred (300) square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  On corner and through lots only one (1) lot frontage may be used to determine the allowable detached sign area. 
c.  No variance may be obtained for sign area requirements of this Article. 
(5)  Permitted Height. 
a.  Maximum of thirty-five (35) feet. 
(6)  Permitted Materials. The sign shall be constructed of metal or wood, or encased in a wood frame or other such material, which complement and coordinate with the architectural style of the development. 
(7)  Design Features. Signs should be coordinated and incorporated into the required landscaped areas. For example, signs should be mounted on earth berms instead of standard support structures whenever possible. 
(8)  Corner Lots. On corner lots where either lot line exceeds three hundred (300) feet, a second sign shall be permitted with the same requirements for single frontage properties, provided that no such detached sign shall be located across from, adjacent to or within seventy-five (75) feet of a residential development or district. 
(9)  Secondary Signs on Corner or Through Lots. A second sign may be erected on the second front of a through lot provided the following additional provisions are met: 
a.  The maximum area of the second sign is one (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage along the adjacent side public right-of-way, or seventy (70) square feet, whichever is less. 
b.  The maximum area of the second sign is twenty (20) square feet if the through lot is located across from, adjacent to or within seventy-five (75) feet of a residential development or district. 
c.  The maximum height of the second sign is twenty (20) feet. 
d.  The second sign must be incorporated into a landscaping bed of at least sixty (60) square feet. 
e.  The landscaping bed shall consist of shrubs, ground cover (excluding grass), and/or other suitable plant materials, and exclude any impervious surface. 
f.  The second sign must be set back from the lot line a distance of no less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(d)  Monument Signs : Monument signs are encouraged and the following incentives are offered for the placement of monument signs in lieu of detached pole signs: 
(1)  In order to encourage their use, a bonus of twenty percent (20%) of the total square footage of the detached sign shall be allowed for a monument sign in lieu of a freestanding detached pole sign. Any or all of this bonus may be allocated to an approved attached or wall sign or included in any area of the monument sign but may not exceed the maximum allowed height of a monument sign. 
(2)  A monument sign may be located in the most rearward five (5) feet of the required ten-foot landscape buffer area. 
(3)  Monument signs shall not exceed a height of eight (8) feet from the ground. Mounds or berms on which a monument sign is located shall be no more than two feet in height measured from the average lot elevation. 
(e)  Electronic Variable Message (EVM) Signs : 
(1)  EVM Sign Lighting : An EVM sign's lighting shall be measured using one (1) of the following methods: 
a.  Illuminance measurement using a light meter . 
i.  The distance (rounded to the nearest foot) from which the illuminance is to be measured shall be calculated using the following formula: 

Where: 
x = Measurement distance in feet 
L = Allowable luminance of the sign = 323 cd/m 2 
A = Area of the sign in square feet 
?I = Change in illuminance = 0.3 fc 
ii.  Based on the measurement distance calculated above, the illuminance shall be measured at a corresponding distance perpendicular to the center of the EVM sign face. See Figure XI-4: Illuminance Measurement Point (Plan View) 
Figure XI-4: Illuminance Measurement Point (Plan View) 

iii.  The light meter's photocell shall be set up at the measurement point at a height of five (5) feet above grade. The photocell shall be oriented to face the EVM sign panel. See Figure XI-5, Photocell Orientation (Elevation View). 
Figure XI-5: Photocell Orientation (Elevation View) 

iv.  With the EVM sign displaying a solid white or whitish grey message, a measure of the illuminance shall be taken. For displays, which utilize one (1) color only, the message shall be the solid color of the display. 
v.  With the EVM sign off, a measure of the illuminance shall be taken. 
vi.  The illuminance of the sign shall be measured as the change in illumination and shall be calculated using the following formula: 
?I = I max - I min 
Where: ?I = Change in illuminance 
I max = Illuminance measured with the sign on 
I min = Illuminance measured with the sign off 
b.  Luminance measurement using a nit gun . An EVM sign's luminance shall be measured as the brightest part of the sign. 
i.  The measurement point shall be located at a distance far enough from the EVM sign that individual LEDs (or other light-emitting source) are not distinguishable but close enough such that only the EVM sign panel is visible in the nit gun's eyepiece (LEDs are grouped in threes: one (1) red, one (1) blue, one (1) green. If these are individually distinguishable, the measurement point must be located further away). 
ii.  The nit gun's target area shall be focused on the brightest part of the sign, as determined by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement or the Director's designee, and a measurement shall be taken. See Figure XI-6, Target area. 
Figure XI-6: Target Area 

(2)  Zoning: EVM signs shall be permitted in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial and less restrictive zoning districts. EVM signs are prohibited from the Rivertown Historic District, and the RT-C1-PO, Rivertown Neighborhood Commercial Planned Option zoning district. 
(3)  Number of Signs: Only one EVM sign shall be permitted per development site. 
(4)  Location: EVM signs shall only be located along street frontage. 
[a.]  Minimum Yard Setback: Shall be in accordance with the respective zoning district. 
[b.]  Maximum Height: Shall be in accordance with the respective zoning district. 
(5)  Area: An EVM sign may be a portion of a sign or may comprise the entire area of a sign. If used as a portion of a sign, the image component of any electronic message sign may not exceed thirty-five (35%) percent of the sign's total area. Only one (1) sign panel per sign face may utilize EVM technology. 
(6)  Content: The content of the sign for a development containing a single use is limited to identification by letter, numeral, symbol, or design of the use, its name and/or address, product(s) sold and rates of products sold, unless otherwise noted in these sign regulations. The content of a detached EVM sign for a development of multiple uses may identify individual tenants only. 
(7)  Spacing: 
a.  EVM signs shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from a residential zoning district as measured radially from the farthest projection of the sign to the nearest boundary of the residential district. 
b.  EVM signs shall be located a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet of another electronic sign as measured radially as the shortest horizontal distance between the farthest projection of the signs. 
(8)  Orientation: The sign face and vision cone must be oriented away from the nearest residential zoning district. 
(9)  Lighting: The sign shall be equipped with light sensors in accordance with the following: 
a.  Controls: Ambient light sensors shall be installed prior to the sign's erection on a site and shall automatically adjust the light intensity of the sign based on ambient light conditions. 
b.  Certification: At the time of application for a sign permit, written certification from the sign manufacturer shall be provided certifying that: 
i.  The EVM provides an Underwrites Laboratories (UL) inspection number; 
ii.  Ambient light sensors are installed; 
iii.  The light intensity of the sign has been preset to not exceed the levels established by this section; and 
iv.  The preset intensity is protected from end user manipulation by password protected software or other approved method. 
c.  Nighttime lighting: Between sunset and sunrise, as determined by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the maximum light intensity shall not exceed three hundred twenty-three (323) candelas per square meter, or three-tenths (0.3) of a foot-candle above ambient light levels. 
d.  Daytime lighting: EVM signs shall not exceed a maximum illumination of 500 Candelas per square meter during daylight hours. In addition, the signs shall not vary in luminescent intensity. 
(10)  Display: The EVM sign shall display static messages/images only. 
(11)  Minimum Duration: Each image and/or message must be maintained for no less than eight (8) seconds. 
(12)  Message Transition: The transition time between messages and/or message frames is limited to three (3) seconds. The transition from one (1) static message to the next shall be instantaneous. 
(13)  Prohibited Display Types: The following EVM display features and functions are prohibited: continuous scrolling and/or traveling, flashing, spinning, rotating, and similar moving effects, and all dynamic frame effects or patterns of illusionary movement or simulating movement. 
(14)  Glare: Lighting on an EVM sign shall not cause glare, which impairs the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle or to otherwise interfere with the safe operation of a motor vehicle. 
(15)  Default Image: EVM signs must have a default design or image that will freeze in one position if a malfunction occurs. If a partial or incomplete message freezes or remains static on the sign due to a technical malfunction or a portion of the display face malfunctions, the sign's illumination must be turned off until the sign is repaired. 
(16)  Prohibited EVM signs: EVM signs are prohibited for the following sign types: 
a.  Attached signs; 
b.  Temporary signs; 
c.  Portable signs; 
d.  Animated signs; and 
e.  Vehicle signs which are used as an on-premises sign, a permanent identification, or to circumvent other parts of this Code. 
(17)  Audio or Pyrotechnics: Audio or pyrotechnic elements are prohibited. 
(18)  Conversion: 
a.  Existing, legally conforming signs may be converted to an EVM sign when all applicable requirements are met. 
b.  Nonconforming signs shall be prohibited from converting to an EVM sign unless such conversion shall cause the EVM sign to come into full compliance with all applicable regulations of this Code. 
(19)  EVM signs shall be permitted for religious structures and uses, public buildings, schools, institutions, and other nonresidential principal uses in residential zoning districts provided: 
a.  The EVM portion of the sign shall comprise no more than fifty percent (50%) of the detached sign area or twenty-five (25) square feet, whichever is less. EVM signs must meet applicable criteria set forth in Article XI, Section 11.04 (e), except that the EVM portion of the sign shall be prohibited from changing messages/images between 10 pm and 6 am. 
b.  Prohibited signs: The following signs shall be prohibited: 
i.  Roof signs. 
ii.  Flashing signs and signs with animated and scintillating lights. 
iii.  Off-premise signs. 
c.  Sign Illumination. All signs shall only be illuminated externally. Illumination shall not be aimed, directed or reflected, focused, or mounted to cause direct light from the luminaire to be directed toward residential or adjoining uses, or to create up light, spill light or glare perceptible to persons operating motor vehicles on public ways. Illumination of the sign face shall not exceed fifty (50) lumens per square foot and flashing, blinking, or scintillating lights are prohibited. 
(20)  Variances: Variances to the EVM sign regulations may be granted under the following conditions: 
a.  A variance for the EVM sign's height may be granted by the City Council when: 
i.  The need for the variance was not created by the applicant; and 
ii.  The variance is the minimum amount needed to relieve a hardship that is unique to the property. 
(21)  Exceptions: 
a.  Pedestrian-oriented Directory and menu signs shall not be considered an EVM sign when the following criteria are met: 
i.  Number: For the site, only one (1) Directory sign or one (1) menu sign shall be permitted to use EVM technology. 
ii.  Sign area: The sign shall have a maximum area of three (3) square feet. 
iii.  Location: The sign shall be attached to the wall within four (4) feet of the building's entrance or window serving walk-up customers. 
iv.  Copy changes: The sign's copy does not change more than once per day. 
b.  Menu boards for businesses offering drive-thru services shall not be considered an EVM sign and shall be subject to the following criteria: 
i.  The EVM portion of the menu board shall comprise no more than fifty (50) percent of the menu board's area. 
ii.  The menu board shall not be located within the first twenty (20) feet of the front of the development site and shall be located a minimum of twenty (20) feet from any lot line abutting a residential zoning district. 
c.  The advertised price of motor fuels dispensed by a retail dealer may be displayed on more than one (1) EVM Sign Panel provided that the EVM Sign Panels shall be embedded in a non-EVM sign panel on a detached sign. See Figure XI-7, Embedded EVM sign panels within a non-EVM sign panel. 
Figure XI-7: Embedded EVM Sign Panels within a non-EVM Sign Panel 

d.  An EVM sign may use a travelling transition subject to the following criteria: 
i.  The sign has an area of fifteen (15) square feet or less. 
ii.  If the EVM sign is located in the C-1 Neighborhood Commercial or a more restrictive district, including any residential district, the sign shall have no message/image changes between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(22)  Enforcement procedure for nighttime lighting requirements: The Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall use one (1) of the following procedures to issue citations for an EVM sign's lighting during nighttime hours: 
a.  Illuminance measure using a light meter. EVM sign owners and/or operators shall be required to cooperate with the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement when testing the sign. 
i.  Upon receiving a complaint about an EVM sign's lighting, the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall send a letter to the property owner. The letter shall include the following information: 
1)  A summary of the City of Kenner's sign lighting requirements for nighttime and daytime hours. 
2)  Date and time a Code Enforcement officer will perform the inspection. 
3)  Requirement that the sign's owner/operator be present for the inspection of the EVM sign's lighting. 
4)  Requirement that a solid white or whitish grey message (for monochrome displays, the message shall be the solid color of the display) be prepared prior to and available during the inspection. 
ii.  During the inspection, the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement or the Director's designee shall take three (3) measures of the EVM sign's illumination, following the procedure set forth in section 11.04 (e) of this Article. The average of the three (3) measures shall be the sign's illumination. 
b.  Luminance measure using a nit gun. During the inspection, the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement or the Director's designee shall take three (3) measures of the EVM sign's illumination, following the procedure set forth in section 11.04 (e) of this Article. The average of the three (3) measures shall be the sign's lumination. 
(23)  That electronic variable message signs in existence prior to the effective date of this ordinance shall be required to meet the display standards, daytime and nighttime lighting requirements, and dwell time standards not to exceed twelve weeks beginning from the date of the adoption of the ordinance. 
(24)  That the Planning Department and Planning Commission are hereby authorized to review and make recommendations concerning the electronic variable message sign regulations every five (5) years in order to address future technological advances which would affect the regulation of such signs. 
Section 11.05 - Temporary Signs 
(a)  General : 
(1)  Signs that meet the standards of this subsection are exempt from the standards for permanent signs and are not counted in the total square footage of signage allowed on any particular property or site. Signs that do not meet the standards of this subsection are subject to the standards for permanent signs. 
(2)  Temporary signs may have external or internal illumination. 
(3)  Temporary banners: Temporary banners are subject to the following regulations: 
[a.]  In all residential zoning districts, temporary banners are not permitted on sites with houses, duplexes, and attached houses. Exception: banners for holidays, religious commemoration, and special family events. 
[b.]  In commercial and industrial zones, one banner no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size is permitted per single-use development site or, on a multi-use development site, per storefront. Only one (1) of these banners may be hung on each building wall or on each separate structure. Any additional banners, or banners larger than thirty-two (32) square feet in size, must meet the following standards for permanent signs in this Code. 
i.  In no case may a site or storefront have more than two (2) temporary banners. 
ii.  In no case shall a temporary banner be larger than fifty (50) square feet in size. 
iii.  A temporary banner may be displayed no longer than thirty (30) days per calendar year. 
[c.]  Banners that do not meet the regulations of this subparagraph, must meet the standards for permanent signs. 
(4)  Temporary Wall or Fascia Signs: 
a.  One (1) temporary wall sign is allowed per street frontage in the Commercial and Industrial Zones. 
b.  Temporary wall signs may be up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area. 
c.  Temporary wall signs may not extend above rooflines. Extensions into the right-of-way are prohibited. 
d.  A temporary wall sign may be displayed no longer than thirty (30) days per calendar year. 
(5)  Temporary Freestanding or Portable Signs : 
a.  One (1) temporary freestanding sign is allowed per property in the Commercial Zones and is not counted in the total square footage of permanent signage allowed on the site. 
b.  Temporary freestanding signs may be up to thirty-two (32) square feet in area. Extensions into the right-of-way are prohibited. 
c.  A temporary freestanding sign may not be displayed longer than thirty (30) days per calendar year. 
(b)  Political and Non-Commercial Message Signs : Political and non-commercial message signs are permitted in all districts and are exempt from sign permit requirements subject to the following: 
(1)  Signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area in residential districts and non-residential districts. 
(2)  Signs may not be posted on any public property. 
(3)  Signs posted on private property require the permission of the property owner. 
(4)  When political signs refer to an election or referendum, that signs are limited to display no earlier than sixty (60) days prior to, and removed no later than ten (10) days after, election or referendum to which the sign refers. 
(c)  Garage/Yard Sale Signs : Temporary residential garage/yard sale signs are permitted in all districts and are exempt from sign permit requirements, subject to the following: 
(1)  Temporary residential garage/yard sale signs may not exceed nine (9) square feet each. 
(2)  Signs shall be posted no more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the event and all signs shall be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the event. 
(3)  Signs may not be posted in the public right-of-way or off-premises. 
(d)  Real Estate Signs : Real estate signs are permitted in all districts and are exempt from sign permit requirements, subject to the following: 
(1)  Maximum Size: Real estate signs are limited to: 
a.  Six (6) square feet in area in residential districts and may only advertise the sale, rental, lease, or management of the premises upon which said signs are located. 
b.  Sixteen (16) square feet in size for non-residential developments under two acres, and 
c.  Thirty-two (32) square feet in size or six (6) feet in height for all non-residential developments larger than two (2) acres. Only one (1) sign on each street frontage may be erected. 
(2)  Real estate signs are limited to six (6) feet in height when installed as freestanding signs. 
(3)  Real estate signs may not encroach into the public right-of-way. 
(4)  Real estate signs shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of sale or lease. 
(e)  Bench Signs : Bench signs are allowed only when associated with a public transit stop. A permit is required from the Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(f)  Vehicle and Trailer Signs : Vehicle and trailer signs may be displayed on any vehicle or trailer operated in the daily conduct of any business enterprise so long as such signs: 
(1)  Are not parked in front of or in line with any greenbelt or planting areas when on the premise of the business entity operating or advertising on such vehicle or trailer; 
(2)  Are on a vehicle or trailer which is operable and not parked primarily for the purpose of signage. 
(3)  Vehicle and trailer signs shall not be used as off-premise signs and shall not be displayed or parked on sites other than the premise of the business entity operating such vehicle other than when the vehicle is being used in connection with the business operations of the entity operating said vehicle or trailer. Such vehicles and trailers may also be parked at the residence of its operator, so long as such vehicle is operated by a resident of the residential property as conveyance to work on a daily or near daily basis. Billboards may not be erected or displayed on any vehicle or trailer. 
(g)  Flags, Streamers, Banners and Pennants : Flags, streamers, banners, pinwheels, spinners, or pennants may be displayed in connection with grand openings or special events no more than twice a year for any one business entity or applicant. Such signs may be displayed for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) consecutive calendar days upon the issuance of a temporary permit by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. Applications for such a temporary permit must state the name of the person, firm, corporation, or organization sponsoring the event, the locations where such device(s) are to be installed and the contemplated dates during which such devices shall remain on display. Banners shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and shall be limited to one banner per premise. 
(h)  A-Frame Signs : 
(1)  A-frame signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area per sign face and four feet (4') in height. 
(2)  The use of A-frame signs is limited to business hours only and must be stored indoors at all other times 
(3)  Only one (1) A-frame sign is permitted per business and a minimum twenty-foot (20') separation is required between all A-frame signs. 
(4)  An A-frame sign must be placed within twenty feet (20') of the primary entrance of the business, and must not interfere with pedestrian traffic or violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or other accessibility codes. 
Section 11.06 - Sign Definitions 
    The following are definitions pertaining to signs: 
(1)  Abandoned Sign: A sign that no longer identifies or advertises an ongoing business, product, location, service, idea, or activity on the premises where such sign is displayed, or has fallen into disrepair or otherwise deteriorated as a result of a lack of maintenance, repair or upkeep. 

(2)  Accessory Sign: A sign relating only to the main use of the premises on which the sign is located, or indicating the name and address of a building or the occupants or management of a building on the premises where the sign is located. 
(3)  A-Frame Sign: An advertising device, ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation such as a "T" shape, located on the ground, not permanently attached, and easily movable. 
(4)  Alteration: Any change in copy, color, size, or shape, which changes appearance of a sign, or a change in position, location, construction, or supporting structure of a sign, except that a copy change on a sign is not an alteration. 
(5)  Animated Sign: A sign, which has any visible moving part, flashing or oscillating lights, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by any means that move, change, flash, oscillate, or visibly alters in appearance in a manner that is not permitted by these regulations. 

(6)  Attached Sign: A sign attached parallel to, but within six (6) inches of, a wall or building, painted on the wall or building surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and displays only one (1) sign surface. Also called Wall Sign. 
(7)  Alteration: Any change in copy, color, size, or shape, which changes appearance of a sign, or a change in position, location, construction, or supporting structure of a sign, except that a copy change on a sign is not an alteration. 
(8)  Animated Sign: A sign, which has any visible moving part, flashing or oscillating lights, visible mechanical movement of any description, or other apparent visible movement achieved by any means that move, change, flash, oscillate, or visibly alters in appearance in a manner that is not permitted by these regulations. 
(9)  Attached Sign: A sign attached parallel to, but within six (6) inches of, a wall or building, painted on the wall or building surface, or erected and confined within the limits of an outside wall of any building or structure, which is supported by such wall or building and displays only one (1) sign surface. Also called Wall Sign. 
(10)  Balloon Sign: An inflatable object or balloon, tethered in a fixed location that has a sign with a message on its surface or attached in any manner to the balloon. 

Bench Sign 1 
(11)  Banner: A sign of lightweight fabric or similar material attached at one or more edges to a pole, building, or structure. A flag is not a banner. 
(12)  Beacon: A strong or bright light focused or directed in one or more directions. 
(13)  Bench Sign: A sign applied or affixed to the seat or back of a bench. 
(14)  Billboard: A permanent off-premise sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises where the sign is located. A billboard is also called an outdoor general advertising sign. 

Bench Sign 2 
(15)  Canopy (Awning) Sign : A sign that is part of, or attached to, an awning, canopy, or other fabric, plastic, or structural protective cover over a door, entrance, window, or outdoor service area. A marquee sign is not a canopy sign. 
(16)  Canopy (Service Station) Sign : A sign that is part of, or attached to, the canopy cover of a gas station. 
(17)  Changeable Copy or Message Sign: A sign or portion thereof with characters, letters, or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign. 

Canopy Sign 
(18)  Construction Sign: A nonpermanent sign identifying the persons, firms, or business directly connected with a construction project. See also Project Sign. 
(19)  Conforming Sign: A sign that is legally installed in conformance to all prevailing jurisdictional laws and ordinances. 
(20)  Copy: The graphic content or message of a sign. 

Changeable Copy or Message Sign 
(21)  Double-faced Sign: A sign with two faces, back to back. 
(22)  Electric Sign: Any sign activated or illuminated by means of electrical energy. 
(23)  Electronic Variable Message (EVM) Sign: 1) An electrically activated changeable sign, which typically uses light emitting diodes (LED) as a lighting source, whose variable message and/or graphic presentation capability can be electronically programmed by computer from a remote location. 2) A sign whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display screen such as video, television, or plasma screens; holographic displays, an electronic message center or LED display, composed of electrically illuminated segments. A time and/or temperature sign shall not be considered an electronic message sign. 
(24)  Flag: Any fabric or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols and used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or other entity. A photo, drawing or similar depiction of a flag on non-fabric material is not included in this definition. 
(25)  Foot-Candle: An English unit of measurement of the amount of light equivalent to the illumination produced by a source of one candle at a distance of one foot. One foot-candle is equal to one lumen per square foot and can be measured by means of an illuminance meter. Abbreviation - FC. 
(26)  Freestanding Sign: A sign anchored directly to the ground or supported by one or more posts, columns, or other vertical structures or supports and not attached to or dependent for support from any building. See also Pole Sign. 
(27)  Home Business or Home Occupation Sign: A sign located in a residential district that contains no commercial message except advertising for goods and/or services offered on the premises, where such goods or services may legally be offered on the premises under this Code and other applicable laws and regulations. 
(28)  Identification Sign: a sign used to identify the name of the individual, family, organization, or enterprise occupying the premises, the profession of the occupant, or the name of the building on which the sign is displayed. 
(29)  Illuminated Sign: Any sign for which an artificial source of light is used in order to make readable the sign's message, including internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, glowing or radiating signs. 
(30)  Laser: A device emitting a narrow, very intense beam of light waves that have been amplified and concentrated by stimulated atoms, or the light produced by such device. 
(31)  Lux: The SI (metric) unit for illuminance. One lux equals 0.093 foot-candles. 

Marquee Sign 
(32)  Marquee Sign: A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or extending along and projecting beyond the wall of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
(33)  Menu Board Sign: Signs located adjacent to a drive-through lane that identifies food and beverages offered for sale at the restaurant and associated prices and specials. 
(34)  Monument Sign: A freestanding sign with the entire length in contact with the ground or a pedestal that rests upon the ground. 

Menu Board Sign 
(35)  Mural: A picture on an exterior surface of a structure. A mural is a sign only if it is related by language, logo, or pictorial depiction to the advertisement of any product or service or the identification of any business. 
(36)  Nit: A photometric unit of measurement referring to luminance. One nit is equal to one cd/m 2 . 
(37)  Non-Conforming Sign: A sign in existence on the effective date of this Code that was lawful before this Sign Code took effect but does not comply with the requirements of this Code. 

Monument Sign 
(38)  Off-Premise Sign: A sign that directs a person to a different premise or location than that on which the sign is located; which identifies advertised goods, products, or services not available on the premises on which the sign is located; or which conveys a non-advertising idea or message; or identifies or advertises a business, person, firm or corporation not located on or occupying the premises where the sign is located; or which is not otherwise defined as an on-premise sign. See also Billboard and Outdoor Advertising Sign. 
(39)  On-Premise Sign: A sign identifying or advertising a business, person, firm, corporation, activity, goal, product, or service located or available on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained or which is displayed and maintained by the owner or occupant of the premises on which it is located. 
(40)  Outdoor Advertising Sign: A permanent sign erected, maintained or used in the outdoor environment for the purpose of the display of commercial or noncommercial messages not appurtenant to the use of, products sold on, or the sale or lease of, the property on which it is displayed. May also be referenced as an Off-Premise Sign, Billboard, or Commercial Outdoor Advertising Sign. 
(41)  Parapet Sign: A sign extending above a roofline or which serves as a parapet. 
(42)  Pole Sign: See Freestanding Sign. 
(43)  Political Sign: Any sign urging the election or defeat of any candidate seeking any political office, or urging the passage or defeat of any ballot measure, but not including any billboard owned or maintained by a commercial firm or advertising company when leased or used as a political sign. 
(44)  Portable Sign: Any sign, display, or advertising device initially designed for being moved or transported, and is not attached permanently to a foundation or a permanent location on the site. Portable signs include, but are not limited to, signs mounted upon a trailer, wheeled carrier or other non-motorized mobile structure, with wheels or with wheels removed. 
(45)  Pre-Existing Sign: See Non-conforming Sign. 

Project or Construction Sign 
(46)  Project Sign: A temporary sign announcing a proposed land development or construction project. 
(47)  Projected Sign: A sign or visual image created by the projection of light onto a surface. 
(48)  Projecting Sign: A sign affixed to a building or wall in such a manner that its leading edge extends more than six (6) inches beyond the surface of such building or wall. 

Public Sign 
(49)  Public Sign: A sign owned by a governmental entity and installed by a governmental official or employee in the performance of his or her public duty. Such signs include, but are not limited to, safety, danger, trespassing traffic control, memorial, and historic landmark signs. 
(50)  Real Estate Sign: Any temporary sign pertaining to the sale, lease, or rental of land or buildings, which is erected or displayed on the lot, structure, or parcel to which it applies. 
(51)  Revolving or Rotating Sign: Any sign whose sign face is designed to move or turn on any axis. 
(52)  Roof Sign: A sign erected or constructed on the roof of a building and supported by the roof structure or that is attached to the roof of a building that projects above the parapet wall or apex of the roof to which it is attached. 

Real Estate Sign 
(53)  Searchlight: A strong or bright light with a reflector in a swivel so that its beam may be sent or directed in various directions. 
(54)  Sign: Any work, lettering, figures, numbers, phrases, sentences, emblems, devices (including loudspeakers), designs, pictures, trade names or trademarks by which is affixed to, or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or piece of land and which directs attention to an object, place, activity, person, firm, corporation, institution, business, service, commodity or a product, which are visible from the rights-of-way of any street, road, or highway and designed to attract attention. 

Roof Sign 
(55)  Sign Area: The area of a sign shall be defined as the square foot area enclosed within the perimeter of the sign face with each face contributing to the aggregate area of any sign. With respect to signs, which are composed of individual symbols, letters, figures, illustrations, messages, forms, or panels, the sign area shall be defined as that area enclosed by one continuous line connecting the extreme points or edges of the advertising message. In cases where there is no definable simple geometric shape, the simplest geometric shape or rectangle enclosing the outer edges of the advertising message shall determine the sign area. In cases of back-lighted awnings with advertising messages, the entire area of the awning shall be considered as the sign area. Criteria for determining sign area are found in Section 11.03 (d) of this Article 
(56)  Sign Face: The part of the sign that is or can be used to identify, advertise, communicate, inform, or convey a visual representation, which attracts the attention of the public for any purpose. "Sign face" includes any background material, panel, trim, frame, color and direct or self-illumination that differentiates the sign from the building, structure, backdrop surface or object upon which or against which it is placed. The sign structure shall not be included as a portion of the sign face provided that no message, symbol, or any of the aforementioned sign face criteria are displayed on or designed as part of the sign structure, unless it is outlined in neon. 
(57)  Sign Height: The vertical distance from the finished grade to the highest point of either the sign or sign structure. 
(58)  Sign Message: The words or symbols on a sign face, which convey a message to those viewing the sign. 
(59)  Snipe Sign: A sign, which is tacked, nailed, posted, pasted, glued or otherwise attached to poles, stakes, fences, or to other like objects. 

Snipe Sign 
(60)  Street Banner Sign: Any banner sign, which is stretched across and hung over a public right-of-way. 
(61)  Temporary Sign: Any sign that is not permanently or securely attached to a building, sign pole, other structure, or the ground and that can be used only for a designated period of time. Types of temporary signs include vehicle, trailer- and skid-mounted signs; banners, portable signs but does not include flags displayed on permanent mountings, freestanding signs, or window signs. 
(62)  Vehicle Sign: Any sign displayed on or from any mode of transportation, including but not limited to cars, buses, trucks/trailers, trains, boats, or airplanes. 
(63)  Wall Sign: See Attached Sign. 
(64)  Window Sign: Any sign placed inside a window or upon the panes of glass of a window and visible from the exterior of the window. 
Article XII. - Supplementary Use and Performance Standards 

Section 12.01 - General 
    The regulations herein set forth in this Article qualify or supplement as the case may be, the district regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance. 
Section 12.02 - Exceptions to Height Requirements 
    The height regulations as stated in this ordinance shall not apply to the following uses; provided, however, that approval of all excesses to height limitations established in other sections of this ordinance is granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, along with a "Determination of No Flight Hazard" by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), if determined necessary. 
(a)  Churches, schools, hospitals, sanitariums, public buildings, semipublic buildings, public service buildings, multifamily dwellings, hotels, motor hotels, office buildings and institutions. There shall be no restrictions on the height of such building provided the front, side and rear yards required in the district in which such building is to be located shall be increased an additional one foot for each one foot that the building exceeds the maximum height permitted in such district. 
(b)  Belfries, cupolas, domes, flagpoles, monuments, water towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, radio towers, masts, aerials, conveyors, and oil derricks 
(c)  Bulkheads, elevator penthouses, water tanks, cooling towers, scenery lofts and similar structures, provided that such structure shall cover not more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total roof area of the building in which such structure is located. 
Section 12.03 - Supplementary area and bulk requirements 
(a)  Lot Area : 
(1)  Where a lot has less area, frontage or depth than the minimum requirements for the district within which the lot is located, and has continuously been a lot of record in separate ownership from adjacent property prior to and since the passage of this ordinance, that lot may be used for any use permitted in the zoning district within which such lot is located. 
(2)  Where two (2) or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in single ownership at the time of passage of this ordinance and such individual lots have a frontage or lot area insufficient to comply with the requirements of the district in which they are located, such lots shall be resubdivided so as to create one or more lots which conform, or more closely conform, to the minimum lot area requirements of the district. 
(3)  No lot shall be created, subdivided, or resubdivided unless it is in compliance with the requirements of the zoning district, except as allowed for in Section 12.03 (a)(2) above. 
(b)  Required Yards : Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and shall not be occupied or encumbered by any use or structure not authorized in any other section of this zoning appendix, except: 
(1)  Where accessory buildings are permitted in that portion of a rear or side yard and, 
(2)  The ordinary projection of sills, belt courses, cornices, and ornamental features projecting not more than eighteen (18) inches. 
(3)  A roof, a gutter and eaves attached to a building but having no other support may project to the extent of five (5) feet into a required front, rear, and side yard if a minimum distance of two (2) feet remains open to the sky between the furthest projection of the roof, gutter or eaves and the side property line. 
(4)  Carports or structures of any kind are not allowed in the required front yard. 
(5)  With the exception of the side yard abutting the street side of corner lots, a porte-cochere or carport may project into a required side yard provided that every part of the projection of such porte-cochere or carport is unenclosed on the side nearest the side lot line. 
a.  Further, this projection shall be at least three (3) feet from the nearest side lot line and shall not extend more than forty (40) feet in length or more than thirteen (13) feet in height; and 
b.  Where a storage or utility room is combined with the carport, the sidewall of said storage or utility room is at least five (5) feet from the nearest side lot line. 
(c)  Porches and Steps : An open, unenclosed, uncovered porch or terrace not exceeding the ground elevation by more than six (6) inches may project into a required front yard a distance not more than ten (10) feet, but in no case more than half the distance from the required building line to the front property line; or project into a required side yard to a point not closer than five (5) feet to any side lot line. This shall not be interpreted to include or permit fixed marquees or canopies. 
(1)  In houses which are retroactively raised to at least the minimum base flood elevation, an open, unenclosed, porch, steps, landing or terrace not to exceed the elevation of the first floor may project into a required front yard by a distance of not more than ten (10) feet, but in no case more than half the distance from the required building line to the front property line; or project into a required side yard to a point not closer than five (5) feet to any side lot line, with the exception of corner lots, on which the side yard along the street shall maintain a ten-foot clearance. Porches or terraces structurally attached to the slab and/or to the main house shall require pile support, if required by the building code, and/or engineering stamp. 
(2)  For houses which are retroactively raised to at least the minimum base flood elevation; an open, unenclosed stoop not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in area, used as a secondary entrance, and associated steps or ramp required to access said entrance, may project up to three (3) feet into the required side yard, no less than two (2) feet from the interior side property line; and no less than five (5) feet from the exterior side property line for corner lots. 
(3)  A roof may be allowed over the landing or step area, to extend to the furthest-most portion of the landing or steps, but in no case to exceed more than five (5) feet in the required front yard area. This roof shall be attached to the main roof of the main structure, with similar material or approved material, designed to appear to be part of the main structure. This extension of the roof shall be able to withstand maximum hurricane winds as determined by the Kenner Building Code. This subsection shall only apply to those homes that are being raised to the minimum base flood elevation and those that comply with Article XII, Section 12.03 subsection (c)(1) of this ordinance. 
(4)  In any residential district, no fence, structure, sign, planting, or other obstruction shall be maintained above a height of three (3) feet, measured from the crown of the street, on a corner lot, within that area between the side and front lot lines of the lot and a line joining two (2) points lying on the centerlines of the street intersecting at the corner and ninety (90) feet distance from the point of intersection. 
Section 12.04 - Use regulations 
(a)  Accessory Uses : 
(1)  Accessory swimming pools, open and unenclosed, may occupy a required rear or side yard provided the water's edge is not located closer than four (4) feet to a rear or interior side lot line. 
(2)  Adequate handholding provisions shall be made for pool entry and exit. 
(3)  Every swimming pool or open water feature shall be protected by a safety fence or barrier approved by the Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. A walk space at least three (3) feet in width shall be provided for fifty percent (50%) of the exterior of the pool between the pool walls and protective fences or barrier walls. 
(b)  Temporary Buildings : 
(1)  Temporary buildings used in conjunction with construction work only may be permitted in any district during the period the construction work is in progress. Such temporary buildings shall be removed upon completion of the construction work. 
(2)  Temporary structures may be used for a maximum period of six (6) months for occupancy for a business, pending application for a permit for the permanent structure, upon approval of the Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement. The Director of Inspection and Code Enforcement may also grant an additional extension of three (3) months for this prior to start of construction should he deem circumstances warrant this. Any extensions of time over this must be granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustments. 
(3)  Temporary buildings, trailers, and storage containers are permitted in every zoning district provided such temporary buildings, manufactured homes and storage containers are located on private property and shall be set back a minimum of five (5) feet from side and rear property lines. Temporary buildings, trailers, and storage containers shall not be permitted within ten (10) feet of the front property line. 
(4)  Temporary buildings, trailers, and storage containers shall require a permit without cost, which provides the delivery date and length of time the building, manufactured home, or container will remain on the property. The maximum length of time a temporary building, trailers, or storage container can be utilized shall be sixty (60) days. The Director of the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement may grant a one-time extension upon request should he deem circumstances are warranted. 
(5)  Only one (1) annual permit per site shall be granted for temporary buildings, manufactured homes, and storage containers. No advertising of any kind except the name and phone number of the owner of the temporary buildings, manufactured homes, and storage containers shall be permitted. 
(6)  The temporary buildings, manufactured homes, and storage containers shall have locking doors, which operate at all times. No flammable or hazardous materials shall be kept in any of the above-mentioned facilities. 
(7)  The establishment of a temporary building, trailers, and storage container pursuant to this paragraph shall not be deemed to establish a nonconforming use under this appendix or to allow a change of use under this appendix. 
(c)  Utilities : 
(1)  Power plants, heating or refrigerating plants, or apparatus or machinery which are necessary to permitted uses in the residential districts shall be permitted in these districts only if so placed and operated to cause the least inconvenience to owners and tenants of adjoining property; and provided that the above mentioned activities comply with existing ordinances and do not cause serious annoyance or injury to occupants of adjoining premises by reason of the emission of odors, fumes or gases, dust, smoke, noise or vibration, light or glare or other nuisances. 
(2)  Existing railroads and utilities may continue to be operated and maintained in residential and commercial districts, but no new railroad nor a new utility structure other than the usual poles, transformers, and similar appurtenances, wires, underground utilities, electric sub-stations and gas metering and pressure regulating stations shall be established in such districts except when so authorized by the Director of Public Works. 
(d)  Fences : 
(1)  Fences may be erected along lot boundaries subject to the requirements of the building code. One (1) segment of fence may be erected in each required side yard area, in alignment approximately parallel to the front lot line and connecting the main building with a fence on or along a side lot line. No fences are allowed in the required front yards. 
(2)  Fences may be allowed in the required front yards at public and private schools and churches on approval of the City Council per Article VI, Section 6.03 (g) Conditional Use Permits. 
(3)  Back yard and side yard fences for residential dwellings shall be no less than four (4) feet and no greater than six (6) feet in height, measured from average ground level or street centerline elevation to the highest point of the fence. Height of fence shall include any berms, chain, or retaining walls, if applicable. 
(e)  Screening : 
(1)  Whenever a commercial use or structure is constructed adjacent to a residential use, structure, or district, the commercial use shall construct a six-foot high solid wood or masonry fence along the property line or lines abutting the residential use or district. If that structure or use is in a C-2 district, said fence shall be eight-feet high. 
(2)  All junk, wrecker, and salvage yards must provide a six-foot high (minimum) wood or masonry fence to screen the view of existing outdoor storage and work areas. 
(3)  All automobile, motorcycle, boat and manufactured home sales, new and used, and automotive repair operations, must adhere to the following: 
a.  No parts or waste material shall be stored outside the building. 
b.  Damaged automobiles, motors, motorcycles and/or other vehicles awaiting repair must be stored in an area enclosed with a solid wood or masonry fence, minimum six (6) feet high, to adequately screen the area from public view. 
c.  All repair operations, mechanical and body, must be conducted in a building. 
Section 12.05 - Yard Regulations 
    The following use restrictions and regulations shall apply to required front, side and rear yard areas as defined in this ordinance: 
(a)  No A-frames, metal or wood, workbenches, or similar structures shall be placed, stored, or used within the front yard area as defined in this ordinance or within the side yard areas abutting the side street on corner lots as defined in this ordinance. 
(b)  No automotive or motor vehicle repair work other than minor motor adjustments, minor parts replacement, and flat tire repair to vehicles owned by the occupant and registered to the address of said premises shall be performed or conducted within the front yard area as defined herein or within side yard areas abutting the side street on corner lots as defined herein. Permissible minor motor adjustments, minor parts replacement, and flat tire repairs as referred to herein, include by way of illustration, but not in limitation thereof, the removal, replacement and/or repair of distributor, carburetor, alternator, water pump, radiator, muffler system, and brake system. Permissible minor repairs as referred to herein shall not include by way of illustration, but not in limitation thereof, the removal of engine heads, engine blocks, transmission, axles, body components, and valve jobs. 
(c)  All motor vehicle repairs, except minor as defined herein, conducted in side yard areas, other than side yard areas abutting a side street on corner lots, and rear yard areas in residential districts, must be done between the daylight hours only or in an enclosed building. 
(d)  No type of commercial automotive or motor vehicle body repair, painting, welding, or sandblasting is allowed in residential districts. 
(e)  Motor vehicle parking is prohibited in the required front yard, except on paved driveways. 
Section 12.06 - Accessory Buildings 
(a)  With the exception of the side yards abutting the street sides of corner lots, any accessory building that is not a part of the main building may be built in a required side yard, provided that such accessory building is not less than sixty (60) feet from the front lot line and not less than three (3) feet from the side lot line. On through lots, an accessory building that is not part of the main building may be built in a required side yard, other than the side yard abutting the street side of corner lots, if no part of such accessory building is less than three (3) feet from the side lot line and no portion of such building is located in either front yard. 
(b)  On corner lots, accessory buildings are not permitted in required side yards on the side street side or within any portion of the rear yard area, which lies between the side street and the prolongation of the required side yard line into the rear yard area. 
(c)  Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard, but such accessory buildings shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the required rear yard, provided that in any area where accessory buildings are not built on the side or rear lot lines and in residential districts, such accessory buildings shall not be located less than three (3) feet from either side or rear lot line. 
(d)  Accessory buildings or structures permitted in a required rear or side yard shall not exceed thirteen (13) feet in height. 
(e)  The combined gross area of all accessory buildings or portions thereof located in side and rear yards shall not exceed forty percent (40%) of the required rear yard area, nor shall more than one accessory building cover any part of a required side yard. 
(f)  Prefabricated utility accessory buildings, built with factory-made panels and initially designed for storage purposes, are allowed in rear yards only. Maximum area shall be two hundred (200) square feet. 
Section 12.07 - Townhouses 
(a)  These regulations apply to townhouses in any zoning district where permitted. 
(b)  In no case will the density be greater than that allowed in the district where townhouses are to be constructed. However, substandard lots of record may be developed containing an area of not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet per unit. 
(c)  Building frontage, measured at a building line, for individual units of a townhouse may not be less than fifteen (15) feet. Lot width for end units shall be adequate to provide front and side yards for the district in which the townhouses are located. 
(d)  For the purpose of the side yard regulations, a townhouse building shall be considered as one building on one lot with side yards required for end units only. Townhouses with three (3) or more units where the side yard is adjacent to a single-family residential district shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet. 
(1)  The front and rear yards required for townhouses shall be as required for the district in which they are being constructed. 
(2)  A detached garage, carport, or other accessory building shall be permitted in the required rear yard on a lot occupied by a townhouse, but in no instance shall be permitted in any other required yard area on the lot. 
(3)  No more than eight (8) dwelling units shall be included in any one townhouse building. 
(4)  The façades of dwelling units in a townhouse shall be varied by changed front yards of not less than three (3) feet and variation in materials or design so that no more than two (2) abutting units will have the same front yard depth and the same or essentially the same architectural treatment of façades and roof lines. 
(5)  Required off-street parking space of one space per dwelling unit must be provided on the lot or within one hundred fifty (150) feet of the lot in any permitted area and cannot occur in the required front yard. 
Section 12.08 - Manufactured Home Parks 
(a)  All ordinances of the City of Kenner regulating manufactured home and manufactured home parks must be complied with, specifically Chapter 54 of the Building Code of the City of Kenner. 
(b)  Manufactured home parks shall be allowed in S-I, L-I, and H-I Districts only and shall conform to the following requirements: 
(1)  A manufactured home park shall be located on a site of not less than one acre and shall not contain more than twenty-four (24) manufactured home sites per acre. Individual manufactured home sites shall contain an area of not less than one thousand seven hundred and fifty (1,750) square feet. 
(2)  A manufactured home park shall be connected with a street by a paved driveway or driveways constructed in accordance with appropriate ordinances and regulations. 
(3)  A front yard at least twenty (20) feet in depth shall be provided. 
(4)  Side yards of not less than five (5) feet shall be provided; however, on corner sites a side yard of not less than ten (10) feet in width shall be provided. 
(5)  A rear yard of not less than twenty (20) feet in depth shall be provided. 
(6)  Required front, rear, and side yards shall be planted with grass, shrubs, or trees and all planting must be maintained in a manner not obstructing sight distances for vehicles entering or leaving the manufactured home park. 
(7)  The manufactured home park shall be separated from the abutting property and the required front yard and on a corner lot from the required side yard on the street side by a solid fence at least five (5) feet, but not in excess of seven (7) feet in height. 
(8)  Individual manufactured home sites shall provide a front yard having a minimum depth of five (5) feet. Appendages, expansions, canopies, or attachments to the manufactured home shall not protrude into any required yard area. 
(9)  Individual manufactured home sites shall provide two (2) side yards having a combined width of thirteen (13) feet; in no case shall either side yard be less than five (5) feet. Appendages, expansions, canopies, or attachments to the manufactured home shall not protrude into any required yard area. 
(10)  Individual manufactured home sites shall provide a rear yard having a minimum depth of five (5) feet. Appendages, expansions, canopies, or attachments to the manufactured home shall not protrude into any required yard area. 
(11)  Off-street parking space for automobiles shall be provided in the ratio of at least one parking space per manufactured home in location convenient to individual manufactured homes or groups of manufactured homes. Parking is not allowed in the required front yard. 
(12)  No signs shall be erected upon such manufactured home parks except not more than one (1) sign shall be permitted at each entrance for directional and identification purposes. Such signs shall not exceed ten (10) square feet nor extend more than ten (10) feet in overall height above the ground and shall not project into required yard areas more than six (6) inches. 
(c)  All manufactured home parks located in the City of Kenner: 
(1)  Shall have one (1) sign listing the manufactured home park name and address located at the main entrance to the park site. 
(2)  Each sign shall include a map diagram showing the names of all streets in the manufactured home park (private or public). 
(3)  Each manufactured home in the park shall be numbered with a uniform twelve (12) by twelve (12) inch sign on a four-foot high post made of weather-resistant material. Said sign shall be located and maintained in the front of each manufactured home giving a clear and unobstructed view from the road giving access and ingress to said manufactured home. 
(4)  Any change of street names by new owners of the manufactured home park shall be submitted to the City of Kenner Planning and Zoning Department and the Fire Department prior to the official name change. 
(5)  A copy of the street map of the manufactured home park with the names of each street and the number of manufactured homes located thereon shall be supplied to the City of Kenner Fire Department. 
(6)  All existing manufactured home parks must comply with all provisions of this ordinance. 
Section 12.09 - Use of Manufactured and Modular Homes as a Single-Family Detached Use on Individual Lots of Record 
(a)  Purpose : The purpose of this provision is to permit an affordable alternative to single-family frame built residential units by permitting single-family detached manufactured homes or modular units to be located in certain zoning districts on individual lots of record when it is determined by the Board of Zoning Adjustments via a site plan review, that the health, safety, welfare and harmony of the community will be served. 
(b)  Permitted Use : 
(1)  The only use allowed under this provision shall be a manufactured or modular home, as defined herein, used as a single-family detached residence, and shall be allowed only in the R-2 and R-3 zoning districts. 
(2)  All accessory and supplementary regulations as provided and allowed in the R-1 Single-family residential zoning district shall apply. 
(3)  Travel trailers, recreational vehicles, and motorized homes, as defined elsewhere herein and similar vehicles, shall not be deemed eligible for this use under this provision. 
(c)  Application Procedure : 
(1)  Applications for new manufactured and modular homes shall be processed through the Department of Planning and Zoning. Once a complete application has been accepted by the Department of Planning and Zoning, the case shall be advertised for a Board of Zoning Adjustments public hearing. 
(2)  Notices shall be sent to the addresses on both sides of the street or road on which the property fronts, as well as the street or road immediately to the rear of the property, within two hundred fifty (250) feet of said property. Should the property on which said modular unit or manufactured home is to be placed be situated on a corner or intersection of two (2) or more streets, then the property owners on both sides of said street and/or roads, within a radius of two hundred fifty (250) feet thereof shall be notified. 
(3)  The Board of Zoning Adjustments shall conduct a public hearing regarding the matter and make its final decision of approval; approval with stipulations; or denial. 
(d)  Performance and Criteria Standards : The following performance standards and criteria shall be used by the Board of Zoning Adjustments in determining the merits of a proposal: 
(1)  Lot area: A site shall contain a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet with a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet and a minimum depth of one hundred (100) feet. 
(2)  Density: There shall be no more than one detached residential unit per one lot of record with a minimum of five thousand (5,000) square feet. 
(3)  Height: No building shall exceed the maximum height established for the respective district. 
(4)  Front yard: There shall be a front yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) feet, provided; however, that where the average depth of existing front yards on lots improved with buildings located within one hundred (100) feet on either side of such lot, front on the same street as such lot and within the same square, is less than the minimum required front yard, the front yard on such lot may be the average of the existing front yards. However, no front yard shall be less than ten (10) feet. On through lots, the required front yard shall be provided on both streets. 
(5)  Side yard: There shall be two (2) yards having a combined width of not less than twenty percent (20%) of the width of the lot provided that in no case shall either side yard be less than five (5) feet and provided further that the combined width of two (2) side yards need not exceed twelve (12) feet. Appendages, carports, canopies, or attachments to the main structure shall not protrude into any required side yard. On corner lots, the side yard on the side of the lot abutting the side street shall not be less than ten (10) feet unless otherwise provided herein. 
(6)  Rear yard: There shall be a rear yard having a depth of not less than twenty (20) per cent of the depth of the lot, provided; however, that the depth of such rear yard shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet and need not exceed twenty-five (25) feet. 
(7)  Parking: There shall be a minimum of two (2) impervious off-street parking spaces. Parking shall not be located in the required front yard nor shall parking be permitted on lawn or other green area in the front yard. 
(8)  Base Flood Elevations: All sites shall meet or exceed established flood grades. 
(9)  Foundation: All foundations shall be of such strength as to adequately support the structure. Plans for the foundation shall be approved by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(10)  Undercarriage: The undercarriage of manufactured homes shall be screened from view by skirting of metal, wood, masonry or similar suitable materials as determined by the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
(11)  Anchoring and tie downs: All manufactured homes shall be securely anchored to the ground at all corners per the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement's approval. 
(12)  Sidewalks: Paved walks, driveways, and sidewalks shall be installed to the required grade. 
(13)  Address and mailbox access: Addresses and mailboxes shall be provided and made accessible from the roadway for identification and service. 
(14)  Other considerations: In addition to meeting the aforementioned performance requirements, other considerations shall include the existing land use patterns and types of existing construction within the neighborhood. 
a.  The structure shall be to scale with other single-family dwellings located on the same street. 
b.  Exterior architectural features shall be consistent with the majority of surrounding residences. 
c.  Metal buildings are prohibited. 
(e)  Six-month Limitation : If a decision of denial is rendered by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, then the same or similar application shall not be resubmitted to the Planning Department for a period of twelve (12) months from the date of the final vote of denial. 
If permits are not applied for within six (6) months of approval by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, the approval by the BZA will be null and void. 
Section 12.10 - Group Homes 
(a)  Group homes are licensed and regulated by the State of Louisiana. 
(b)  Group homes are subject to all federal regulations, regulations of the Louisiana Administrative Code, and local zoning regulations. Federal and/or State regulations shall take precedence over local regulations. 
(c)  Group homes shall be permitted in any of the residential districts in the City of Kenner 
(d)  Group homes shall be located no closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any other existing group home, as measured from the nearest point of the lot line on which such use is proposed to be located to the nearest point on the lot line on which any other existing similar use is located. 
(e)  A group home shall encompass the entire dwelling. 
(f)  The location, design, and operation of the group home shall not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. The facility shall retain a residential character, which shall be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. New buildings shall be non-institutional in design and appearance and physically harmonious with the neighborhood in which they are located, considering such issues as scale, appearance, density, and population. 
(g)  Group homes are divided into the following sizes: 
1.  Group home-small: Up to six (6) residents 
2.  Group home-large: Seven (7) to fifteen (15) residents 
3.  Group home-congregate: Sixteen (16) or more residents 
Section 12.11 - Automobile Sales Establishments: New, Used, and Rental 
(a)  Automobile sales establishments shall only be located in those districts where they are specifically permitted as per Article VI, Zoning of this ordinance. 
(b)  Site Development Criteria: 
(1)  No automobile sales establishment may locate any closer than one thousand (1,000) feet from any established, operational, automobile sales or rental establishment. The distance shall be measured radially from the subject property lines. 
(2)  All automobile sales and rental establishments shall have a permanent office building, which meets all current building, safety, and sanitary codes of the City of Kenner, as a primary structure. No portable, temporary, or manufactured building shall be used as the primary structure. 
(3)  Public rights-of-way shall not be used for parking, storage, or display of vehicle inventory. 
(4)  Parking: All automobile sales establishments shall provide dedicated off-street customer parking spaces over and above those spaces used for inventory parking. Parking shall comply with Article VII, Off-Street Parking and Loading Regulations of this ordinance. 
(5)  The outdoor area devoted to storage, loading, parking and display of vehicles shall only take place on the same lot with and ancillary to a sales room. Such areas shall not be used for the storage or display of vehicles that are not in operating condition. Inoperable vehicles shall be screened from public view by a solid wood or masonry fence as required by Sec. 12.04 (e) of this ordinance. 
(6)  Surfacing: All areas for required parking and storage must be hard-surfaced (concrete, asphalt, or pervious paving). Limestone, gravel, and similar surfacing materials are not allowed. 
(7)  Landscaping: As per Article IX of this Ordinance. 
(8)  Signs: As per Article XI of this Ordinance. 
Section 12.12 - Service Stations and Similar Uses 
    Proposals for service stations, gas stations, and similar establishments must provide a utility survey illustrating the layout of proposed underground piping and all existing sewer, water, and drainage lines on site and within fifty (50) feet of the site shall be shown on the plans. Said plans must be approved by the City of Kenner Fire Department and the Department of Public Works. 
Section 12.13 - Exterior Lighting 
(a)  Purpose: These regulations are intended to minimize excessive light trespass and to contribute to the safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Kenner and implement the goals and policies of the City of Kenner's Comprehensive Plan to increase security and promote public safety by providing sufficient lighting levels for vehicular and pedestrian access at a development site, improve aesthetics in the commercial areas of the City, and to reduce and eliminate problems with glare and light trespass. 
(b)  General: The light source shall be concealed and shall not be visible from any street or adjacent lot or site. In order to direct light downward and minimize the amount of light spill into the night sky and onto adjacent streets, lots, or sites, all light fixtures shall be cutoff fixtures. 
(c)  Lighting Regulations in all Districts: 
(1)  In commercial, industrial, and mixed-use districts, a lighting plan must be submitted as part of a site plan review prior to submitting an application for a building permit. 
(2)  Spotlights and floodlights shall be angled so that the center of the beam will strike the ground within the said property line. 
(3)  Any exterior lighting that can be reasonably expected to create a nuisance to the adjacent neighboring properties is prohibited. 
(4)  Lighting Prohibitions all Districts: 
a.  Laser source light. The use of laser source light or any similar high intensity light for outdoor advertising or entertainment, when projected above the horizontal, is prohibited. 
b.  Searchlights. The operation of searchlights for advertising purposes is prohibited. 
c.  Commercial landscape lighting, which is above the 90-degree plane, is not permitted in order to omit excessive light glare. 
d.  No security flood lighting shall be allowed from any building, structure, improvement or light standard located on any lot or site. 
(5)  Glare Prohibited: 
a.  Light used to illuminate any parking area abutting a residential district shall be so arranged as to reflect light away from the residential district. 
b.  The maximum permitted illumination at the property line is two (2) foot-candles. The cone of light must be contained on-site and must not cross the property line. OR 
c.  See Table XII-1: Outdoor Lighting Intensity Specifications. 
Table XII-1: Outdoor Lighting Intensity Specifications 
At Property Lines Minimum Foot-candles Maximum Foot-candles Adjacent to a residential use None 0.5 Adjacent to commercial or light industrial use None 1.5 Adjacent to office or public uses None 1.0  
(d)  Lighting on Buildings: 
(1)  No light fixtures mounted on the exterior of a building shall be mounted above the fascia of the roof or above the top of any building parapet wall. 
(2)  Building exterior lighting shall be adequately controlled downward, using a building detail or some type of shield or cutoff device, to prevent glare. This includes light fixtures mounted beneath building canopies, porches, covered walkways, or eaves. 
(3)  Canopy fixtures shall use recessed lens covers flush with the bottom surface of the canopy that will provide a cutoff or shielded light distribution. It is the intent of this requirement that the light source not be visible. 
(4)  Building wall pack type light fixtures may be used in loading or service areas and shall not be mounted higher than ten (10') feet above finish grade. Building wall pack light fixtures shall incorporate sharp cutoff devices or shields to eliminate or prevent glare or undesirable illumination of other lots or sites. 
(e)  Lighting for Parking Lots and other Vehicular Use Areas: 
(1)  Vehicular Use Area light standard (a concrete footing or foundation, light pole and light fixture, combined) shall be no lower in height than eighteen (18') feet and no taller in height than twenty-six (26') feet. The light standard height shall be measured from the top of the vertical curb of the vehicular use area directly adjacent to or nearest to the light standard to the very top of the light standard. 
(2)  All vehicular use areas must be lit using a "down" or "cutoff" type fixture, which concentrates the light downward onto the surface below to be illuminated to eliminate or prevent glare or any undesirable illumination of adjacent properties. 
Section 12.14 - Home Occupations 
(a)  Required Standards for Home Occupations : 
(1)  The individual licensed for the home occupation shall live in the dwelling. 
(2)  No more than one (1) home occupation license shall be issued per family dwelling. 
(3)  No person shall be employed on the premise, who is not a bona fide resident of the dwelling. 
(4)  The use of the dwelling unit for home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to its use for residential purposes. Not more than twenty percent (20%) of the living area of the dwelling unit or 400 square feet, whichever is the lesser, shall be used in the conduct of home occupations. 
(5)  No outdoor display or storage of inventory, equipment, or supplies associated with the home occupation is permitted. 
(6)  There shall be no change in the exterior appearance of the building or premises as a result of such occupations, with the exception of a sign as provided in Article XI, General Sign Regulations. 
(7)  No home occupation shall be conducted in any accessory building. 
(8)  No mechanical equipment shall be used or stored on the premises except that which is normally used for purely domestic or household purposes. The home occupation shall not create noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, dust, smoke, or heat detectable to the normal senses outside the dwelling unit. No equipment or process shall be used which creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television sets off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line voltage. There shall be no illegal discharge of any materials, fluids, or gases into the sewer or drainage system or any other manner of discharging such items in violation of any applicable government code. 
(9)  No more than one (1) home occupation related vehicle, regardless of the number of home occupations, is permitted at any (1) one premises. Any such vehicle must be twenty (20) feet or less in overall length and not more than seven (7) feet in overall height and must be parked off any public right-of-way. All exterior storage of cargo, equipment or other material on the vehicle shall be shielded from view at all times when such vehicle is located on a residential lot. 
(10)  An "address of convenience" consists solely of the receiving of phone calls, mail, and keeping business records in connection with any profession or occupation, and shall not require a home occupation permit. A business that receives clients or customers is not an "address of convenience" but shall be considered a "home occupation" and must meet all the requirements of this section. 
(11)  When in compliance with the requirements of this section, a home occupation includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Art studio; 
b.  Day care for not more than six (6) children, including any children of the adult provider; 
c.  Dressmaking and tailoring; 
d.  Professional office of a lawyer, engineer, architect, accountant, salesman, or other similar occupation; 
e.  Teaching or tutoring, including musical instruction and dance instruction, limited to not more than two (2) pupils at a time; 
f.  Typing/word or data processing service. 
(12)  The following uses are not to be considered appropriate as home occupations uses. Personal services including: 
a.  Cosmetology, barbershops, beauty parlors, kennels, dog grooming; 
b.  Real estate and insurance offices; 
c.  Radio, television and appliance repair, cabinet making, boat building for others. 
d.  Auto servicing or rebuilding and repair for others; 
e.  Contractor's offices; 
f.  Metal fabrications or cutting, employing welding or cutting torches, ambulance service, helium balloons, house painters; and 
g.  Other uses similar in nature or in effect on the surrounding neighborhood. 
(13)  Home occupations that exist as legal uses shall not be allowed to continue once the occupants who have established the legal use status no longer occupy the premises. 
(14)  The City of Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement shall determine whether the home occupation meets the established criteria and shall issue a home occupation permit when such application is in compliance with the established criteria. 
(15)  Once an applicant meets all of the criteria for a home occupation, an occupational license may be issued from the Kenner Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement. 
Section 12.15 - Telecommunications Towers 
(a)  Telecommunications transmission towers, monopole telecommunications towers, masts, aerials, antennas, and related communication equipment shelters must be located only in the Special Industrial Districts S-I, Light Industrial Districts L-I, and Heavy Industrial Districts H-I, subject to criteria listed in subsection (e), Criteria for Standard Telecommunications Installations, below. 
(b)  Monopole telecommunications towers, masts, aerials, antennas, and related communication equipment shelters will be allowed in the General Commercial Districts C-2, Special Industrial Districts S-I, Light Industrial Districts L-I, and Heavy Industrial Districts H-I, subject to criteria listed in subsection (e), Criteria for Standard Telecommunications Installations, below. 
(c)  Monopole telecommunications towers, masts, aerials, antennas, and related communication equipment shelters shall be allowed in the Single-Family Residential Districts, R-1, R-1A, Two-Family Residential Districts R-2, Three-and Four-Family Residential Districts RR-3, Multiple-Family Residential Districts R-3, Neighborhood Commercial Districts C-1, General Office Districts G-O, and Recreation Districts RD, on nonresidential uses or sites in said districts provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  No new site may be established if there is a technically suitable place available on an existing communications tower within the search area that the new telecommunications site is to serve. For the purpose of this ordinance, the search area is defined as the grid for the placement of the telecommunications structure. 
(2)  The minimum lot size on which a monopole telecommunications transmission tower or antenna is to be located shall be the minimum lot size for the zoning district, or five thousand (5,000) square feet, whichever is greater, and shall be of sufficient size to contain onsite any debris from tower or antenna failure. 
(3)  No new site will be allowed within a one thousand-foot radius of existing monopole telecommunications transmission towers or antennas within the district. 
(4)  Permitted Height. The maximum height of any monopole telecommunications transmission tower, mast, aerial, and/or antenna shall be sixty-five (65) feet. The height shall be measured from the top of the telecommunications structure to grade and shall include the height of any building or other structure upon which the telecommunications structure is mounted. 
(5)  Setbacks: 
a.  The monopole telecommunications transmission tower must be setback from all property lines by a distance of twenty percent (20%) of the height of the tower or by the rear yard setback required for the zoning district, whichever is greater. 
b.  Communication equipment shelters must meet the minimum setback standards for accessory structures in the zoning district and shall not be used for offices, long-term vehicle storage, or other outdoor storage. 
c.  In no case shall a monopole telecommunications transmission tower be located in the required front yard of a lot. 
d.  The distance from the base of the monopole telecommunications transmission towers, masts, aerials, and/or antennas to the nearest property line of any residential use shall not be less than the height of the telecommunications structure from the top of the telecommunications structure to grade. 
(6)  General Design Standards, Fences, and Landscaping: 
a.  General design standards: The entire facility must be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with its environment. The use of compatible materials such as wood, brick, or stucco is required for communication equipment shelters, which shall be designed to architecturally match the exterior of structures within the zoning district. 
b.  Fences and Landscaping: 
i.  Existing onsite vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
ii.  Solid walls or fences constructed of wood, brick, masonry or a combination thereof shall be used to secure the site and screen the site from public view. 
iii.  All walls or fences shall be used in conjunction with landscaping. The portion of the telecommunications site or that portion of a parcel upon which the fence is located that abuts public land or streets shall be landscaped with at least one (1) row of trees or evergreen shrubs at least four (4) feet high upon maturity and spaced not more than ten (10) feet apart. These trees or shrubs may be planted in any configuration, which will serve to better buffer the site. 
iv.  In no case will barbed wire or razor wire fencing be permitted in the zoning districts. 
(d)  Communication Equipment Shelters : 
(1)  Telecommunications equipment may be housed within existing structures or in new buildings constructed within the buildable area of the site. 
(2)  Communication equipment shelters up to a maximum of eleven (11) feet in height and four hundred (400) square feet in area shall be permitted on rooftops. 
(3)  Communication equipment shelters shall be subject to local, state, and federal safety standards to protect adjacent land uses. 
(4)  In no case shall associated support buildings be considered accessory structures or buildings. 
(5)  Platforms are permitted and excluded from this criterion. 
(6)  Structural integrity: Telecommunications and cellular transmission towers shall be certified by an engineer to withstand a minimum wind load of one hundred five (105) mph and a maximum gust load of two hundred (200) mph. The monopole telecommunications transmission tower and any proposed transmission equipment must be certified to meet any structural standards for steel antenna towers and support structures set in the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Association Standards referenced as EIA/TTA-222-E and as amended hereafter. 
(7)  Visual Impact Mitigation: 
a.  Color: The monopole telecommunications transmission tower or antenna shall be constructed of a material with a neutral color and shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding landscape and uses. 
b.  Lighting: When lighting is required and is permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration or other federal or state authority, it shall be orientated inward so as not to project onto surrounding property. 
c.  Design: The design criteria for monopole telecommunications transmission towers and related communication equipment shelters shall follow the provisions outlined above in subsection (c)(6)a., General Design Standards. The monopole telecommunications transmission towers shall be of a stealth or camouflaged design in order to blend in with surrounding landscape and uses. 
(8)  Time limit on project completion: Once a monopole telecommunications transmission tower or antenna is approved, the building permit shall be obtained within six (6) months and the project shall be completed within one (1) year. Extensions may be granted upon request, proper notification, and review of extension request. 
(9)  All obsolete or unused facilities and structures must be removed within twelve (12) months of cessation of operation at the site. Written notification of the cessation of operation at the site shall be provided to the Department of Inspections and Code Enforcement by the operator of the site within ninety (90) days of the cessation of operation. 
(e)  Criteria for Standard Telecommunications Installations : The following criteria shall apply to telecommunications transmission towers, monopoles, masts, aerials, antennas, and related communication equipment shelters: 
(1)  Distance requirements to residential development. The distance from the base of the telecommunications transmission towers, monopoles, masts, aerials, and/or antennas to the nearest property line of any residential use shall not be less than the height of the telecommunications structure from the top of the telecommunications structure to grade. 
(2)  Fences and Landscaping: 
a.  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
b.  Solid walls or fences constructed of wood, brick, masonry or a combination thereof shall be used to secure the site and screen the site from public view. 
c.  All walls or fences shall be used in conjunction with landscaping. The portion of the telecommunications site or that portion of a parcel upon which the fence is located that abuts public land or streets shall be landscaped with at least one (1) row of trees or evergreen shrubs at least four (4) feet high upon maturity and spaced not more than ten (10) feet apart. These trees or shrubs may be planted in any configuration, which will serve to better buffer the site. 
(3)  Visual Impact Mitigation: 
a.  Color. Telecommunications transmission towers, monopoles, masts, aerials and/or antennas shall be constructed of a material with a neutral color designed to blend in with surrounding land uses. 
b.  Lighting. Dual lighting shall be employed on telecommunications transmission towers, monopoles, masts, aerials and/or antennas when lighting is required and as permitted by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other federal or state authority. For the purposes of this ordinance and to minimize intrusion into other areas, dual lighting shall be considered as strobe lighting during the day light hours and red lighting at night. 
(4)  Communication Equipment Shelters and Platforms: 
a.  Telecommunications equipment may be housed within existing structures or in new buildings constructed within the buildable area of the site. 
b.  Communication equipment shelters up to a maximum of eleven (11) feet in height and four hundred (400) square feet in area shall be permitted on rooftops. 
c.  Communication equipment shelters shall be subject to local, state, and federal safety standards to protect adjacent land uses. 
d.  In no case shall associated support buildings be considered accessory structures or buildings. 
e.  Platforms used to house telecommunications equipment shall be excluded from the above criteria. 
(5)  Structural Integrity: Telecommunications and cellular transmission towers shall be certified by an engineer to withstand a minimum wind load of one hundred five (105) mph and a maximum gust load of two hundred (200) mph. The monopole telecommunications transmission tower and any proposed transmission equipment must be certified to meet any structural standards for steel antenna towers and support structures set in the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Association Standards referenced as EIA/TTA-222-E and as amended hereafter. 
(6)  Guy anchors: 
a.  Where a telecommunications tower is guyed, the exposed, above ground portion of the guy anchors shall be no less than five (5) feet from the nearest property line. 
b.  For rooftop telecommunications towers, all guy wire anchors shall be positioned on top of the roof of the building upon which the transmission towers, masts, aerials and/or antennas are located. 
(7)  Density Requirements : No more than one (1) site for telecommunications transmission towers, masts, monopole telecommunications transmission towers, and aerials and/or antennas of a monopole design shall be permitted within any given five hundred (500) foot radius. 
(f)  Amateur radio operators : Operators of amateur radios licensed under Part 97 of the Federal Communications Commission regulations are specifically excluded from the requirements of this Article. 
Article XIII. - Subdivision Regulations 

Section 13.01 - Definitions 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words as used herein as defined as follows: 
(a)  Subdivision means the division of a lot, tract, or parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, plots, parcels, or building sites, for the purpose of sale or of building development, either immediate or future. It also includes the resubdivision or arrangement of one or more lots, plots, parcels, or building sites. 
(b)  Street, avenue, road or any other similar designation all mean the same for the general purpose of this chapter. 
(c)  Alley, service way or any other similar designation all mean the same for the general purpose of this chapter. 
(d)  Simple resubdivision means a subdivision involving resubdivision of a previously recorded plan which does not involve any new street or easement of access or the extension or creation of any public improvements, which does not adversely affect the development of the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and which is not in conflict with any provisions of this Article or the Unified Development Code and subdivision regulations. 
Section 13.02 - Preliminary Subdivision Plan 
(a)  In seeking to subdivide land into lots or building sites, or to dedicate streets, alleys, or land for other public use, the owner shall submit a copy or print of a preliminary sketch plan to the Council of the City of Kenner before submission of the final plan. The preliminary plan shall be drawn to scale not over fifty (50) feet to the inch and shall show: 
(1)  The flood zone in which said proposed plan is situated in accordance to flood maps prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(2)  The location of all existing property lines, north point, scale, streets, alleys, buildings, water courses, sewer mains, water mains, gas mains, culverts and other underground structures, easements and other existing features within the area to be subdivided and all tie-ins in the adjoining or abutting streets or alleys. 
(3)  The names of all adjoining subdivisions. 
(4)  The proposed locations and width of all streets, alleys, and lots. 
(5)  The title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, the name of the owner, and name of the surveyor plotting the tract. 
(6)  The Council of the City of Kenner may require a contour map, or certain elevation databased upon the official datum. 
(b)  The Council of the City of Kenner shall either approve or conditionally approve, or shall disapprove such preliminary plan within sixty (60) days after its submission. 
(c)  If the plan is conditionally approved, the condition of approval shall contain the following requirements: 
(1)  That any changes the Council of the City of Kenner deems necessary (in order that the subdivision conforms to these regulations) be made. 
(2)  That the proper final plans be submitted complying with the provisions herein set forth for the final plans. 
Section 13.03 - Final Subdivision Plan 
    The final plan shall be submitted to the Council of the City of Kenner. This plan shall be filed and shall show the following: 
(a)  Flood measures taken to minimize flood damage in flood hazard zones. 
(b)  The title under which the subdivision is to be recorded, the name of the owner, and the name of the surveyor responsible for the plan; north point and scale. 
(c)  The boundaries of the property, the lines of all streets and alleys with their widths and names, and other portions intended to be dedicated to public use. In case of branching streets or alleys, the angle of departure from one street or alley to another shall be indicated, angles of ninety (90) or one hundred eighty (180) degrees need not be shown, but all other angles must be indicated in the proper locations. 
(d)  The lines of the adjoining streets and alleys with their widths and names. 
(e)  All lots, lines, lot numbers, or letters in resubdivision and utility easements shall be shown and determined by measurements. Where there is no alley dedication, a utility easement having a minimum width of five (5) feet shall be granted and shown across the rear of all lots and at such other locations, as the Council of the City of Kenner deems necessary. 
(f)  All dimensions, both linear and angular, necessary for locating the boundaries of the subdivision in relation to some section, quarter section or other established corner and line must be shown in order to show the relation of the subdivision boundaries to the section lines, or to another established corner and acceptable line. 
(g)  All dimensions both linear and angular of the streets, alleys, lots, utility easements or other tracts or areas shall be shown. 
(h)  Radii, arcs, and chords, points of tangency and central angles for all curves and rounded corners. 
(i)  Location and description of all monuments. A suitable permanent monument of stone, iron or concrete shall be located at all corners, and at all angle points on the subdivision boundaries. All streets, alleys, lots or other tract corners, intersections and angle points shall be marked with iron pipe or other suitable monument. 
(j)  Any restrictive covenants to apply to lots in the subdivision shall be printed on the subdivision plot or plan for recording in the office of the clerk and recorder of Jefferson Parish, Louisiana. 
(k)  That the surveyor preparing the map or plot is licensed and registered in the State of Louisiana. 
(l)  A dedication form to be signed by the owner or owners, and the mortgagee or mortgagees, in the presence of a notary public. 
(m)  A printed signature block for the approval of the Council of the City of Kenner. 
(n)  The map or plan shall not show any tract, area, strip or any other portion of land as "Reserve" or "Reserved" all areas shall be designated by number or letter and no blank area shall be shown on the map or plot. 
(o)  When the area subdivided into lots, plots or building sites lies at such a low elevation that it has been, within the past twenty (20) years, inundated or overflowed by rain or stormwaters, a statement shall be printed on the subdivision map or plat setting forth these facts, and should the elevations of the land be variable, the portions that have been overflowed shall be indicated on said map or plot. 
Section 13.04 - Approval of and Fee for Resubdivision 
    An application for a simple resubdivision shall be submitted directly to the Kenner Planning Director for review. The planning Director and staff will make a determination as to whether a proposed subdivision meets the definition of a simple subdivision. The Kenner Planning Director is authorized to administratively approve simple resubdivisions. 
Section 13.05 - Acre or Large Tract Subdivisions 
    Where the area is divided into larger tracts than for normal building sites and in the opinion of the City Council any or all of the tracts are susceptible to being resubdivided, the street and lot arrangement of the original subdivision shall be such that the alignment of future street dedications may conform to the general street layout in the surrounding area. 
Section 13.06 - Relation to Adjoining Streets 
(a)  The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall provide for the continuation of existing streets in adjoining subdivisions (or other proper projections where adjoining property is not subdivided) insofar as they may be necessary for public requirements. 
(b)  The width of such streets in new subdivisions shall not be less than minimum width herein established. The street and alley arrangement shall be such as to cause no undue hardship to owners of adjoining property. 
(c)  Whenever there exists a dedicated or platted half-street or alley adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half of the street or alley shall be dedicated. All streets approximately in alignment with existing streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. All other streets shall be assigned names, which do not conflict with names of existing streets. 
Section 13.07 - Street and Alley Widths 
    The minimum width for major streets shall be as required by the major street plan for the City of Kenner. 
Section 13.08 - Blocks 
    When a dead-end street or alley is necessary to serve a certain irregular area, due to size, shape, or topography of said area, the closed end shall provide a turning loop having a minimum inside radius of fifty (50) feet for a street and twenty (20) feet for an alley. 
Section 13.09 - Lots 
(a)  All lots, plots, or building sites in any original subdivision shall be numbered consecutively from one to the total number of lots in the subdivision. The elimination of block numbers or letters is desired. All lots, plots, or building sites in any resubdivision shall be lettered a, b, c, etc. 
(b)  In any subdivision that is laid out and developed in units of First and Second filing, etc., the lots shall again be numbered consecutively, not duplicating any lot numbers in previous units of filings. 
(c)  All lots, plots, or building sites shall front upon a dedicated street with a minimum frontage of fifty (50) feet and a depth of one hundred (100) feet. 
Section 13.10 - Improvements 
    Upon receiving conditional approval of the preliminary plan by the Council of the City of Kenner, the owner or subdivider shall have the final plan prepared, containing the changes or additions ordered by the Council of the City of Kenner, and conforming to these regulations. The Mayor shall execute the form showing the approval by the Council on condition that the owners enter into an agreement with and satisfactory to the Council of the City of Kenner relative to the improvement of all streets and alleys involved, and to the necessary drainage of the property. 
Section 13.11 - Approval conditions 
    Before approval and acceptance of the plan by the Council, an agreement shall be entered into which shall require, subject to such additional terms and conditions, and such modifications as the Council shall approve, the following: 
(a)  The owner or subdivider shall construct the necessary facilities as determined by the City of Kenner Councilmen for adequate drainage of the area being subdivided, with permanent drainage structures under all streets and alleys, and all drainage structures shall be constructed in accordance with plans and specifications approved by the Parish of Jefferson and the Mayor and Councilmen of the City of Kenner. 
(b)  The owner or subdivider shall grade all the streets and alleys to the grade indicated by the engineer as the future established grade. All grading shall be done in compliance with the specifications of the Department of Public Works. 
(c)  The owner shall provide hard surfacing to all streets to specifications on file in the Department of Public Works office, and shall also provide public utilities when available, or shall have given such assurance that these improvements will be made as will be satisfactory to the Councilmen of the City of Kenner. 
(d)  All roadwork and drainage construction must be approved by the designated engineer. It shall be the duty of the engineer to see that all grade lines and elevations are set properly. For this service, the engineer shall charge a fee for said work. 
(e)  Other than the grading, graveling and construction of drainage structures required under this chapter, no person, firm, or corporation shall do any work without the approval of the City Council. 
(f)  After subdivisions are accepted and dedicated by ordinance of the City Council, it is the duty of the subdivider to notify the City Council when the streets are in proper condition and for inspection by the engineer. No streets shall be accepted for maintenance by the City Council until such an inspection has been made by the engineer and he has given his approval and recommendation in writing. In cases where the engineer has been notified to make an inspection of certain streets and he finds that they are not properly surfaced as set forth in subparagraph (c) of this section, then the engineer is authorized to charge a reasonable inspection fee for each additional inspection required. 
(g)  That all streets to be hereafter dedicated to public use by any person, firm, or corporation, laying out any subdivision be in accordance with this chapter. Such person, firm, or corporation shall submit to the City Council an ordinance, which shall name the street or street widths, locations and it, shall be accompanied by a map showing the location, width, etc. 
(h)  That the ordinance dedicating said streets to public use may be included in the ordinance subdividing the property or it may be done by separate ordinance, which shall be optional with the board. 
(i)  That all ordinances providing for the subdivision of tracts of land, into lots, plots or building sites, setting out streets and ordinances dedicating streets to public use, shall be registered in the conveyance office of the Parish of Jefferson, at the expense of the landowners or parties dedicating said streets to public use. 
(j)  All public utilities facilities to be provided in said subdivision shall be approved by the Council, commission or corporation charged with the responsibility for maintaining said facilities. 
(k)  Sanitary sewers. If the closest boundary of the subdivision is located within three hundred (300) feet of an existing sanitary sewer main, connection must be made, otherwise other methods of disposal of domestic sewage may be resorted to, subject to the laws prevailing, whether City, parish or state. 
(l)  Information concerning this utility must be secured and agreed upon prior to final adoption of the subdivision. 
(m)  That all owners or subdividers dedicating streets to public use shall improve such streets and shall provide all other necessary off-site improvements such as sewer, water and drainage in compliance with the specifications of the department of public works or the Parish of Jefferson, or both, depending upon who has jurisdiction. The owners or subdividers shall furnish the Council, through the planning department, a surety bond in such value as is deemed adequate to cover all work required to be done in said subdivision by the Council, such value or amount to be determined by the City's engineer; and that a reasonable length of time be set for the completion of all work in the subdivision, after which time the developer will forfeit his surety bond if work is not satisfactorily completed. 
Section 13.12 - Protection of Utilities From Excessive Exposure to Flooding 
    Protection of all public and private utilities to include water, sewer, etc., above or below grade from excessive exposure to flooding shall be provided. All modern means of materials and workmanship shall be required to prevent infiltration level in excess of E.P.A. requirement in flood hazard areas as well as all areas of the City. 
Section 13.13 - Variations and Exceptions 
    The Council of the City reserves the right to consider modifications of the requirements of this chapter, when it is clearly evident that an extraordinary condition exists that would make it impractical and not feasible to comply with all the requirements of this chapter. 
Section 13.14 - Enforcement 
(a)  The sale of property to be used as lots, plots, or building sites only by metes and bounds description shall be presumed to be an attempt to evade these regulations, and such instrument shall not be eligible for filing and recording in the office of the clerk and recorder and the accessor's office of Jefferson Parish, Louisiana. 
(b)  No plan, map, or plat of any subdivision of land shall be filed and recorded in the office of the clerk and recorder and the assessor's office of Jefferson Parish, Louisiana, until such plan, map, or plat has been accepted by the Council and the endorsements of such action by the Council shown on the original plan, map, or plat. 
(c)  No street number and no building permit shall be issued for the erection of any building in the above limits or any piece of property other than on an original or resubdivided lot in a duly approved and recorded subdivision without the written approval of the Council or its authorized representative. 
(d)  No sewer, water or gas main or pipe, or other public utility improvement shall be made nor shall any public money be expended within the lands laid out in building lots, streets or alleys, where the improvements are for the benefit of such lands until the plan, plot, or replot of such land shall have been accepted by the City Council and recorded in the office of the clerk and recorder and the accessor's office of Jefferson Parish, Louisiana. 
(e)  The approved and accepted map, plan, or plot of any subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the clerk and recorder and the accessor's office in Jefferson Parish, Louisiana, within thirty (30) days from the date of approval and acceptance of the City Council or said approval and acceptance shall be void. 
(f)  It shall be illegal to sell by lot and block where plan or plat has not been accepted by the City of Kenner Council. 
(g)  No subdivision request will be processed until the City Finance Department's certificate of clearance is submitted to the Planning and Zoning Department indicating all City liens or taxes against the property proposed for subdivision have been satisfied. 
Section 13.15 - Violation and Penalty 
    Any person, partnership, or corporation who violates any of the provisions of this chapter or aids or abets in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punishable by a fine of not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for not less than thirty (30) days, or both. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 13.16 - Conflicting Provisions Repealed 
    All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with any of the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. 
Section 13.17 - Validity 
    If any section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of this chapter shall be held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other section, clause, paragraph, provision or portion of this chapter, the City Council hereby expressly declaring that it would have passed the remaining portions of this chapter with the invalid portions omitted. 
Article XIV. - Nonconforming Uses 

Section 14.01 - Purpose 
    The purpose of nonconforming use regulations is to allow nonconforming uses while upholding the integrity of the district regulations described in this ordinance by carefully guiding nonconforming uses to have as little negative impact on conforming uses as possible. 
Section 14.02 - Continuance 
    Any lawful structure, building permit issue, or use existing on or prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance; or whenever a district shall be changed by amendment to this ordinance; may be continued even though such building, structure, or use does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Section 14.03 - Extensions, Additions, and Enlargements 
    No extensions, additions, or enlargements shall be permitted to any legal nonconforming use, except as provided for in Article VI, Zoning. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to exclude routine maintenance, repair, or renovation, which does not extend, increase, or enlarge the nonconforming structure, building, or use. 
(a)  Nonconforming Uses in Residential Zoning Districts : For the purposes of protecting the integrity of residential neighborhoods, no extensions, additions or enlargements shall be permitted to any legal nonconforming use, structure, or building located within the following zoning districts: R-1, R-1A, and RR-1, Single-family Residential; R-2, Two-family Residential; R-3, Three and Four-family Residential; and R-M, Multi-family Residential. 
(b)  Nonconforming Uses in Nonresidential Zoning Districts : A legally nonconforming nonresidential commercial or industrial structure not located in a residential district may be permitted an addition provided: 
(1)  The total addition shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the total area of the original structure; 
(2)  The proposed addition shall not infringe on the side, front, and rear yard requirements for the district in which the nonconforming use is located; 
(3)  The applicant shall obtain a building permit for the addition within one (1) year from the effective date of the ordinance approved by the Council; 
(4)  Approval of the Kenner City Council is obtained after proper application initiated with the Planning and Zoning Department in accordance with provisions set in Article VI, Zoning. 
(5)  If visibility of an off-premises sign message is obscured by the elevation of a roadway or similar public works project, an addition to height may be permitted provided the extension is limited to the minimum increase in sign height that allows the message to be visible. The requirements of paragraphs (a) and (b) above shall not apply but the requirements of paragraphs (c) and (d) above shall apply. 
Section 14.04 - Change in Use 
(a)  Residential Districts : For the purposes of protecting the integrity of residential neighborhoods, no change in use from one (1) nonconforming use to another nonconforming use shall be permitted in any residential zoning district. 
(b)  Nonresidential Districts : A nonconforming use may be changed to a similar and/or more restrictive nonconforming use in any nonresidential zoning district in accordance with the regulations of the district in which it is located. A nonconforming use shall be considered similar or more restrictive if the following conditions related to the intensity of the use or public safety are met: 
(1)  Off-street parking requirements are not increased; 
(2)  Required height and area requirements are not changed; 
(3)  Service areas, including loading and unloading areas, are not increased, and a wood, brick or masonry fence a minimum height of seven (7) feet is installed between the service area of the nonconforming use and any abutting residential development or residential zoning district; 
(4)  The change in use is not likely to produce additional smoke, noise, vibration, toxic matter or fire and explosive hazards over the use previously situated on the site; 
(5)  Existing signs identifying the nonconforming use may be maintained, or the sign face replaced, provided that the area of the sign is reduced or equivalent to the existing sign size. All new signs shall be in conformance with the regulations of the district the proposed use is located; 
(6)  The issuance of an alcoholic beverage permit shall be considered an intensification of the land use and a less restrictive condition. A change in nonconforming use may be allowed for an alcoholic beverage permit, only if the previous use had been issued an alcoholic beverage permit; 
(7)  The hours of operation of the nonconforming use cannot be expanded; 
(8)  All City codes are met relative to any site changes necessary in the change to a similar or more restrictive use. 
(c)  In no case shall a nonconforming use be changed to a less restrictive use or to a use of a less restrictive zoning district. 
(d)  Once a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the nonconforming use shall not be reestablished. 
Section 14.05 - Change in Occupancy 
    A change in occupancy of a nonconforming use shall be permitted provided the regulations in Section 14.04, Change in Use are met. 
Section 14.06 - Restoration of Nonconforming Uses 
[(a)]  Partial destruction and restoration: A nonconforming use, structure, or building may be restored after destruction by Act of God, war, or other local catastrophe if so destroyed to no more than seventy-five (75) percent of its value as determined by the assessor of this parish for current tax purposes; and only if a permit to restore the use, structure, or building is obtained within the one (1) year immediately following the date of said destruction. 
[(b)]  Total destruction: If the structure, building, or use is destroyed beyond seventy-five percent (75%) of its value or more, as defined in this subsection, then for the purposes of this section the nonconforming use, structure or building shall be deemed totally destroyed, and the nonconforming status shall terminate as of the date of such destruction. 
[(c)]  Appeal of termination of nonconforming status: The owner of any structure totally destroyed as defined in subsection (b) above may appeal by petitioning the City of Kenner Council through the City of Kenner Planning Department and in accordance with provisions set in this Article, to restore the nonconforming status of the structure or use. The Kenner City Council may approve the restoration provided the following criteria are met: 
(1)  The nonconforming structure or use shall not be detrimental to the public welfare or seriously affect or be injurious to other property or improvements in the neighborhood in which the property is located; 
(2)  The nonconforming structure or use shall not contribute substantially to increasing congestion of streets or create a traffic hazard; 
(3)  The proper number of parking and loading spaces as required by the ordinance is provided for the use or structure to the maximum extent possible; 
(4)  The existing drainage, sewerage and street systems are not overburdened and the necessary improvements are provided to accommodate the use or structure; 
(5)  The nonconforming structure shall be compatible with surrounding development within three hundred (300) feet in that the same or similar exterior finish, roof materials and roof lines are used; 
(6)  Sufficient buffers to protect conforming uses are provided in accordance with the following requirements and subject to existing space limitation: 
a.  Perimeter of a lot abutting residential property: 
i.  On the perimeter of a lot abutting residential land use, a continuous barrier is required for the purpose of buffering loading, unloading, and other service areas, garbage and trash receptacles, and off-street parking or other vehicular use areas exposed to abutting property. 
ii.  The barrier shall be an opaque fence or living fence, a berm, or any combination thereof with a minimum height of seven (7) feet. If the barrier includes use of plant materials, such materials shall be planted in a strip of not less than five (5) feet in width. 
b.  Tree provisions: For each thirty-five (35) feet of the required barrier or fraction thereof, one (1) tree shall be provided. Each tree shall be planted in at least a twenty-five-foot square planting area. Each such planting area for trees shall be landscaped with grass, ground cover or other landscaping. 
c.  Perimeter of a lot abutting nonresidential property: If the abutting lot contains nonresidential land uses, only the tree provision, referenced in paragraph (6)b. above, shall be required. 
d.  Existing barrier: If the perimeter of a lot abuts an existing barrier, the existing barrier may be used to satisfy the landscape barrier requirements listed above, provided that the existing barrier meets all applicable standards set forth herein. 
e.  Parking: 
i.  All vehicular use areas including parking lots shall be buffered from view from public rights-of-way by a barrier with a minimum height of thirty (30) inches, consisting of an earth berm, hedge, wall, or any combination thereof. 
ii.  All vehicular use areas, including parking spaces, drives, and service drives shall consist of hard-surface material. 
f.  The buffer standards contained within this subsection shall not apply to nonconforming single-family and two-family dwellings. 
g.  All applicable City, state, and federal codes shall be met. 
h.  The applicant shall have one (1) year to obtain a building permit to restore the structure, building, or use from the effective date of this ordinance approved by the Council. 
Section 14.07 - Vacancy of a Nonconforming Structure 
    The discontinuance or suspension of a nonconforming use or associated activity for any reason shall constitute vacancy of a nonconforming structure, regardless of the intent of the owner or lessee of the premises to continue such nonconforming use or associated activity. Vacancy of a nonconforming for a period of one (1) year shall terminate the nonconforming use. 
Section 14.08 - Limitation of Nonconforming Use of Land 
    Where a portion of the property occupied by a nonconforming structure is used as nonconforming, but the use does not include the entire lot or parcel, the portion not used shall not be deemed to be nonconforming and said use may not be extended. 
Article XV. - Hazard Aerial Zoning 

Section 15.01 - Definitions 
    As used in this Article the following words, terms, and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them: 
(1)  Airport: The Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport. 
(2)  Airport elevation: The highest point of the airport's usable landing area measured in feet from mean sea level (MSL). 
(3)  Approach surface: A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline, extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the approach zone height limitation slope set forth in Section 15.03 of this Article. In plan, the perimeter of the approach surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach zone. 
(4)  Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones: These zones are set forth in Section 15.02 of this Article. 
(5)  Conical surface: A surface extending outward and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20 to 1 for a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
(6)  Director of aviation: The Director of aviation for the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport (LANOIA) or the official representative appointed by the New Orleans Aviation Board (NOAB). 
(7)  Hazard to air navigation: An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace. 
(8)  Height: For the purposes of determining the height limitations in all zones set forth in this Article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
(9)  Horizontal surface: A horizontal plane one hundred fifty (150) feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with the perimeter of the horizontal zone. 
(10)  Larger than utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft. 
(11)  Nonconforming use: Any preexisting structure, object of natural growth or use of land, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Article or an amendment thereto. 
(12)  Non-precision instrument runaway: A runaway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned. 
(13)  Obstruction: Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section 15.03 of this Article. 
(14)  Person: An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative of any of them. 
(15)  Precision instrument runway: A runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning document. 
(16)  Primary surface: A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the primary surface is set forth in Section 15.02 of this Article. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
(17)  Runway: A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
(18)  Structure: An object, including a mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead transmission lines. 
(19)  Transitional surfaces: These surfaces extend outward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(20)  Tree: Any object of natural growth. 
(21)  Utility runway: A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
(22)  Visual runway: A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures. 
Section 15.02 - Airport Zones 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this Article, there are hereby created and established certain zones, which include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to the LANOIA. Such zones are shown on the Louis Armstrong New Orleans International Airport Zoning map prepared by VTN Louisiana, Inc., and dated December 15, 1979. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(a)  Utility runway visual approach zones: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of twelve hundred fifty (1,250) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(b)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of two thousand (2,000) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(c)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of fifteen hundred (1,500) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(d)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum, greater than three-quarter mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of thirty-five hundred (3,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(e)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum, as low as three-quarter mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of four thousand (4,000) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(f)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet at a horizontal distance of fifty thousand (50,000) feet from the primary surface. Its centerline is the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(g)  Transitional zones: The transitional zones are the areas beneath the transitional surfaces. 
(h)  Horizontal zone: The horizontal zone is established by swinging arcs of ten thousand (10,000) feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(i)  Conical zone: The conical zone is established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zones and extends outwards therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
Section 15.03 - Airport Zone Height Limitations 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Article, no structure shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone created by this Article to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(a)  Utility runway visual approach zone: Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(b)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(c)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(d)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum, greater than three-quarter mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes thirty-four (34) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extended to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(e)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum, as low as three-quarter mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes thirty-four (34) feet for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(f)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: Slopes fifty (50) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline; thence, slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of forty thousand (40,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(g)  Transitional zones: Slopes seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation, which is one hundred fifty-four (154) feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured at ninety (90) degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(h)  Horizontal zone: Established at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation or at a height of one hundred fifty-four (154) feet above mean sea level. 
(i)  Conical zone: Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
(j)  Accepted height limitations: Nothing in this Article shall be construed as prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure, or growth of any tree to a height up to fifty (50) feet above the surface of the land. 
Section 15.04 - Use Restrictions 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Article, no use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this Article in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. 
Section 15.05 - Nonconforming Uses 
(a)  Regulations not retroactive : The regulations prescribed by this Article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this Article, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction, alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Article, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Marking and lighting : Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the Director of aviation to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at the expense of the New Orleans Aviation Board. 
Section 15.06 - Permits 
(a)  Future Uses : 
(1)  Except as specifically provided in (a), (b) and (c) hereunder, no structure shall be erected or otherwise established, unless a permit therefore shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. 
(2)  If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. No permit for a use (as outlined in Section 15.04 inconsistent with the provisions of this Article shall be granted. 
a.  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features, such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zones. 
b.  In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a horizontal distance of not less than forty-two hundred (4200) feet from each end of the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such approach zones. 
c.  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
(3)  Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, or alteration of any structure, or growth of any tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this ordinance except as set forth in Section 15.03. 
(b)  Existing Uses : No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of any obstruction or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than it was on the effective date of this Article or any amendments thereto or than it is when the application for a permit is made. Except as indicated, all applications for such a permit shall be granted. 
(c)  Nonconforming uses abandoned or destroyed : Whenever a nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than eighty percent (80%) torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
Section 15.07 - Penalties 
    Each violation of this Article or of any regulation, order, or ruling promulgated hereunder shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days or both; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
Section 15.08 - Conflicting Regulations 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this Article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict is with respect to the height of structure or trees, and the use, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
Section 15.09 - Severability 
    If any of the provisions of this Article or the application thereof to any person or circumstances are held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of the Article, which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end, the provisions of this ordinance are declared to be severable. 
Article XVI. - Appendix 

Section 16.01 - Fee Schedule 
    The City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses for applications for permits and certificates, amendments, appeals and other matters related to this chapter. Until all applicable fees, charges, and expenses have been paid, no action shall be taken on any application or appeal. All fees shall be made payable to the City of Kenner. The fee schedule is hereby established as follows: 
Application Description Filing Fee Alley, Street Closing, Revocation $300 Alienation $200 for first acre, $100 per every acre thereafter not to exceed $5,000 Amusement Centers $300 Board of Zoning Adjustments $150 Child Care Centers $300 City Maps 24" x 36": $12 per page Comprehensive Plan Text Amendment $500 Conditional Use $300 for first two acres, $175 per acre thereafter not to exceed $6,000. Conditional Use Amendment Major: $300 
Minor: $100 General Advertising Sign $300 Hazardous & Obnoxious Use $500 for first two acres, $100 per acre thereafter. Planned Unit Development (PUD) $300 for first two acres, $175 per acre thereafter not to exceed $6,000. Planned Unit Development Amendment Major: $300 
Minor: $100 Resubdivision (Lot Consolidation) $200 Research/Zoning Interpretation $50 per hour R1-P (Planned Unit Development) $300 for first two acres, $175 per acre thereafter not to exceed $6,000. Rivertown Historic Design Commission $300 Site Plan Review (No Application Submittal) $100 Street Name Change $300 Subdivision Base fee of $200 plus $25 per lot Tax Research Fee for Resubdivisions $20 per property assessment Unified Development Code   i. Text Change $100 per change   ii. Changing Official Zoning Map $200 for first acre and $50 for every acre thereafter not to exceed $5000  
APPENDIX B - SPECIAL ACT CREATING FIREMEN'S PENSION AND RELIEF FUND[1] 
AN ACT 
To create a Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund for the City of Kenner, Louisiana; to provide for a public corporation to administer same, for contributions to such Fund by the City of Kenner and others, and for monthly deductions from the pay of members of the fire department, for disability payments to members of the fire department, for retirement pensions, for pensions to widows and children of members, exempting said Fund and payments made therefrom for disability or pensions from seizure for debt; for termination of benefits under other plans and for the transfer of funds; making the "Service" provisions retroactive for members presently employed by said fire department, and otherwise providing with respect to said purpose. 
Notice of intention to apply for the passage of this Act has been published and evidence of such publication exhibited to the Legislature, both as required by Section 6 of Article IV and also Section 25 of Article XIX of the Constitution of Louisiana. 
Be it enacted by the Legislature of Louisiana: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- This appendix sets forth an act creating a firemen's pension and relief fund for the city, which was House Bill No. 166 and Act No. 19 of the 1964 Regular Session of the Louisiana Legislature and approved June 24, 1964. 
Cross reference- Employee benefits generally, § 2-20 et seq.; police pension and relief plan, § 11-16 et seq. 

Section 1. 
    There is hereby created a Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund for the City of Kenner, Louisiana, and a public corporation to be known as the Board of Trustees of the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, which corporation shall be vested with the power to administer the Fund herein provided for, to sue and be sued, to buy and sell securities for investment of the surplus monies of said Fund, to allot disability payments and pensions as hereinafter set forth, to employ necessary clerical and professional services and fix the compensation of same. 
Section 2. 
    The board of trustees shall be composed of five (5) members, consisting of the mayor, who shall be president of the board, two (2) members of the board of aldermen, who shall be chosen by that body, the fire chief and one active member of the fire department, to be elected on the first Monday of September, 1964. The elected members shall be elected for a one year term by secret ballot. The president of said board shall vote only in case of a tie. The board of trustees shall select one of its members to act in the capacity of secretary-treasurer of the board. 
    In case of a vacancy on the board of trustees from among the members of the fire department on said board, said vacancy shall be filled by an election conducted as herein provided for and to be held within sixty (60) days of the creation of such vacancy. 
Section 3. 
    From the effective date of this Act, all funds, monies, proceeds and revenues hereafter provided for shall constitute and be "The Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund of the City of Kenner, Louisiana," for the pensioning of disabled, superannuated and/or retired members of the fire department of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, and their widows and/or orphans, and for the relief and aid of any member of said fire department in case of temporary disability. 
Section 4. 
    The Fund as above constituted and established shall be controlled, managed and administered by the board of trustees herein provided for. 
Section 5. 
(A)  The board of trustees shall have exclusive control and management of the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund and shall make all necessary and pertinent rules and regulations for the proper administration of said Fund; shall hear and decide on all applications for benefits under this Fund, and its decisions on such applications shall not be subject to review or reversal except by said board or upon filing of suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. All rules and regulations adopted by the board of trustees shall, within thirty (30) days after their adoption, be posted on the bulletin boards provided for that purpose in each of the fire houses located within the city limits of the City of Kenner, Louisiana. 
(B)  The board shall meet quarterly and a special meeting shall be called on forty-eight (48) hours' notice by the president at the request of any three (3) members. Three (3) members shall constitute a quorum. 
Section 6. 
    The board of trustees shall have the power and it shall be its duty to: 
(1)  Make all rules and regulations necessary to the proper conduct of the business of the Fund under the provisions of the law; 
(2)  Retain such legal, medical, clerical or other services as may be necessary for the conduct of the affairs of the Fund, and make compensation for such services; 
(3)  Cause such amounts as may be set forth in the law to be deducted from the salaries of the active participants in the Fund, and be paid into the treasury of the Fund; 
(4)  Certify to the levying authority provided by law the amount of revenues required and provided for, and cause same to be collected through the proper local agency; 
(5)  Cause the examination of every disability pensioner or beneficiary as often as the board deems necessary, but at least once a year; 
(6)  Keep all necessary records of its meetings and proceedings; 
(7)  It shall annually, at the close of the fiscal year, cause to be posted in each station house a recapitulation of the Fund, prepared by an independent certified public accountant, showing number of pensioners, amount of disbursements, revenues received and present condition and manner of investment of said Fund; and 
(8)  Keep a book to be known as the List of Retired Firemen. This book shall give a full and complete record of the action of the board of trustees in retiring or pensioning all persons under this Act, showing the names, date of entering the service of said fire department, date or removal from active service, and the reason for such action. Decisions by the board shall be reviewable only by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
Section 7. 
    The Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund shall consist of the following: 
(1)  All rewards, gifts or emoluments that may be paid or given for or on account of extraordinary service of said fire department, except when given to an individual member or given to endow a medal or other permanent award, shall be paid into the Pension and Relief Fund. 
(2)  The proceeds of the sale of condemned property owned and used by the fire department shall be paid into the Pension and Relief Fund. 
(3)  The refund on all insurance premiums from insurance companies, under R.S. 22:1581-1587, now in the Firemen's Pension Fund and each year's refund or a like amount. 
(4)  Five (5) per cent of the gross salary of all employees of said fire department who are eligible for participation in the benefits of this Fund shall be deducted from their respective salaries monthly and paid into said Fund. 
(5)  The City of Kenner is authorized and directed to appropriate and pay out of the annual revenues of the general alimony tax of the said City of Kenner into the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund a sum equal to the monthly deductions from the firemen's salaries, said payments to be paid into said Fund monthly. 
(6)  The City of Kenner shall pay out of the annual revenues of the general alimony tax of the City of Kenner into the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund of the City of Kenner annually, at the beginning of the fiscal year, an amount equivalent to the amount of such deficit as may result, occur or appear in the operation of said Fund for the preceding year at the close of such fiscal year, considering the receipt and revenues accruing for such year to the said Fund under paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4) and (5), of this section, as against disbursements for such year made under the provisions of this Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund. 
Section 8. 
    The board of trustees may at any time, after considering the probable current demands upon such Fund, determine what portion of said Fund may be safely withdrawn from the current cash account for investment for revenue purposes, and having so determined, invest the same in the manner hereinafter authorized, and all proceedings of the board of trustees relating thereto shall be entered upon its records. Such investment shall be only in interest bearing bonds of the United States of America, or of the State of Louisiana; or of the said City of Kenner, Louisiana. All income from such investment shall be and become a part of said Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund. All such securities shall be deposited with the secretary-treasurer of the board of trustees, and the receipt therefor filed in the record books. 
Section 9. 
    No portion of the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund shall, before or after its order for distribution is issued by the board of trustees to the person or persons entitled thereto under the provisions of this Act, be held, seized, taken, subjected to, detained or levied upon, by virtue of any attachment, garnishment, execution, injunction, writ, order, decree or any other process whatsoever, issued out of or by any court of this state, for the payment or satisfaction, in whole or in part, of any debt, damage, demand, claim, judgment or decree against any beneficiary of such fund; but shall be exempt therefrom. The Fund shall be kept, held and distributed solely for the purposes named in this Act and for no other purposes whatsoever. 
Section 10. 
    If at any time there shall not be sufficient funds in such Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund subject to disbursements to pay each person entitled to the benefit thereof, the full amount per month as herein provided, then such monthly payment or payments shall be made pro rata to each beneficiary until the said Fund shall have been replenished sufficiently to resume payment in full to each of said beneficiaries. Deficits to each beneficiary shall be paid when said Fund has been replenished sufficiently to make these back payments. 
Section 11. 
    All municipal employees who are secured benefits under the provisions of this plan shall, on the effective date of this Act, thenceforth and immediately thereupon cease to be eligible for benefits under any other municipal pension and relief and/or retirement plan and, on the effective date of this Act, all funds and monies which have heretofore been paid into any pension and relief and/or retirement fund or plan of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, by any municipal employee who thereupon becomes subject to benefits under this plan shall immediately be transferred into this Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund hereby created and the responsible fiscal officer for any such fund shall immediately take appropriate steps to transfer such funds or monies to this plan. 
Section 12. 
    Pensions and benefits shall be as follows: 
(1)  If any member of the said fire department while in the active service of said fire department for a period of at least six (6) months, is found by the board of trustees to be totally, physically or mentally disabled for service in said fire department by reason of service in said fire department, he shall receive monthly from the Fund so long as such disability shall continue or until he becomes eligible for retirement on service basis, whichever is sooner, a sum which, together with the benefits from Workmen's Compensation Act, shall be equal to seventy-five (75) per cent of the monthly salary of the active member of the said fire department holding the position corresponding to that held by the beneficiary at the time that he became disabled. 
(2)  If any member of said fire department, while in the active service, is found by the board of trustees to be totally physically or mentally disabled for service in said fire department by reason of causes not arising or developing directly from his employment in said fire department, save and except any disability which may arise from the commission or attempted commission of a misdemeanor or felony or use of any drug or intoxicating liquor to such extent as to become under the influence thereof or due to his negligence, he shall receive monthly from the fund, so long as such disability shall continue or until he becomes eligible for retirement on service basis, whichever is sooner, a sum equal to thirty-three and one-third (33 1/3 ) per cent of the monthly salary of the active member of said fire department holding the position corresponding to that held by the beneficiary at the time he became disabled, plus an additional two (2) per cent of such salary for each year of active service rendered over five (5) years; provided, however, that the maximum benefit shall be sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) per cent of the monthly salary of the active member of the said fire department holding the position corresponding to that held by the beneficiary at the time he became disabled, computed on the basis of the respective months. Provided, further, that the time elapsing while said member is receiving benefits under this subsection shall not be considered as time served in the said fire department by such member and shall not be included as "time served" in determining eligibility for retirement under this Act. Provided, further, however, that if such member who has been disabled for service in said fire department for causes not arising or developing directly from his employment in said fire department has served as a member of the fire department continuously for a period of ten (10) years at the time of disability, he shall be eligible for retirement without serving the full twenty (20) years as stipulated in subsection (3) hereof. 
(3)  Any member of the said fire department who serves in said fire department for a period of twenty (20) years, upon making proper written application to the board of trustees requesting it, shall be retired from the service in said fire department and shall be paid a monthly sum equal to sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) per cent of the monthly salary of the active member of said fire department holding the position corresponding to that held by the beneficiary at the time of his retirement, and an additional amount equal to one per cent of such salary for each year of service after said member has reached the age of fifty (50) years and after he shall have served twenty (20) years; provided, however, that the maximum benefit shall not exceed seventy-five (75) per cent of said salary. 
(4)  After any member of such fire department shall have been retired upon pension by reason of disability, the board of trustees shall have the right at any time to cause such retired member to be brought before it and again examined by the city physician and/or other competent physicians and surgeons, to be selected by it, and also to examine other witnesses for the purpose of discovering whether such disability to perform the duties of the position held at the time of his removal from active service yet continues, and whether such retired member should be continued on the pension roll, but such retired member shall remain upon the pension roll until reinstated to his former rank in the active service of the fire department. Such retired member shall be entitled to notice and to be present at the hearing of any such evidence, and shall be permitted to propound any questions pertinent or relevant to such matter, and shall also have the right to introduce upon his own behalf any competent evidence he may see fit. All witnesses so produced shall be examined under oath. The decision of the board of trustees shall be final and conclusive, and no appeal shall be allowed therefrom, nor shall the same be subject to review except by the board of trustees or upon proper application to the courts. 
(5)  If any member of the fire department, while in the service of the fire department or while eligible for or receiving benefits under the provisions of this Act, shall die from any cause, and leave a widow surviving, the board shall direct the payment monthly from the said fund to such widow, during the remainder of her life, and while she remains unmarried, fifty (50) per cent of the benefits to which such deceased member would be entitled, were he the direct beneficiary, to be computed at the time such payment is made; each surviving minor child under the age of eighteen (18) years shall receive twenty-four (24) per cent of the said benefit which would be otherwise payable to the deceased member if he were the direct beneficiary; provided, however, that said payment to said children shall continue after the remarriage of the said widow, but not after the marriage of the children. Provided, further, that no widow shall be entitled to or receive the benefits from this Act unless she was married to such member prior to his removal from active service and was living with him at the time of death. Provided, further, however, that the total sum payable to said deceased's family shall not exceed sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) per cent of his salary. 
(6)  Whenever an active or retired member of the fire department shall die as aforesaid in subsection (5) hereof, the board of trustees shall appropriate from the fund the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for funeral and burial expenses of such deceased member. 
(7)  In the event of the death of a member of the fire department as aforesaid in subsection (5) hereof leaving no wife but a child or children, each child shall receive thirty (30) per cent of the benefits to which such deceased member would have been entitled had he been the direct beneficiary; provided, however, that these benefits shall be payable only until such child reaches the age of eighteen (18) years or marries, whichever is sooner. Provided, further, that the total sum payable to said deceased's family shall not exceed sixty-six and two-thirds (66 2/3 ) per cent of his salary. 
(8)  The benefits provided in preceding paragraphs (1) and (2) may continue only until the time the member would have been eligible for retirement under the provisions of this Act, had he continued in active service, and at such time, he shall receive the benefits provided for under the retirement provisions of this Act, if he is eligible therefor. 
(9)  The benefits provided in this Act for minor children shall be paid to the qualified tutor or tutrix during the minority of said child, unless otherwise directed by the board. 
(10)  In the event a member of the fire department shall die of any cause, while eligible for or receiving benefits under the provisions of this Act, and leave a father and/or mother directly dependent upon him for support and maintenance, the board in its discretion may grant and pay such father and/or mother such portion of the pension which would have been payable to the deceased member had he been the direct beneficiary as they may deem advisable. Provided, however, that this subsection shall not operate in such manner as to effect or diminish any benefits provided herein for surviving widows and/or children. 
(11)  No member or other beneficiary designated in this Act shall be entitled to or receive the benefits herein provided so long as he shall receive from the fire department a sum equal to or greater than the benefits to which he would otherwise be entitled under this Act. In the event such sum so received should be less than the said amount of the benefits provided herein, the benefits payable shall be reduced in an amount equal to the sum received from the fire department. 
Section 13. 
(1)  In the event a member of the fire department becomes separated from the service in said fire department before being eligible for pension, his salary deductions shall not be returned to him. 
(2)  In the event a member of the fire department shall be laid off, voluntarily or involuntarily, for any cause for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, he shall continue during said layoff periods to be entitled to the benefits of this Act. 
(3)  If any member or members of the fire department shall be discharged from the service for reasons of economy or reduction in the force due to no fault of said member and later shall be reemployed by the fire department, his rights to the privileges and benefits of this Act shall continue as from the date he was discharged without any loss of rights and privileges due to such period of absence from the service, provided he does not draw out his salary deductions, and time lost under these conditions shall not count as time served on said fire department. 
Section 14. 
    Members of the said fire department, as used in this Firemen's Pension and Relief Act, shall constitute every man actively in the employ of said fire department of the City of Kenner and who is qualified under the Municipal Fire and Police Civil Service System of the City of Kenner, Louisiana. 
Section 15. 
(1)  Time served in the service of the United States Government during time of war shall constitute "service" in the fire department. 
(2)  A member serving in the Armed Forces of the United States Government, at his first opportunity after the national emergency is over, must apply for reemployment with said fire department within ninety (90) days after his release from military service for said service time to be so applied. 
(3)  Voluntary enlistment and service in the Armed Services of the United States during peace time shall not constitute service with the fire department, unless the member is subject to mandatory military conscription and has successfully passed the physical examination. 
(4)  Time lost on account of sickness and fire department "service injury" shall constitute "service" in the fire department. 
(5)  "Service" in said fire department, as used in this Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund, shall also include any activity while on or off duty with a view toward saving life or property, excluding injury or disease from other gainful employment. 
(6)  Time served prior to the enactment of this Act in the active service of said fire department shall be considered as "service" in the said fire department for the retirement provisions of this Act and for the purpose of the ten (10) year period of service provisions of section 12(1) and (2) of this Act. 
Section 16. 
    The board of trustees of the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund of the City of Kenner shall have, and the same is hereby granted unto them, full power and authority to sell, mortgage, lease, let or otherwise alienate or dispose of any and all property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, which is now in the possession of or belongs to or shall become the property or come into the possession of the Firemen's Pension and Relief Fund of the City of Kenner, Louisiana, and/or of the board of trustees thereof. 
Section 17. 
    All laws or parts of laws in conflict with the provisions of this Act be, and the same are, hereby repealed insofar as the same conflict herewith; provided, that no section, part or portion of this Act shall operate or be considered to diminish in any manner the rights or benefits previously granted to any person presently in the employ of said fire department. 
Section 18. 
    If any provision or item of this Act or the application thereof is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions, items or applications of this Act which can be given effect without the invalid provisions, items or applications, and to this end the provisions of this Act are hereby declared severable. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 
  
Note- This is a numerical listing of the ordinances of the city of Kenner, Louisiana used in this Code. Repealed or superseded laws and any omitted materials are not reflected in this table. 
Ord. No. Date Section Section this Code 178  8- 4-31 I 7-119 220 12- 4-42 7-85 242  8- 5-46 3-2 258  5- 3-48 7-121 274 12- 1-50 15-52 15-53 277  2- 2-51 15-54 278  2- 2-51 7-107 280  2- 2-51 II 7-113 282  4-13-51 1-3 14-1-14-3 4-13 14-5-14-14 285 10- 5-51 7-121 286 10- 5-51 7-110 292  3- 7-52 I 7-118 294  7- 7-52 I 4-20 II 4-16 III-V 4-21-4-23 VII-X 4-32-4-40 XI-XIV 4-47-4-49 XV 4-4 4-24 4-25 XVI 4-5 4-26 XVII-XIX 4-18-4-19 295  7-21-52 7-42 296  7- 7-52 XII 4-46 297 10- 3-52 7-73 309 11- 6-53 1-5 2-41-2-45 317  4-19-54 14-11 323  6-24-54 15-18 326  8- 6-54 I 15-55 349  5-16-55 14-11 365  9-19-55 I-IV 2-56-2-59 366  9-19-55 II 2-60 III 2-60 407 10-15-66 1-5 2-30-2-34 414 12-17-56 I 5-34 5-41 5-42 VIII 5-35 XIII 5-33 XIX 5-32 423  5-20-57 VIII 13-42 IX 13-43 XI 13-44 429  2- 7-44 7-82 430  7-15-57 7 7-38 431  7-15-57 7-32 432  7-15-57 7-35 433  7-15-57 7-42 434  7-15-57 7-43 435  7-15-57 7-54 436  7-15-57 7-58 437  7-15-57 7-59 438  7-15-57 7-102 439  7-15-57 7-75 440  7-15-57 7-44 441  7-15-57 7-53 442  7-15-57 7-65 443  7-15-57 7-78 444  7-15-57 7-79 446  7-15-57 II 7-74 447  7-15-57 7-64 448  7-15-57 7-77 449  7-15-57 7-81 450  7-15-57 7-85 451  7-15-57 7-86 469 11-18-57 I-III 10-16-10-18 481  8- 1-58 7-120 506 10-13-58 7-64 507  5-19-58 I 7-87 511 11-10-58 I-IV 15-34-15-37 VI 15-39 VII 15-40 527  2-16-59 7-103 533  3- 9-59 II 5-43-5-46 542  5-11-69 15-18 544  6- 8-59 I 15-38 558  9-15-59 I 15-56 III 15-56 597  5-23-60 7-46 626 11-14-60 7-98 698 10- 8-62 7-100 704 12-10-62 II 4-3 721  4- 8-63 1 9-17 6-11 9-18-9-23 763  1-27-64 I 4-2 III-VIII 12-15-12-21 764  1-27-64 I 12-14 II 12-1 IX 12-2 X 12-3 XI-XIII 12-22-12-24 769  2- 9-64 II-VII 9-1-9-6 772  6- 1-64 1 7-1 4 7-3 7 7-2 7-4-7-21 7-32-7-73 7-76-7-77.1 7-78-7-86 7-92-7-112 7-114-7-117 9-120 9-1 9-3-9-6 15-18 15-19 15-51 15-54 773  4-13-64 1-12 6-2-6-13 779  6- 1-64 V 4-1 837  2- 8-65 7-121 870  8- 9-65 7-121 876 10-11-65 I-V 7-106 904  2-14-66 I-XII 11-17-11-28 XIV-XVIII 11-30-11-34 XX 11-36 936 11-14-66 2-9 VI 2-5 2-6 977  3-13-67 12-15 12-17 12-18 989  5- 8-67 1 5-57-5-63 5-65-5-78 5-84-5-109 1068  4- 8-68 14-9 1080  8-12-68 1 15-23 1081  8-12-68 15-18 1082  8-12-68 1-3 14-1-14-3 4-13 14-5-14-14 1082-A 11-29-69 1-3 14-1-14-3 4-13 14-5-14-14 1086 10-14-68 15-18 1088 11-11-68 3 5-30 4 5-31 1093 11-11-68 15-21 2 15-18 3 15-51-15-54 4 15-20 1115  2-27-69 1-6 11-17-11-22 8-21 11-24-11-37 23 11-16 1119  4-14-69 2 15-20 1128  5-12-69 7-84 1138  6- 9-69 3 7-100 1139  7-14-69 1-3 10-29-10-32 4-13 10-33-10-42 14 10-31 1145  9- 8-69 1 13-2 1160 11-10-69 14-3 1169  1-16-70 1-8 10-53-10-61 10-13 10-62-10-66 15-27 10-68-10-79 28 10-80 10-84 29-31 10-81-10-83 33 10-85 34 10-86 10-91 35-38 10-87-10-90 40-44 10-92-10-96 46-62 10-97-10-113 1193  3-24-70 7-84 1234  7-28-70 II 2-2 1240  9-28-70 I 5-120 II-VIII 5-130-5-138 IX 5-122 X 5-123 XI 5-121 5-124 1241  9-28-70 I-III 15-2 1267  1-11-71 1 5-131 1268  1-11-71 1 15-56 2 15-21 3 15-22 1269  1-11-71 1, 2 5-16-5-18 4 5-19 5-7 5-17 1274  2- 8-71 I 16-21 II 16-16 16-20 III 16-59-16-80 IV 16-23 16-24 16-88-16-103 16-105-16-109 16-111 V-VII 16-27-16-33 VIII 16-1-16-4 16-22 16-25 16-26 16-34-16-49 16-81 16-82 16-110 16-112 IX 16-50 X 16-51 XI 16-5 16-52 XII 16-53 XIV 16-17 16-19 XV 16-18 1276  2-22-71 1 2-1 1288  4-12-71 16-29 1289  4-12-71 15-21 15-23 15-56 1304  5-13-71 15-21 15-23 1313  6-14-71 15-21 1325  8- 9-71 4 6-1 1337  9-13-71 15-21 15-23 15-56 1362 11-22-71 I, II 2-71-2-74 IV 2-75 1368 12-13-71 I 3-63 II 3-71 3-72 III 3-62 IV 3-64 V 3-72-3-74 VI-XII 3-65-3-70 XIII-XXVI 3-75-3-88 1369 12-13-71 1 3-20 2 3-18 3-19 3 3-28 3-31 4 3-29 5 3-20 6 3-31 3-34 3-35 7-14 3-21-3-27 15 3-30 16 3-32 17 3-33 18 3-37 19 3-36 20-30 3-38-3-48 31 3-1 32-34 3-49-3-51 1374  2-14-72 App. A 1375  2-14-72 1-3 7-122 1378  2-14-72 1-5 8-1 1382  3-13-72 1, 2 13-19 1391  4-10-72 1, 2 11-1 1396  4-24-72 1, 2 2-10 1403  5- 8-72 15-21, 15-23 (b)(13)-(27) 1407  6-26-72 1-5 2-30-2-34 1410  7-10-72 1-6 2-81-2-86 1421  7-24-72 1-3 91/2-2 1427  8-14-72 Adopting Ordinance p. ix 1430  8-28-72 1-4 4-6 1468 11-27-72 15-18(2), (8) 15-21 15-23(b)(28), (29) 1483  2-12-73 15-21 15-23(b)(30) 1484  2-12-73 1 7-3.1, 7-3.2 1485  2-12-73 1 7-123-7-123.2 1486  2-12-73 1-3 10-106.1 1493  2-26-73 7-81 1520  5-14-73 15-34, 15-38 15-41, 15-42 1528  5-29-73 15-21, 15-23(a) (3)-(6), (b) (31), (32) (e), 15-56 1532  5-29-73 1, 2 App. A, § 3.02(a) (2), (53) 3 App. A, § 20.03(d) 4 App. A, § 20.05(a) 1545  7-23-73 8-2 1556  8-27-73 15-51, 15-51.1 15-57 1563 11- 8-73 2-10.1-2-10.3 1584 11-26-73 7-106 1585 11-26-73 1-4 2-11 1586 11-26-73 1 App. A, § 20.04(e) 1588 12-10-73 1-5 11-2 1603  1-14-74 15-18(9), 15-21 15-23(b) (33)-(37), (e) (2)-(11), 15-56 1607  1-28-74 5-17.1, 5-18 (6)-(9) 5-18.1 1609  1-28-74 7-93.1-7-93.4 1 7-93.6 1610  2-11-74 16-29 1612  2-11-74 13-44 1616  2-25-74 15-23(b)(38), (39) 1618  2-25-74 7-93.1, 7-93.3 7-93.5 1 7-93.6 1631  3-25-74 7-105 1632  3-25-74 13-24-13-31 1639  4- 8-74 1 App. A, § 13-02(a)(5.1) 2, 3 App. A, § 13.02 (a)(2), (2.1) 1640  4- 8-74 10-87(f), (g) 1668  9- 9-74 15-23(c)(3)-(6) 1675 10-14-74 14-1-14-17 1676 10-14-74 1-9 5-1 1689 11-11-74 1 3-89, 3-90 1690 11-11-74 15-56 1694 12- 9-74 7-120 1697 12- 9-74 15-21, 15-23(a)(7)-(9), (b)(40)-(44), (c)(7)-(11), (d)(2), 15-56 1706  1-27-75 15-21, 15-56 1709  2-24-75 15-21, 15-56 1710  2-24-75 16-29, 16-53 1723  4-28-75 16-6 1724  4-28-75 15-21, 15-23(b) (45)-(52), 15-56 1734  6- 9-75 15-21, 15-23(a) (10), 15-56 1735  7-14-75 15-21 1739  7-28-75 1-6 91/2-3 1744  7-28-75 15-18(10) 1745  7-28-75 16-53 1747  7-28-75 1-14 10-121-10-134 1752  8-11-75 15-56 1755  8-25-75 3-23(a)(1), 3-67(a)(1) 1788 10-28-75 1-6 7-130 1806 12- 8-75       Rpld 16-53(a)(6) 1807 12- 8-75 15-23(a)(11), (b)(53), (54) 1828  2-23-76 1-6 7-124-7-129 1852  5-31-76 7-93.1, 7-93.3       Rpld 7-93.5 1863  6-28-76 1 8-16(a) 1873  6-28-76 15-18(9) 1880  7-12-76 15-21, 15-23(b)(55)-(60), (d)(3)-(5), 15-56 1891  8- 9-76 1-10 131/2-1-131/2-10 11       Rpld 7-114-7-119 1894  8-22-76 1, 2 4-4, 4-5 3 4-6(A)(1)-(5), (B)(1), (2), (D)(1)-(6), (E)(1)-(10), (F)(1)-(5), (G)(1) 4, 5 4-7, 4-8 6       Rpld 4-4-4-6, 4-16-4-26, 4-32-4-40, 4-46-4-49 1932 10-26-76 16-91 1942 11-22-76 1 5-18(12) 1943 11-22-76 1 5-18(13) 1959 12-28-76 16-76, 16-78 1968  1-10-77 15-18(2), (11)-(13), 15-21, 15-23(a)(12)(13), 15-51.1, 15-56 1977  1-24-77 2 13-36 1992  2-28-77 16-29(7)(a) 2020  3-28-77 15-18(14) 2026  4-11-77 1 15-21 2       Rpld 15-23(b)(2), (3) 2037  4-25-77 1 15-24 2042  5- 9-77 1-7 15-51 2043  5- 9-77 1 5-18(14) 2044  5- 9-77 4-4, 4-6(A)(6), (C)(1)-(7), (D)(7)-(9), (E)(11), (12), (F)(4)-(6), (G)(2) 2052  5- 9-77 15-56 2073  6-12-77 1 15-21 2102  7-11-77 16-29 2109  7-25-77 1 5-18(13) 2110  7-25-77 1 5-18(10) 2146  9-12-77 1 7-121 2148  9-19-77 1 5-18(11) 2177 10-17-77 15-23(b)(2) 2197 12-12-77 15-23(a)(14), (c)(12), 15-21 2228  1- 9-78 1 5-146-5-149, 5-156, 5-161-5-167, 5-176-5-179, 5-186-5-189 3       Rpld 5-1 2233  2- 6-78 1-5 4-4-4-8 2256  2-27-78 1-3 7-131 2267  3-27-78 1 5-18(5.2) 2275  4- 3-78 10-30, 10-32, 10-36, 10-39, 10-40 2285  5- 1-78 15-18(15), 15-21, 15-23(a)(15), (16), (b)(61)-(74), (c)(13)-(15), (e)(12), (13), 15-56 2286  5- 1-78 7-132 2296  5-15-78 15-21 2306  5-29-78 1 7-65 2307  5-29-78 1 5-18(5.3) 2313  6-12-78 1 1-9 2314  6-12-78 15-21, 15-23(e)(14), (f)(1), 15-56 2344  7-17-78 15-18(10) 2384  9-18-78 15-16, 16-29(c.1), 16-29.1, 16-49.1, 16-61 2395  9-25-78 131/2-11, 131/2-12 2409 10-23-78 1-3 91/2-3(a), (c), (c.1) 2410 10-23-78 15-56 2420 11-20-78 15-56 2427 12- 4-78 App. A 2429 12- 4-78 1 7-120(a)(1) 2431 12-18-78 1 5-18(5.1) 2435  1- 2-79 1 5-18(11) 2455  2- 4-79 1 5-18(13) 2497  4- 2-79 1 7-120(a)(2), (b) 2504  4-16-79 15-21, 15-23(b)(75), (76) 2507  4-23-79 1 15-51(a)(3) 2521  5-14-79 1 App. A, § 14.03(14) 2536  6- 4-79 1 5-110 2537  6- 4-79 1 5-18(12.1) 2559  7-16-79 15-21, 15-23(a)(17), (b)(77)-(79), (c)(16), (e)(15), (f)(2), 15-56 2568  8- 6-79 1 5-18(12.2) 2601  9-17-79 15-21 2602  9-24-79 App. A, § 18.01(12), (12a) 2607  9-24-79 1 16-29 2608 10- 1-79 15-56 2616 10-22-79 1-9 91/2-3 2617 10-22-79 1, 2 91/2-4 2633 11-19-79 1 5-18(13) 2634 11-26-79 15-21 2646 12-26-79 7-106(1) 2659  1-14-80 15-21, 15-23(c)(17)-(19) 2661  1-21-80 15-23(b)(80) 2668  2-11-80 7-121(b) 2673  2-25-80 App. A, § 12.02(a)(25) 2695  4-21-80 15-21 2700  5-12-80 15-56 2721  6- 2-80 15-23(e)(16) 2727  6-23-80 1 10-81 2738  7- 7-80 15-21 2741  7-14-80 App. A, § 18.01(a)(12), (12a) 2742  7-14-80 1 App. A, 20.07(b)(13) 2744  7-21-80 15-56 2752  7-28-80 1-14 App. A, §§ 24.01-24.14 2773  8-18-80 15-23(c)(20), (21) 2774  8-18-80 15-21 2781  8-25-80 15-56 2785  9- 2-80 15-21 2800 10- 6-80 15-21 2801 10- 6-80 15-21 2808 10- 6-80 15-21 2810 10-20-80 App. A, § 6.02(a)(15) App. A, § 7.02(a)(3) 2811 10-20-80 15-21 2819 11- 3-80 15-21 2827 11-10-80 15-21 2836 12- 8-80 4-5(b) 2848 12-22-80 15-21 2862  1- 8-81 15-23(b)(81), (82) 2863  1- 8-81 1 10-114 2870  2- 5-81 15-23(a)(18) 2875  2- 5-81 15-56 2876  2- 5-81 7-106(1) 2878  2-19-81 1-5 8-2 2885  2-19-81 15-56 2895  3- 5-81 15-21 2897  3-12-81 1 91/2-3(b) 2918  4- 9-81 15-56 2928  4-23-81 15-21 2933  5- 7-81 1       Rpld 9-17-9-23 2948  5-28-81 15-56 2979  7- 2-81 A-L 10-141-10-152 2981  7- 2-81 1 7-95.1 2982  7- 2-81 1 8-16(a) 2983  7- 2-81 1 8-26 6, 7 8-27 2984  7- 2-81 1 15-55.2 2995  7-16-81 15-21 3017  8-17-81 15-21 3025  8-17-81 1-5 8-2 3076 11- 5-81 1, 2 7-120(a)(1) 3110 12-10-81 16-29(4), (5)(b), (6), (7), (9), (10) 3111 12-10-81 16-53(a)(1), 16-61, 16-63, 16-64, 16-73(1) 3121 12-10-81       Rpld 16-105 15-21 3174  3- 4-82 1 App. A, § 3.02(a)(60) 2 App. A, § 11.02(4) 3 App. A, § 12.02(a)(12) 3176  3- 4-82 1 15-51(b)(5) 3200  4-15-82 1 15-56 3202  4-15-82       Rpld 15-23(b)(2) 3217  5-20-82 15-23(c)(22), (23) 3261  7-15-82 1 16-64 3267  8- 5-82 1 15-38 3269  8-19-82 1 3-28(a)(3)(a) 2 3-71(2) 3270  8- 5-82 1 16-27(b) 2 16-76 3 16-78 4 16-100 5 16-103(a) 3287  9- 2-82 1 91/2-3(j) 3290  9- 2-82 1 15-23(c)(24) 3313 10-21-82 1 15-23(c)(25)-(29) 3314 10-21-82 1 15-21 3315 10-21-82 1 15-21 3382  1-20-83 1 16-61 3448  4- 7-83 1 App. A, § 3.02(a)(8.1) 2 App. A, § 12.02(a)(1a) 3 App. A, § 13.02(a)(3a) 3476  4-21-83 1 App. A, § 12.02(a)(6a) 2 App. A, § 13.02(a)(5a) 3 App. A, § 14.03(a)(5a) 3496  5- 5-83 1 15-23(b)(83) 3520  5-19-83 1 5-18(12.1.5) 3543  6- 2-83 1 15-56(a) 3545  6- 2-83 1 15-56(a) 3562  6-16-83 1-18 App. A, §§ 27.01-27.18 3563  6-16-83 1 15-21 3579  7- 7-83 1-3 3-89-3-91 3582  7- 7-83 1 15-23(c)(30)-(33) 3601  7-21-83 1 15-56(d) 3602  7-21-83 1 15-21 3613  8- 4-83 1 15-56(a) 3633  8-18-83 1 15-18(16) 3644  9- 1-83 1 13-25 2, 3 13-29, 13-30 3646  9- 1-83 1, 2 15-21 3647  9- 1-83 1 15-56(a) 3648  9- 1-83 1 15-21 3674  9-15-83 1 4-6(C)(5)(a) 2 4-6(C)(5)(c) 3 4-6(G)(2)(b)9.i 3678  9-15-83 1 App. A, § 20.07(c)(2) 3691 10- 6-83 1, 2 App. A, § 5.06 3692 10- 6-83 1 15-21 3693 10- 6-83 1 15-21 3728 11- 3-83 1 13-50 3750 11-17-83 1 13-32 3752 11-17-83 1 15-21 3753 11-17-83 1 15-23(c)(34), (35) 3762 12- 1-83 1 15-23(e)(17) 3774 12-15-83 1 App. A, § 27.06 3808  1- 5-84 1 15-21 3809  1- 5-84 1 15-56(a) 3810  1- 5-84 1 15-56(a) 3811  1- 5-84 1 15-23(c)(36) 3812  1- 5-84 1 15-23(c)(37) 3814  1- 5-84 1 15-21 3815  1- 5-84 1 15-56(a) 3816  1- 5-84 1 7-120(c)(11) 3838  2- 2-84 1 App. A, § 21.04(c)(5) 3841  2- 2-84 1 91/4-21 2 91/4-24 2A 91/4-25 3 91/4-23 4 91/4-22 3842  2- 2-84 1 15-56 3873  3- 1-84 1 16-6 3901  4- 5-84 App. A, §§ 28.01-28.09 App. A, §§ 29.01-29.10 3931  4-19-84 1 13-51 3933  4-19-84 1 15-56(a) 3936  4-19-84 1 15-21 3945  5- 3-84 1 15-23(c)(38) 4037  6-21-84 1 7-133 4038  6-21-84 1 15-21 4082  7-19-84 1 15-21 4083  7-19-84 1 15-21 4094  8- 2-84 1 15-55.3 4159  9-20-84 1 15-21 4160  9-20-84 1 15-21 4188 10-18-84 1-4 13-52 5       Rpld 5-18(5.1) 4189 10-18-84 1 13-51 4190 10-18-84 1 15-21 4191 10-18-84 1 15-56 4234 11-15-84 1, 2 5-18(19, (20) 4235 11-15-84 1, 2 5-18(17), (18) 4236 11-15-84 1, 2 5-18(15), (16) 4237 11-15-84 1, 2 App. A, § 27.02 3, 4 App. A, § 27.05 4248 12- 6-84 1 15-21 4273 12-20-84 1 15-55.2 4280  1- 3-85 I App. A, § 11.02(17a) 4295  1-17-85 I App. A, § 20.07(c.1) II App. A, § 20.07(c) III App. A, § 3.02(a)(78) IV App. A, § 3.02(a)(78a) 5299  2- 7-85 1 15-56 5310  2-21-85 1, 2 App. A, § 27.02 5316  3- 7-85 1 15-56 5319  3- 7-85 1 15-23(g) 2 15-23(g)(1) 3 15-56 5334  3-21-85 I App. A, §§ 20.10.01-20.10.14 II App. A, Art. xx.10(note) III(a) App. A, § 3.02(84) (b) App. A, § 18.02(a)(12) (c) App. A, § 29.08(b)(10) (d)       Rpld App. A, § 10.02(6), (8), (9) (e)       Rpld App. A, § 11.02(4)(15) (f)       Rpld App. A, § 12.02(a)(7), (12) (g)       Rpld App. A, § 14.03(a)(6) 5340  3-21-85 1 15-23(g)(2) 5347  4-18-85 I 10-29(b) II 10-30(c) III 10-35(b)-(e) IV, V 10-43, 10-44 VI 10-31 VII 10-45 5377  5- 2-85 1       Rpld 15-23(g)(1) 5399  5-16-85 1 15-52.1 5400  5-16-85 1 15-21 5402  5-16-85 1 15-18(2) 5410  6- 6-87 1 1-9 5440  6-20-85 1 10-44(b) 5441  6-20-85 1 15-56(a) 5442  6-20-85 1 7-126.1 5452  7- 9-85 1 15-56(a) 5453  7- 9-85 1 15-21 5454  7- 9-85 1, 2 App. A, § 27.02 5455  7- 9-85 1 15-21 5456  7- 9-85 1 15-18(5) 5475  8- 1-85 1       Rpld 7-126.1(d) 5505  9- 5-85 1 15-56(a) 5506  9- 5-85 1 15-23(b)(84), (85) 5507  9- 5-85 1 15-56(a) 5529  9-19-85 1       Rpld 15-18(14) 5540 10- 3-85 I, II 5-190, 5-191 5562 10-17-85 1 15-18(3) 5563 10-17-85 1 15-55.2(c)(2) 5564 10-17-85 1 15-56(a) 5565 10-17-85 1 15-21 5566 10-17-85 1 15-23(c)(39), (40) 5567 10-17-85 1 15-56(a) 5568 10-17-85 1 15-56(a) 5569 10-17-85 1 15-18(17) 5576 11- 7-85 1 15-56(a) 5595 12- 5-85 1 8-26 5596 12- 5-85 1 8-16(a) 5632  1-23-86 5 15-18(18) 5640  2-20-86 1       Rpld 15-55.2, 15-55.3 2-5       Added 15-55.2 5650  3-20-86 1 10-43(l) 2, 3 10-46, 10-47 4 10-35(c), (d) 5672  5- 1-86 I App. A, § 16.03 II App. A, § 16.05(e) 5673  5- 1-86 I 14-2(a)(5) II 14-3(b), (j) III, IV 14-4, 14-5 V 14-11(a) VI 14-11(h) 5736  8- 7-86 1 15-23(f)(3), (4) 5737  8- 7-86 1 15-24(b) 5745  8-21-86 1 15-23(c)(41) 5746  8-21-86 II 13-61 III 7-105(b) 5751  9- 4-86 1 15-36(21) 5766 10- 2-86 1 15-21 5774 10-16-86 1 7-134 5775 10-16-86 1 13-51(7)(b) 5776 10-16-86 1 15-21 5783 11- 6-86 1 15-21 5793 11-20-86 1 15-21 5794 11-20-86 1 15-21 5795 11-20-86 1 15-21 5800 12- 4-86 1 App. A, § 29.05 5815  1-22-87 1 App. A, § 20.09.01 5817  2- 5-87 1 7-100(b)(17) 5822  2-19-87 1 5-146-5-149, 5-156, 5-161-5-167, 5-176-5-179, 5-186-5-191 5827  3- 5-87 1 15-23(e)(18) 5828  3- 5-87 1 15-23(e)(19) 5829  3- 5-87 1 15-21 5830  3- 5-87 1 15-21 5831  3- 5-87 1 15-21 5833  3- 5-87 1 15-21 5834  3- 5-87 1 15-21 2 15-18(9), (20) 5835  3-5-87 1(Exh. A) 10-29(b), (c) 10-30(a), (b), 10-31, 10-32, 10-35(d), 10-36, 10-37, 10-39, 10-40, 10-43(g), (i), 10-44(c)(5) 5838  3-19-87 1 15-21 5841  4- 2-87 1 Rnbd App. A, § 20.09(a)(4), a.-d.       as App. A, § 20.09(b)       Amnd App. A, § 20.09(b) 2       Rnbd App. A, § 20.09(b)       as App. A, § 20.09(c) 5843  4- 2-87 I 13-70-13-73 5849  5- 7-87 1 Added App. A, § 23.02(b) 2       Rnbd App. A, § 23.02(b)-(e)       as App. A, § 23.02(c)-(f) 5850  5- 7-87 1 App. A, § 12.02(4b) 5860  5-21-87 1 15-56(a) 5861  5-21-87 1 5-146-5-149, 5-156, 5-161-5-167, 5-176-5-179, 5-186-5-190 5870  6- 4-87 I 10-159-10-169 5872  6- 4-87 1 7-120(a)(3) 2 7-120(c) 5877 I       Rpld 10-53-10-113       Rpld 12-1-12-3, 12-14-12-24 II       Added 10-115 5885  7-23-87 1 16-61 5892  7-23-87 1 15-21 5893  7-23-87 1 15-21 5894  7-23-87 1 15-23(c)(43) 5895  7-23-87 1 15-23(c)(42) 5912  8-20-87 I App. A, § 20.09(a)(11) 5913  8-20-87 I App. A, § 12.02(4a) II App. A, § 18.02(a)(1a) III 10-43(a) IV 10-43(m) 5933  9-17-87 1 4-7 5937 10- 1-87 1 5-21 5943 10-15-87 1 15-21 5944 10-15-87 1 15-23(a)(19) 15-23(b)(86) 5945 10-25-87 1 15-56(a) 5946 10-15-87 1 15-21 2 15-23(a)(20), 15-23(b)(87) 3 15-56(a) 5951 11- 5-87 1 15-21 5959 11-19-87 1 15-56(a) 5960 11-19-87 1 15-21 5962 12- 3-87 I App. A, § 3.02(111a) II App. A, § 12.02(20a) 5964 12- 3-87 1 7-106(r) 5972 12-17-87 1 15-21 5973 12-17-87 1 15-56(a) 5974 12-17-87 1 7-105(d), (e) 6025  2-18-88 1 15-21 6030  2-18-88 1 15-21 6031  2-18-88 1 15-21 6032  2-18-88 1 15-23(c)(44) 6033  2-18-88 1 15-56(a) 6035  3- 3-88 1 15-56(a) 6038  3- 3-88 1 15-56(a) 6058  5- 5-88 I App. A, § 20.09 (b)(3)a. II App. A, § 20.09 (b)(3)b. 6067  5-19-88 1 91/2-5 6075  6- 2-88 1 15-18(14) 6076  6- 2-88 1 15-21 6077  6- 2-88 1 15-21 6078  6- 2-88 1 15-21 6079  6- 2-88 1 15-56(a) 6080  6- 2-88 1 15-21 6081  6- 2-88 I, II 10-130.1, 10-130.2 6092  6-16-88 1 15-21 6100  6-16-88 1 15-23(h)(1) 6109  7-21-88 1 15-21 6110  7-21-88 1 15-21 6117  7-21-88 1 15-21 6118  7-21-88 1 15-21 6119  7-21-88 1 15-21 6121  7-21-88 1 15-21 6123  7-21-88 1 10-43(a) 6124  8- 4-88 1 App. A, § 20.09(b)(1) 6139  8-18-88 1 15-21 6140  8-18-88 1 15-21 6142  9- 1-88 1 15-21 6144  9- 1-88 1 (Exh. A) 10-29-10-43, 10-45-10-48       Rpld 10-44 6149  9-15-88 1 15-21 6154 10- 6-88 1 App. A, § 20.09(a)(4) 6156 10- 6-88 1 15-21 6157 10- 6-88 1 15-21 6164 10-26-88 1 10-43(g) 2       Rpld 10-43(j) 3 10-43(l) 6169 11- 3-88 1 15-56(a) 6185  1- 5-89 1 3-28(a)(3) 6186  1- 5-89 1 15-21 6187  1- 5-89 1 15-21 6189  1- 5-89 1 15-23(g)(3) 6190  1- 5-89 1 15-23(b)(1) 6191  1- 5-89 1 15-21 6192  1- 5-89 1 15-56(a) 6210  2- 2-89 1 15-21 6220  2-16-89 1 15-23(b)(1) 6222  3- 2-89 1 15-21 6223  3- 2-89 1 15-21 6224  3- 2-89 1 15-21 6226  3- 2-89 1 15-21 6230  3-16-89 1 15-21 6234  4- 6-89 1 16-29 2 16-29.1 3 16-49.1 4       Rpld 16-64 6235  4- 6-89 1, 2 15-21 6236  4- 6-89 1 15-21 6239  4- 6-89 1 15-21 6252  5-18-89 1 15-21 6260  6- 1-89 1 16-61 6262  6- 1-89 1 15-21 6265  6-15-89 1 15-21 6266  6-15-89 1 15-21 6287  6-15-89 1 15-21 6268  6-15-89 1, 2 15-21 6269  6-15-89 1 15-23(b)(2) 6270  6-15-89 1 15-23(b)(3) 6271  6-15-89 1 15-21 6272  6-15-89 1 15-18(21) 6273  6-15-89 1 15-23(a)(21) 6274  6-15-89 1 15-23(i)(1), (2) 6282  7-13-89 1 App. A, 5.01(a) 6283  7-13-89 1 15-21 6284  7-13-89 1 15-21 6286  7-13-89 1 15-23(g)(1) 6290  7-27-89 1 15-56(a) 6292  7-27-89 1 15-21 6302  8-17-89 1 15-23(c)(45) 6303  8-17-89 1 15-21 6307  8-17-89 1 15-21 6318  9-21-89 1 10-49 6319  9-21-89 1 15-21 6327 10- 5-89 1 15-21 6328 10- 5-89 1 15-21 6333 10-19-89 1 App. A, Art. II 2 App. A, § 3.02(a)(1a) 3 App. A, § 12.02(a)(22) 4 App. A, § 13.02(a)(20) 5 App. A, § 15.02(a)(1a) 6 App. A, § 16.02(a)(1a) 7 App. A, § 15.02(a)(66) 8 App. A, § 16.02(a)(38) 9 App. A, § 20.08(a)(5) 6340 10-19-89 1 15-21 6343 10-19-89 1 15-21 6344 10-19-89 1 15-21 6350 11- 2-89 1 15-56(a) 6357 12- 7-89 I       Rpld App. A, § 20.04(o) III 91/2-4(f)-(j) 6364  1- 4-90 I App. A, § 21.05 6369  1- 4-90 1 15-21 6375  1-18-90 1 15-23(h)(2) 6376  1-18-90 1 15-21 6379  2- 1-90 1 15-21 6387  3- 1-90 1 15-23(c)(46) 6388  3- 1-90 1 15-21 6389  3-15-90 1 15-56 6390  3-15-90 1 15-21 6399  4-19-90 1 App. A, §§ 6.04(a)(1), 8.04(a)(1), 9.04(a)(1), 10.04(a)(1) 6401  4-19-90 1 15-21 6402  4-19-90 1 15-21 6404  4-19-90 1 15-56 6407  5- 3-90 1 15-21 6408  5- 3-90 1 15-21 6412  5-17-90 1 15-21 6417  5-17-90 1 15-23(c)(47) 6420  6- 7-90 1 15-18(22) 6441  7-12-90 1 15-23(b)(88) 6442  7-12-90 1 15-23(b)(89) 6443  7-12-90 1 15-23(b)(90), (91) 6444  7-12-90 1 15-23(b)(92) 6445  7-12-90 1 15-23(i)(3) 6446  7-12-90 1 15-23(i)(4) 6447  7-12-90 1 15-23(i)(5), (6) 6448  7-12-90 1 15-21 6449  7-12-90 1 15-23(a)(22) 6450  7-12-90 1 15-23(a)(23) 6451  7-12-90 1 15-18(23) 6452  7-12-90 1 15-21 6453  7-12-90 1 15-21 6454  7-12-90 1 15-21 6455  7-12-90 1 15-23(g)(4) 6462  7-26-90 1, 2 7-135 6466  7-26-90 1 15-21 6469  8-16-90 I App. A, § 21.07 II App. A, § 20.08(c)(8) 6473  8-16-90 1, 2 15-21 6474  8-16-90 1, 2 15-21 6475  9- 6-90 1 15-21 6479  9- 6-90 1 7-120 6481  9- 6-90 1 15-21 6482  9- 6-90 1 15-21 6483  9- 6-90 1 15-21 6493  9-20-90 1       Rpld 13-50 2       Added 13-50 6500 10- 4-90 1 15-21 6504 10-18-90 1 7-136 6507 11- 1-90 1 5-18(16.1)-(16.3) 6508 11- 1-90 1 5-18(24) 6509 11- 1-90 1 15-38 6510 11- 1-90 1 15-38(18.3) 6511 11- 1-90 1 15-38(18.1), (18.2) 6512 11- 1-90 1 5-18(14.2) 6513 11- 1-90 1 5-18(21)-(23) 6514 11- 1-90 1 5-18(14.1) 6515 11- 1-90 1 15-21 6520 11-15-90 1 App. A, § 3.02(26), (57A), (88) 6521 11-15-90 1 App. A, § 22.06 6522 11-15-90 1 15-21 6523 11-15-90 1 15-21 6526 11-15-90 1 15-23(b)(93), (94) 6527 11-15-90 1 15-18(24) 6528 11-15-90 1 15-21 6529 11-15-90 1 15-23(b)(95) 6530 11-15-90 1 15-23(i)(7)-(21) 6535 12-19-90 1 App. A, § 18.02(a)(4), (7), (11), (25), App. A, § 18.02(b) 6550  1- 3-91 1 App. A, §§ 14.01, 14.03 6552  1- 3-91 1 15-21 6564  2- 7-91 1 15-21 6569  2-21-91 1 15-21 6570  2-21-91 1 15-21 6579  3-21-91 1 15-21 6583  3-21-91 1 15-18(25) 6586  4- 4-91 I 7-132.1 6590  4-18-91 I 3-3 II 3-52 III 3-92 IV 7-137 6596  5- 2-91 I       Rpld 7-132 6597  5- 2-91 1 15-21 6601  5-16-91 1 13-62 6602  5-16-91 1 15-23(b)(96), (97) 6611  6- 6-91 1 15-21 6615  6-20-91 1 7-106(l) 6625  7-11-91 1 10-43(g) 6637  7-25-91 1 15-21 6638  7-25-91 1 15-21 6639  7-25-91 1 15-51.1 6647  8- 1-91 1 15-56(a) 6650  8-15-91 1, 2 16-29, 16-29.1 6656  9- 5-91 1 15-21 6661  9-19-91 1 15-21 6662  9-19-91 1 15-21 6663  9-19-91 1 15-18(26) 6673  9-19-91 1 15-21 6674 10- 3-91 1 App. A, § 20.03(c) 6677 10- 3-91 1 15-18(27) 6679 10-17-91 I       Rpld 10-115 II 10-53-10-83 6684 10-17-91 1 15-21 6687 10-17-91 1 15-18(28) 6688 11- 7-91 1 15-21 6692 11- 7-91 I 7-52.1 6694 11-21-91 1 15-18(29) 6695 11-21-91 1 15-21 6697 11-21-91 1 15-21 6714  1-23-92 1 15-21 6715  1-23-92 1 15-21 6716  1-23-92 1 15-18(30) 6719  1-23-92 1 15-21 6720  1-23-92 1 15-21 6735  3-19-92 1 15-21 6742  5- 7-92 1 15-21 6744  5- 7-92 1 15-21 6753  6- 4-92 1 91/2-5(a) 6754  6- 4-92 1 15-21 6760  6-18-92 1, 2 15-21 6764  7- 2-92 1 15-21 6782  8- 6-92 1 10-53 10-54(11) 10-55(1), (2) 10-62(e) 10-78(d)(5), (6) 10-82 6791  8-20-92 1 15-21 6792  8-20-92 1 15-23 6796  9- 3-92 1 15-23 6797  9- 3-92 1 15-21 6802 10- 1-92 1 7-138 6810 11- 5-92 1 App. A, § 8.02(a)(1)c. 2 App. A, § 10.02(a)1. 6818 11-19-92 1 15-21 6819 11-19-92 1 15-21 6826 12-17-92 1 7-112(b) 2 7-130(a) 6829  1- 7-93 1 15-21 6830  1- 7-93 1 15-21 6834  1-28-93 1 15-56(a) 6835  2- 4-93 1 15-23(f) 6841  3- 4-93 1 App. A, § 3.02(a)(44a) 2 App. A, § 13.02(a)(5) 3 App. A, § 13.02(a)(23)d. 6845  3- 4-93 1 15-21 6853  4-15-93 1 15-23(g)(5) 6854  4-15-93 1 15-21 6855  4-15-93 1 15-23(a)(20), 15-23(b)(87) 6857  4-15-93 1 15-21 6858  4-15-93 1 15-21 6882  6-17-93 1 15-23(b)(98) 6883  6-17-93 1 15-23(b)(99) 6884  6-17-93 1 15-21 6885  6-17-93 1 15-21 6901  7- 1-93 1 15-23(c)(2) 6905  7-15-93 1(Exh. A) 8-28-8-35 2 15-51(a) 6912  8-19-93 1 15-23(c)(50) 6914  8-19-93 1 15-21 6917  9- 2-93 I 15-21 II App. A, § 12.02(15) App. A, § 13.02(5) 6919  9- 2-93 1 15-34 6920  9- 2-93 1 15-56 6944 11- 4-93 1 15-21 6952 12- 2-93 1 15-21 6954 12- 2-93 1 15-21 6955 12- 2-93 1 15-21 6957 12-16-93 1 App. A, § 3.02(a)(85a) 2 App. A, § 12.02(a)(22) 3 App. A, § 13.02(a)(20) 4 App. A, § 15.02(a)(1a) 5 App. A, § 16.02(a)(1a) 6970  2- 3-94 1 16-125-16-133 6971  2- 3-94 1 15-21 6973  2- 3-94 1       Rpld 15-23(b)(98) 6974  2- 3-94 1       Rpld 15-23(b)(99) 6989  3- 3-94 1 10-30(a) 2 10-38(c), (d) 6992  3-17-94 1, 2 13-50 6997  3-17-94 1 15-21 7010  5- 5-94 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 13-44 2(Exh. B)       Added 13-44 7012  5- 5-94 1(Exh. A)       Rpld 8-16 2(Exh. B)       Added 8-16 3(Exh. C)       Rpld 8-26 4(Exh. D)       Added 8-26 7021  5-19-94 1 15-21 7024  6- 2-94 1 App. A, § 3.02(110a) 2 App. A, § 15.02(52a) 7041  6-16-94 1 5-148 2, 3 5-156 4, 5 5-177(2), (10) 6 5-178 7, 8 5-179(b), (i) 9       Rnbd 5-179(i), (j)       as 5-179(j), (k) 10 5-179(j)(3) 11 5-186 12, 13 5-187(3), (4)(b), (c), (5) 14 5-189(1) 15, 16 5-190(4), (8), (9) 7070  8- 4-94 1 15-23(c)(51), (52) 7071  8- 4-94 1 15-23(c)(53) 7072  8- 4-94 1, 2 15-25 7073  8- 4-94 1 15-23(c)(54) 7082  9- 1-94 1-3       Added 91/2-5(f) 7084  9- 1-94 1 App. A, § 23.02(e) 2 App. A, § 20.08(c)(5) 7094  9-15-94 1 3-4 7095  9-15-94 1 15-23(c)(55) 7096  9-15-94 1 15-21 7097  9-15-94 1 15-21 7108 10- 6-94 1 3-36(9) 7111 10-20-94 1 16-59.1 7118 11- 3-94 1       Rpld 16-49.1(1) 2 16-49.1(7) 7122 11-17-94 1 15-21 7123 11-17-94 1 15-21 7124 11-17-94 1 15-21 7125 12- 1-94 2 App. A, § 4.01 3 App. A, §§ 30.01-30.08 7126 12- 1-94 1 15-21 7127 12- 1-94 1 15-21 7133 12- 1-94 1 7-139 7134 12- 1-94 1       Rpld 3-89-3-91       Added 3-89-3-94 7146  1- 5-95 1 13-50(a)(1)d., (m)(2)c. 7166  2- 9-95 1 15-21 7167  2- 9-95 1 15-21 7176  3- 2-95 1(1) 5-162 (2) 5-190(3)(b), (4)(b) (3) 5-187 7186  4- 6-95 1 App. A, § 3.02(87a) 2 App. A, § 12.02(16a) 3 App. A, § 18.02(a)(32) 7197  4-20-95 1 5-18(10)(b) 7205  5- 4-95 1 App. A, § 20.08(5) 7219  6- 1-95 1 7-50.1 7233  6-15-95 1 5-18(5.1) 7234  6-15-95 1 15-23(c)(56) 7235  6-15-95 1 15-21 7236  6-15-95 1 15-56(a) 7247  6-15-95 1 15-21 7261  7- 6-95 1 15-21 7262  7- 6-95 1 15-21 7264  7-20-95 1 15-23(c)(57) 7265  7-20-95 1 15-23(c)(58) 7267  7-20-95 1 15-21 7293  9- 7-95 1       Added 15-18(31), (32) 2       Added 15-26 7297  9-21-95 1       Rpld 7-1-7-21 7-32-7-139 2       Added 7-1-7-9 7-20-7-25 7-30-7-40 7-50-7-52 7-60-7-65 7-70-7-76 7-80-7-100 7-110-7-136 7-150-7-184 7306  9-21-95 1 15-21 7307  9-21-95 1 15-21 7308  9-21-95 1 15-21 7309 10- 5-95 1       Added App. A, §§ 31.01-31.07 2 4.01 7357 12-14-95 1 15-21 7358 12-14-95 1 15-23(c)(59), (60) 7362 12-14-95 1 15-21 7365 12-14-95 1 15-23(c)(61) 7366 12-14-95 1 15-23(c)(62), (63) 7370  1- 4-96 1 15-23(f) 7371  1- 4-96 1 15-56(a) 7372  1- 4-96 1 15-23(c)(64) 7374  1-18-96 1 15-23(c)(65) 7393  3- 7-96 1       Added App. A, § 14.03(35a) 7395  3- 7-96 1 15-56(a) 7396  3- 7-96 1 15-56(a) 7397  3- 7-96 1       Rpld 15-23(f)(4), (5) 7398  3- 7-96 1       Added 15-23(c)(66) 7403  3-21-96 1 15-21 7404  3-21-96 1 15-21 7405  3-21-96 1 15-21 7406  3-21-96 1 15-21 7407  3-21-96 1       Rpld 15-23(f)(1) 7412  3-21-96 1-3       Added 91/2-6-91/2-8 7419  4-11-96 1       Rpld 15-18(5), (24) 2       Added 15-18(5) 7425  4-18-96 1       Added 10-170-10-181 2       Rpld 7-168 7436  4-18-96 1       Added 14-14(g) 7475  6-20-96 1       Added 15-23(c)(67) 7484  7-11-96 1       Added App. A, § 3.02(a)(3a), (5a), (26a), (77a), (78b), (78c), (80a), (110b) 2       Added App. A, § 6.02(a)(4a) 3       Added App. A, § 8.02(a)(3a) 4       Added App. A, § 9.02(a)(4a) 5       Added App. A, § 10.02(a)(6a) 6       Added App. A, § 11.02(a)(16a) 7       Added App. A, § 12.02(a)(14a) 8       Added App. A, § 13.02(a)(12a) 9       Added App. A, § 14.02(a)(12a) 10       Added App. A, § 15.02(a)(28a) 11       Added App. A, § 16.02(a)(21a) 12       Added App. A, § 17.02(a)(12) 13       Added App. A, § 20.02(d) 7499  7-18-96 1       Added 15-18(5.1.5) 7503  7-18-96 1 16-63 7511  8-15-96 1(13-700)       Added 13-80 7557 11- 7-96 1 15-21 7559 11- 7-96 1 15-21 7560 11- 7-96 1 15-21 7566 11-21-96 1 15-21 7567 11-21-96 1 15-21 7568 11-21-96 1 15-21 7569 11-21-96 1 15-21 7570 11-21-96 1 15-21 7596 12- 5-96 1 15-21 7602 12-19-96 2 App. A, § 3.02(23) 7604 12-19-96 1 15-21 7616  1- 9-97 1 7-171(f) 7622  2- 6-97 1 15-38 7633  2-20-97 1       Added 7-185 7636  3- 6-97 1 App. A, § 20.02(d)(2)g. 7637  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7638  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7639  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7640  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7641  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7642  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7643  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7644  3- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7646  3- 6-97 1 15-21 7648  3- 6-97 1 15-21 7649  3- 6-97 1 15-21 7668  3-20-97 1       Added 7-186 7673  4- 3-97 1       Added 7-82(11) 7682  4-17-97 1, 2 7-169 7711  5-15-97 1 10-172 7747  6-19-97 1 16-29(1), (2), (3)(b), (7)(a) 2 16-29.1 3       Dltd 16-30 7756  6-19-97 1 15-21 7799  9- 4-97 1 App. A, § 13.02(5) 7815 10- 2-97 1 10-31 2 10-39 3       Added 10-43(i) 7823 11- 6-97 1       Added 15-23(c) 7824 11- 6-97 1 15-21 7825 11- 6-97 1 15-23(c) 7826 11- 6-97 1 15-21 7829 11- 6-97 1 15-21 7837 11-20-97 1 15-23(c) 7838 11-20-97 1 15-23(c) 7850 12- 4-97 1 3-37(a)(1)       Rpld 3-38-3-52 2       Added 3-38-3-50 3       Rpld 3-77-3-88 4       Added 3-77 7853 12- 4-97 1 15-23(c) 7854 12- 4-97 1 15-23(c) 7858 12-18-97 1       Added App. A, §§ 16A.01-16A.06 2       Rpld App. A, § 16.03(b)(10) 7859 12-18-97 1B       Added App. A, §§ 5(A).01-5(A).03.11 2 App. A, § 10.06 (title) 7861 12-18-97 1 5-86       Added 5-18(13.5) 7863  1- 8-98 1 15-21 7873  1-22-98 1       Added 7-66 7876  2- 5-98 1 15-21 7892  4- 2-98 1       Added 7-187 7900  4-16-98 1 15-21 7901  4-16-98 1 15-21 7902  4-16-98 1 15-21 7911  4-16-98 1 15-21 7912  4-16-98 1 15-21 7913  4-16-98 1 15-21 7933  6- 4-98 I App. A, § 13.03 II, III App. A, § 13.04(b)(1), (c) IV App. A, § 20.04(h) V, VI App. A, § 20.09.01(d)(3)c., (e)(1)c. 7947 7-2-98 1       Added 10-182-10-191 7965 8-6-98 1 15-21 7977 9-3-98 I App. A, § 6.02(a)(2) 7978 9-3-98 1 7-2 2 7-80 3 7-92(d) 4 7-95 5 7-98 6 7-100 7 7-118(b) 8 7-125 9 7-127 10 7-128 11 7-155 12       Rpld 7-162(c) 13       Rpld 7-167(e) 14       Rpld 7-170(e) 15 7-172(a)       Rpld 7-172(e) 16 7-176 17       Rpld 7-178 18 7-182(c) 19(10-800)       Added 10-200 7979 9-3-98 I       Added 2-90-2-92 7987 9-17-98 1       Added 15-23(c)(88), (89) 8007 11-5-98 I 3-41(a), 3-43 8018 11-19-98 1 15-21 8020 12-3-98 1 15-21 8021 12-3-98 1 15-21 8022 12-3-98 1 15-21 8023 12-3-98 1 15-21 8032 12-17-98 1       Added 15-23(g)(6), (7) 8059 4-1-99 1 15-21 8060 4-1-99 1 15-21 8061 4-1-99 1 15-56(a) 8064 4-1-99 1 15-21 8077 5-6-99 1       Rpld 15-20 2, 3       Added 15-20.1, 15-20.2 8081 5-20-99 I       Added 91/2-4(j) II       Rnbd 91/2-4(j) as 91/2-4(k) 8112 7-1-99 1 15-21 8113 7-1-99 1 15-21 8117 7-1-99 1 15-21 8118 7-1-99 1 15-21 8119 7-1-99 1 15-21 8120 7-1-99 1 15-21 8137 7-15-99 I       Added 10-225-10-229 8138 7-15-99 1 15-21 8140 7-15-99 1 15-21 8141 7-15-99 1 15-21 8143 7-15-99 1 15-21 8148 8-5-99 I       Added 15-55.3 8162  9- 2-99 1       Added 91/2-5(g) 8165 9-2-99 1-5 Ch. 5 8167 9-2-99 I       Added 7-188 8175 9-16-99 I 7-95 II 7-99(1) 8179 10-7-99 Ch. 5(note) 8214 12-16-99 I 91/2-4(j) 8215 1-6-00 1 15-21 8236 3-2-00 1 15-21 8237 3-2-00 1 15-21 8238 3-2-00 1 15-21 8239 3-2-00 1 15-21 8324 7-20-00 1 15-21 8325 7-20-00 1 15-21 8327 8-3-00 1 15-21 8328 8-3-00 1       Added 7-189 8335  8-17-00 1 10-200(l) 8354 10- 5-00 1 15-21 8360 10-19-00 1 15-56 8368 11- 2-00 3(15-75.1-       Added 15-75-15-92  15-75.18) 8369 11- 2-00 1 App. A, § 20.09(b) 8374 12- 1-00 1       Rpld 16-29 2       Rpld 16-29.1 3       Added 16-29 8375 12- 1-00 1 15-21 8401  2- 1-01 1 15-21 8402  2- 1-01 1 15-21 8416  3-15-01 1 10-200(e) 2       Added 10-200(l)(1), (2) 8462  5-17-01 1       Added 15-18(33) 8463  5-17-01 1       Added 15-18(34) 8502  8- 2-01 1 15-18 8511  8-16-01 1 15-21 8512  8-16-01 1 15-21 8520  8-16-01 1       Added 3-78 8524  9- 6-01 1, 2 15-55.2 8547 10- 4-01 1 15-21 8548 10- 4-01 1 15-21 8549 10- 4-01 1 15-21 8550 10- 4-01 15-21 8556 10-18-01 1 7-2 2       Added 7-137 8557 10-18-01 1 15-21 8558 10-18-01 15-21 8559 10-18-01 1 15-21 8560 10-18-01 1 15-21 8592 12-20-01 1       Added 13-53 8601  1- 3-02 1 App. A, § 13.02(a)(5) 8602  1- 3-02 1 App. A, § 13.02(a) 8603  1- 3-02 1 15-23 8619  2-21-02 1       Added 15-38(d) 8668  6- 6-02 1       Rpld App. A, § 13.02(a)(23)c. 2       Rnbd App. A, § 13.02(a)(23)d.       as App. A, § 13.02(a)(23)c. 8679  6-20-02 1 91/2-7(c)-(e) 8695  7-11-02 1 5-6(1), (2) 8700  7-18-02 1 15-21 8701  7-18-02 1 15-21 8776  1-16-03 1, 2 15-21 8861  7-10-03 1       Added 91/2-9 8862  7-10-03 1 15-23(a), (b) 8872  7-17-03 1       Added 91/2-10-91/2-16 8898  8-21-03 1 15-21 8943 11-20-03 1 15-21 8944 11-20-03 1 15-21 8947 11-20-03 1       13-52(a)(5) 8956 12-18-03 1       Rpld 4-1-4-8       Added 4-1-4-100 8975  2-19-04 1 15-21 8984  3- 4-04 1 15-21 9001  4- 1-04 1 App. A, § 20.04(m) 9011  5- 3-04 1 15-21 9012  5- 3-04 1 15-21 9013  5- 3-04 1 15-21 9028  5-27-04 1 15-21 9041  7- 1-04 1       Added 7-188(d) 9068  9-21-04 1       Added 14-1(d) 2 14-4 9089 10-21-04 1 15-1 9094 11-18-04 1 15-21 9155  7- 7-05 1       Added 15-18(36) 9182  8- 4-05 1       Added App. A, §§ 13(A).01-13(A).06 9194  8-18-05 1 5-64 9199  8-18-05 1 15-21 9201  8-18-05 1 15-21 9207  8-18-05 1 2-90 9218 10- 6-05 1 16-29(d)(1), (2) 2 (g) 9219 10- 6-05 1 16-96 2 16-100 3, 4 16-103(a), (c) 9225 10-20-05 1       Added App. A, § 20.04(o) 9240 12- 1-05 1 App. A, § 15.02(a)(47) 9241 12-15-05 1       Added App. A, § 14.03(a)(40) 9249  2- 2-06 1       Added App. A, §§ 12.01-12.07 9250  2- 2-06 1 App. A, § 14.03(37) 9257  2- 2-06 1 15-56 9283  4-20-06 1 15-18(18) 9287  5-18-06 1 10-200(l) 9287  5-18-06 1 10-200(l) 9359  8-17-06 1 5-162 9377  9- 7-06 1       Added App. A, § 20.3(e)(1) 9407 11- 2-06 1 App. A, § 20.03(e)(1) 2       Added App. A, § 20.03(e)(2) 9414 12- 7-06 1 App. A, § 20.07 caption 2 App. A, § 20.07(c) 3 App. A, § 20.07(c)(2) 4       Added App. A, § 3.02(76a) 5       Added App. A, § 3.02(78a) 6       Added App. a, § 6.02(a)(1a) 9425  1- 4-07 1, 2 Ch. 5 note 9471  4-12-07 1 15-56 9479  5- 3-07 1       Added 91/2-17 9491  5-17-07 1       Added 91/2-18 9512  6- 7-07 1 15-56 9544  8-16-07 1       Rpld App. A, § 20.09.01 2       Added App. A, § 20.09.01 9545  8-16-07 1       Added 5-79 9555  9- 6-07 1, 2 App. A, § 6.02(a)(1a)5., 6. 9624  2-14-08 1       Added 5-80 9625  2-14-08 1       Added 15-23(a)(25)       Added 15-23(b)(100) 9650  3-13-08 1       Added 7-138 9734  7-10-08 1       Added 15-23(c)(90) 9735  7-10-08 1 15-55.3 9736  7-10-08 1 15-56 9741  7-24-08 1       Rpld 10-182-10-191 9745  7-24-08 2 15-21 9809 11- 6-08 1 App. A., § 3.02(a)(110a) 2 App. A., § 15.02(a)(52a) 9810 11- 6-08 1       Added App. A., § 6.02(a)(1)a. 9764  9-11-08 I 8-31 II, III 8-33, 8-34 9902  4-16-09 1 3-24 9910  5- 7-09 2 15-21 9912  5-21-09 2       Rpld 10-121-10-134 3-25       Added 10-121-10-143 26       Rpld 10-141-10-152 9939  6-18-09 1 7-171(a) 2       Added 7-171.1-7-171.15 9941  6-18-09 1       Added 3.02(a)(79a) 2 3.02(a)(80) 3       Added 11.02(20) 4       Added 12.02(a)(26) 5       Added 14.03(a)(41) 6 16.02(a)(1) 8       Added 3.02(a)(45a) 9944  6-18-09 1 15-38 9953  7- 9-09 1 7-3 9966  8- 6-09 2 15-21 9967  8- 6-09 1 15-56 9986  9- 3-09 1 10-200(l), (l)(1) 9987  9- 3-09 1 3-21 2 3-28 9988  9- 3-09 1-3       Added 7-191 9989  9- 3-09 1       Added 7-192 9995  9-17-09 1 10-133 10,012 10- 1-09 1 7-171.3(2) 2 7-171.4(4) 3 7-171.7(d) 4 7-171.9(b) 10,047  1-7-10 1 App. A, § 18.01(a)(2) App. A, § 18.03(c) 2 App. A, § 20.03(g) App. A, § 20.04(b) App. A, § 20.09(c)(1), (4) 3 App. A, § 20.10.06(a) 4 App. A, § 21.03 App. A, § 21.04(a) 5 App. A, § 22.01-22.06 6 App. A, § 27.09 App. A, § 27.10 App. A, § 27.14 7 App. A, § 28.08(a)(2) 10,048  1-7-10 1 App. A, § 18.01(a)(2) 10,051  1-21-10 1, 2 8-1 3       Added 8-3 4, 5 8-32 6       Dltd 8-35 7       Added 8-35 8       Added 8-36 9, 10 7-86 11, 12 7-87 10,052  1-21-10 2 15-21 10,070  4- 8-10 1 5-1 2 3-28(a)(3)b. 3 3-71(3) 4 15-34 15-38 15-41 5 91/2-7(f) 6 5-63 10,083  4-22-10 1 15-56 10,112  6-17-10 1       Added 13-80(c)       Rnbd 13-80(c)-(e)       as 13-80(d)-(f) 10,144  8-19-10 1       Added 15-23(a)(26)       Added 15-23(b)(101) 10,155  9-16-10 1 3-37(a) 2 3-38 10,164 10- 7-10 1       Added App. A, § 20.03(e)(1a) 10,168 10-21-10 1 3-37(note) 10,208  2-17-11 1       Added 15-23(a)(27) 2       Added 15-23(j) 10,211  3- 3-11 1       Rpld 3-37(a)(14)a. 2       Added 3-37(a)(16)b. 4 3-18 5       Added 3-23.1 10,215  3- 3-11 1 15-56 10,217  3-17-11 1 4-1 2       Added 4-9.1 10,232  5-19-11 1 3-37(a)(16)b. 2 3.23.1(c)(8)       Added 3.23.1(c)(9) 10,253  7- 7-11 1 16-29(d) 2 16-29(g) 10,259  7-21-11 1 App. A, § 3.02(a)(85a) 2       Added App. A, § 13.02(a)(15a) 3 App. A, § 13.02(a)(20) 4 App. A, § 15.02(a)(1a) 5 App. A, § 16.02(a)(1a) 10,261  7-21-11 1 7-171.3 10,268  8- 4-11 1       Rpld 10-121-10-143       Added 10-121-10-142 10,272  8- 4-11 1 13-71(b), (c) 10,284  9- 1-11       Added 15-27 10,292  9-15-11 1       Rpld 5-146-5-149, 5-156, 5-161-5-167, 5-176-5-179, 5-186-5-190       Added 5-146-5-150, 5-156, 5-160-5-166, 5-170-5-175, 5-180-5-190 10,313 11- 3-11 1 15-56(a) 10,314 11- 3-11 1 15-23(a)(20), (24)       Added 15-23(a)(28), (29) 2 15-23(b)(87), (98) 3       Added 15-23(f)(1), (4) 4       Added 15-23(g)(8), (9) 10,354  2-16-12 1 15-56 10,366  4- 5-12 1       Added 5-181(3)d-g. 10,391  5- 3-12 1       Added App. A, § 3.02(a)(86a) 2       Added App. A, § 11.02(4) 3       Added App. A, § 12.02(a)(7) 4       Added App. A, § 13.02(a)(13a) 10,430  7-19-12 1 7-171(f) 10,455  9-20-12 1-7       Added 5-201-5-207 10,467 10-18-12 1 91/2-7(b), (c) 2 15-51.1 3 10-170(a), (b)(1) 10,485 11-15-12 1 3-24(c) 10,491 12- 6-12 1       Added App. A, 
§ 3.02(49a) 10,506 12-20-12 1 5-63 10,578  5- 2-13 1       Rpld 16-1-16-6, 16-16-16-29, 16-31-16-53, 16-65-16-82, 16-88-16-104, 16-106-16-112, 16-125-16-133       Added 16-1-16-9, 16-16, 16-21-16-28, 16-30-16-51, 16-60-16-79, 16-85-16-96, 16-105-16-108, 16-115-16-118, 16-128-16-131, 16-135-16-137 16-145, 16-146 2-4 ch. 16(note) 10,582  5- 2-13 1 3-22 10,592  5-16-13 1 15-21 10,657  9-19-13 1 App. A, § 18.01(a)(12) 10,690 11-21-13 1-4       Added 15-23(a)(30-(32), 
(b)(102), 
(f)(5), (6), 
(g)(10), (11) 10,695 12- 5-13 1 7-171(a)       Added 7-171(i) 10,725  3-20-14 1 3-18 2 3-37(a)(8) 10,741  5- 1-14 1 7-2 2       Added 7-77 3, 4 7-95, 7-96 5, 6 7-98, 7-99 7 7-100(a) 8 7-123 9 7-127 10,761  6- 5-14 1       Rpld App. A, 
§ 13.02(15)       Rnbd App. A, 
§ 13.02(15a)       as App. A, 
§ 13.02(15) 10,807  8-21-14 1 15-23(a)(30) 2       Rpld 15-23(b)(102) 3       Added 15-23(f)(7) 4       Added 15-23(g)(12) 10,837 11- 6-14 1       Rpld App. A, 
§ 20.09(a)(1)d.       Rnbd App. A, 
§ 20.09(a)(1)e-k.       as App. A, 
§ 20.09(a)(1)d-j. 2       Added App. A, 
§ 20.09(a)(12) 3       Added App. A, 
§ 20.09(d) 4, 5 App. A, 
§ 20.09(note) 10,871  2-19-15 2 13-71(tit.)       Added 13-71(c) 10,888  4-23-15 1 13-71 10,941  7- 9-15 1       Rpld 16-32 2 16-33(a) 10,957  8- 6-15 1 7-166(b)(17)b. 10,958  8- 6-15 1 91/2-7(c) 10,967  8-20-15 1       Rpld 7-82(11) 2 7-80 10,981  9-17-15 1 16-105(f)(3) 11,019 12- 3-15 1 15-18 11,058  3-17-16       Added 5-211-5-216 11,062  3-17-16 1 App. A 2       Rpld Ch. 14 3       Rpld Ch. 10, Art. VII 4       Rpld Ch. 2, Art. III 5 5-131(d)(2) 6 7-171.4(2) 7 8-28 8 10-43(a) 9 16-77(b)(2)b. 11,102  6- 2-16 1 15-34 2 15-37 3 15-38(a)       Added 15-38(e) 4 15-41 11,143  8- 4-16 1 7-171.4(a)(1) 2 7-171.7(a) 11,202 11-17-16 1 7-171.3 2 7-171.4       Added 7-171.4(a)       Rpld 7-171.4(5)       Added 7-171.4(b) 11,211 12-15-16 1 13-40(b) 11,229  3- 9-17 1 App. A, 7.11 11,248  4-20-17 1 10-170 2 10-172 11,269  5- 4-17 1 4-67 2       Added 4-67.1 10,785  7-10-14 1       Added 2-12 11,294  6-15-17 1       Rpld 16-1-16-9 16-16 16-21-16-28 16-30-16-51 16-60-16-79 16-85-16-96 16-105-16-108 16-115-16-118 16-128-16-131 16-135-16-137 16-145, 16-146       Added 16-1-16-11 16-16 16-23-16-31 16-36-16-47 16-53-16-65 16-71, 16-72 16-77-16-95 16-102-16-104 16-110-16-130 16-135-16-139 16-146-16-154 16-161-16-165 16-171 16-179 16-186-16-195 16-202 16-209-16-211 16-218 16-225-16-228 16-235 11,320  8-17-17 1       Added 16-66 2, 3 16-112, 16-113 4 16-115 5       Rpld 16-116 6 16-136 7, 8       Rpld 16-137, 16-138 9 116-148 11,341 10-19-17 1 15-18 2 15-23 11,338 10- 5-17 1 16-46 2 16-53 2 16-55 11,349 11- 2-17 1       Added Ch. 10, Art. XII, 
10-246-10-257 11,356 12- 7-17 1       Rpld Ch. 5, Art. IV, 
5-146-5-150 5-156 5-160-5-166 5-170-5-175 5-180-5-190       Added Ch. 5, Art. IV, 
5-146-5-150 5-156 5-160-5-166 5-170-5-174 5-181-5-197 11,364 12-21-17 1       Added 15-23.1 2       Added 15-56.1 11,394  4- 5-18 1 App. A, § 5.04 2 App. A, § 7.11(b) 11,409  5-17-18 1 15-21 11,436  7-12-18 1 15.56(a) 11,446  7-26-18 1       Added 2-13 11,452  8- 9-18 1 7-95 2       Rpld 7-96 3, 4 7-99, 7-100 11,459  8-23-18 1 15-21 11,478 1- 1-18 1       Added 7-172.1-7-172.8 11,493 12- 6-18 1       Added 8-19 11,509  1-18-19 1       Added 15-23(c)(91)  
