CITY OF MONROE CODE 
____________ 
CONTAINING THE 
CHARTER 
AND THE 
GENERAL ORDINANCES 
OF THE CITY 
____________ 
Adopted: July 13, 1982 
Effective: August 1, 1982 
____________ 
Published in 1982 by Order of the City Council 
Reformatted in 2010 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MONROE, LOUISIANA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Robert E. Powell 
Mayor 
____________ 
D. Milton Moore, III-District I 
Gene F. Tarver-District II (Chairman) 
Bennie J. Ausberry-District III 
Tyson D. Bordelon-District IV 
Charles H. Johnson-District V 
City Council 
____________ 
(Mrs.) Gennie Barnes 
Clerk of Council 
____________ 
Charles Hamaker 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mr. M. J. Cook 
Director of Administration 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
MONROE, LOUISIANA 
____________ 
James E. Mayo 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mr. Michael Echols, District 1-(Chairman) 
Mrs. Gretchen Ezernack, District 2 
Ms. Juanita Woods, District 3-(Vice Chairman) 
Mr. Kenneth Wilson, District 4 
Mr. Eddie Clark, District 5 
City Council 
____________ 
Mrs. Carolus S. Riley, CMC, MMC 
Clerk of Council 
____________ 
Mrs. Nanci Summersgill 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Mr. David L. Barnes, Jr. 
Director of Administration 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the ordinances of the City of Monroe of a general and permanent nature. As expressed in the Adopting Ordinance, the Code supersedes all such ordinances not included herein or recognized as continuing in force by reference thereto. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1958 Monroe City Code as supplemented through January 24, 1978 and ordinances subsequently adopted by the governing body. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the Comparative Tables appearing in the back of the volume, the reader can locate any section of the Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this volume. 
Numbering System 
    The numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two component parts separated by a dash, the figure before the dash representing the chapter number and the figure after the dash indicating the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the first section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-1 and the sixth section of chapter 10 is 10-6. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and, at the same time, new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper places, simply by using the decimal system for amendments. By way of illustration: If new material consisting of three sections that would logically come between sections 5-4 and 5-5 is desired to be added, such new sections would be numbered 5-4.1, 5-4.2 and 5-4.3 respectively. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between chapters 12 and 13 it will be designated as chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject, the next successive number being assigned to the article or division. 
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of the headings being couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology and still others in language generally used by government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indices themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which he is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this Code is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental service by which the Code will be kept up-to-date periodically. Upon the final passage of amendatory ordinances, they will be properly edited and the page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the Code, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. Each such amendment, when incorporated into the Code, may be cited as a part thereof, as provided in section 5 of the Adopting Ordinance. 
    The successful maintenance of this Code up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the volume. As revised sheets are received it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publishers that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    The publication of this Code was under the direct supervision of George R. Langford, President, and Roger D. Merriam, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publishers are most grateful to all city officers and employees for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this Code. 
July, 1982 
MUNICIPAL CODE CORPORATION 
Tallahassee, Florida 
ORDINANCE NO. 7411 
STATE OF LOUISIANA 
CITY OF MONROE 
    The following Ordinance was offered by Mr. Moore who moved for its adoption and was seconded by Mr. Ausberry: 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a Revised City of Monroe Code; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein, Except as Herein Expressly Provided; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code of Ordinances; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective and Further Providing With Respect Thereto. 
Be It Ordained, by the City Council of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, in legal session convened that: 
    Section 1. That the Code of Ordinances, consisting of Chapters 1 to 37, each inclusive, prepared by the Municipal Code Corporation, a copy of which is annexed hereto and made a part hereof, be and is hereby adopted and enacted as the "City of Monroe Code," and shall be treated and considered as a new and original comprehensive Code of Ordinances which shall supersede all other general and permanent ordinances adopted into the Code of Ordinances of the City of Monroe on or before December 23, 1980, to the extent provided in section 2 hereof. 
    Section 2. That all provisions of said Code shall be in full force and effect from and after August 1, 1982, and all ordinances of a general and permanent nature of the City of Monroe, adopted on and entered into the Code of Ordinances of the City of Monroe, final passage on or before December 23, 1980, and not included in this Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are hereby repealed from and after the effective date of such Code. 
    Section 3. That the repeal provided for in Section 2 shall not effect ordinances providing for the description or extension of the corporate limits of the City; promising or guaranteeing the payment of money to or by the City, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the City or any evidence of the City's indebtedness; or any contract or obligation assumed by or in favor of the City; or administrative ordinances or resolutions of the City Council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; or any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the City Council, or any preceding governing body to any person, firm or corporation; or any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening or vacating any street or public way in the City; or the annual or capital budget or appropriation ordinances or resolutions; or ordinances relating to the street grades of any street in the City; or ordinances relating to local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; or ordinances relating to the levying or imposing of taxes; or ordinances relating to the dedication or acceptance of any plat or subdivision in the City; or ordinances relating to special uses of property within any established zoning districts of the City; or any ordinance or other Code, or parts thereof, adopted by reference by any section of this Code and not included therein; nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. That it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, partnership, association, organization or corporation to violate or fail to comply with any provision of the "City of Monroe Code" hereby adopted, or any amendment thereto. 
    Section 5. That whenever in such Code an Act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor by the City Council or whenever in such Code the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful by the City Council, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provisions of such Code shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of such Code. 
    Section 6. Any and all additions and amendments to such Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the council to make the same a part of such Code, shall be deemed to be incorporated in such Code, so that reference to such Code shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. Any ordinance adopted after December 23, 1980, which amends or references to ordinances which have been codified in such Code, shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of such Code. 
    Section 7. That in case of the amendment of any section of such Code for which a penalty is not provided, the general penalty, as provided in section 1-11 of such Code shall apply to the section as amended, or in case such amendment contains provisions for which a penalty, other than the aforementioned general penalty, is provided in another section in the same chapter, the penalty so provided in such other section shall be held to relate to the section so amended, unless such penalty is specifically repealed therein. 
    Section 8. That a copy of such Code shall be kept on file in the office of the clerk, preserved in looseleaf form or in such other form as the clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the clerk or someone authorized by said officer, to insert in their designated places all amendments and all ordinances or resolutions which indicate the intention of the City Council to make the same part of such Code when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such Code all provisions which from time to time may be repealed by the City Council. This copy of such Code shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same. 
    Section 9. That all ordinances or part of ordinances in conflict herewith, are to the extent of such conflict hereby repealed. 
    Section 10. That this ordinance shall become effective on August 1st, 1982. 
    Section 11. That the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
    This Ordinance was INTRODUCED on the 22nd day of June, 1982. 
    NOTICE PUBLISHED on the 29th day of June, 1982. 
    This Ordinance having been submitted in writing, introduced and published, was then submitted to a vote as a whole, the vote thereon being as follows: 
    AYES: Councilmen Moore, Tarver, Ausberry, Bordelon and Johnson 
    NAYS: None 
    ABSENT: None 
    And the Ordinance was declared ADOPTED on the 13th day of July, 1982. 
Gene Tarver 
Chairman 
Gennie Barnes 
City Clerk 
Robert E. Powell 
Mayor's Approval 
(SEAL) 
A TRUE COPY 
Gennie Barnes 
Secretary 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No. 11,087  7-13-10 Included 1 11,089  7-13-10 Included 1 11,103  8-10-10 Included 1 11,122  9-28-10 Included 1 11,123  9-28-10 Included 1 11,125  9-28-10 Included 1 11,161  3- 8-11 Included 1 11,162  3- 8-11 Included 1 11,163  3- 8-11 Included 1 11,176  4-26-11 Included 1 11,177  4-26-11 Included 1 11,195  7-12-11 Included 2 11,204  7-26-11 Included 2 11,230 10-11-11 Included 2 11,234 10-25-11 Included 2 11,254 12-27-11 Included 2 11,268  2-14-12 Included 2 11,300  6-26-12 Included 2 11,301  6-26-12 Included 2 11,306  7-24-12 Included 2 11,310  7-24-12 Included 2 11,323  8-28-12 Included 2 11,339 11-13-12 Included 2 11,343 11-27-12 Included 2 11,349 11-27-12 Included 2 10,300  3-25-03 Included 3 10,301  3-25-03 Included 3 10,312  5-27-03 Included 3 11,363  2-12-13 Included 3 11,367  2-26-13 Included 3 11,369  3-26-13 Included 3 11,409  8-27-13 Included 3 11,410  8-27-13 Included 3 11,421  9-24-13 Included 3 11,440 11-12-13 Included 3 11,443 11-12-13 Included 3 11,449 12-23-13 Included 3 11,459  2-25-14 Included 3 11,469  4-22-14 Included 4 11,494  8-26-14 Included 4 11,508  9- 9-14 Included 4 11,519 10-28-14 Included 4 11,520 10-28-14 Included 4 11,549  3-10-15 Included 4 11,551  3-24-15 Omitted 4 11,564  4-28-15 Included 4 11,567  4-28-15 Included 4 11,580  5-26-15 Included 4 11,584  6-23-15 Included 4 11,588  7-28-15 Included 5 11,589  7-28-15 Included 5 11,590  7-28-15 Included 5 11,607  8-25-15 Included 5 11,610  9- 8-15 Included 5 11,611  9- 8-15 Included 5 11,617 10-27-15 Included 5 11,619 11-10-15 Included 5 11,638 12- 8-15 Included 5 11,641  1-12-16 Included 5 11,642  1-12-16 Included 5 11,644  1-26-16 Included 5 11,700  7-26-16 Included 5 11,702  8- 9-16 Included 5 11,703  8- 9-16 Included 5 11,704  8- 9-16 Included 5 11,708  8-23-16 Included 5 11,727  9-27-16 Included 5 11,732  9-27-16 Included 5 11,733  9-27-16 Included 5 11,737 10-25-16 Included 5 11,746 12-27-16 Included 6 11,757  2-28-17 Included 6 11,758  2-28-17 Included 6 11,763  4-11-17 Included 6 11,550  3-24-15 Included 7 11,784  7-25-17 Included 7 11,786  8- 8-17 Included 7 11,798  9-12-17 Included 7 11,799  9-12-17 Included 7 11,800  9-26-17 Included 7 11,805  9-26-17 Included 7 11,807 10-24-17 Included 7 11,810 11-28-17 Included 8 11,816 12-27-17 Included 8 11,828  2-27-18 Included 8 11,829  2-27-18 Included 8 11,835  3-19-18 Included 8 11,837  3-27-18 Included 8 11,838  3-27-18 Included 8 11,840  4-10-18 Included 8 11,848  4-24-18 Included 8 11,853  5- 8-18 Included 8 11,854  5- 8-18 Included 8 11,855  5- 8-18 Included 8 11,860  6-12-18 Included 9 11,876  9-25-18 Included 9 11,883 10-23-18 Included 9 11,884 10-23-18 Included 9 11,897 11-27-18 Included 10 11,906  1-22-19 Included 10 11,916  2-12-19 Included 10 11,925  3-26-19 Included 10 11,927  4- 9-19 Included 10  
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein in the form approved by the electorate is the Monroe City Charter. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, FORM OF GOVERNMENT, BOUNDARIES, POWERS 

Section 1-01. - Incorporation. 
    The inhabitants of the City of Monroe within the corporate limits as now established or as hereafter established by law shall be and continue to be a body politic and corporate in perpetuity under the name of the "City of Monroe" hereinafter referred to as the "City." 
Section 1-02. - Home Rule Charter. 
    The charter commission has proposed and the electors have adopted this, their home rule charter, under the authority of Article VI, Section 5 of the Louisiana Constitution of 1974, hereinafter referred to as "constitution." The City is therefore a local governmental subdivision which operates under a home rule charter and, subject to said charter, is authorized as hereinafter provided, to exercise any power and perform any function necessary, requisite or proper for the management of its local affairs. 
Section 1-03. - Form of Government. 
    The plan of government provided by this home rule charter shall be known as the "mayor-council" form of government. It shall consist of an elected council that shall constitute the legislative branch of the government and an elected mayor who shall be the chief executive officer and head of the executive branch. 
Section 1-04. - Boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the City shall be those in effect as of the effective date of this charter and shall be subject to change thereafter as provided by law. 
Section 1-05. - General Powers. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter the City shall continue to have all the powers, rights, privileges, immunities and authority heretofore possessed by the City under the laws of the state, including but not limited to, Act 47 of 1900 as amended. The City shall have and exercise such other powers, rights, privileges, immunities, authority and functions not inconsistent with this charter as may be conferred on or granted to a local governmental subdivision by the constitution and general laws of the state, and more specifically, the City shall have and is hereby granted the right and authority to exercise any power and perform any function necessary, requisite or proper for the management of its affairs, not denied by this charter, or by general law, or inconsistent with the constitution. 
Section 1-06. - Special Powers. 
    The City shall also have the right, power and authority to pass all ordinances requisite or necessary to promote, protect and preserve the general welfare, safety, health, peace and good order of the City including, but not by way of limitation, the right, power and authority to pass ordinances on all subject matters necessary, requisite or proper for the management of the City's affairs, and all other subject matter without exception, subject only to the limitation that the same shall not be inconsistent with the constitution or expressly denied by general law applicable to the City. 
Section 1-07. - Joint Service Agreements. 
    The City is authorized to enter into joint service agreements or cooperative efforts with other governmental agencies and political subdivisions, including but not limited to the parish governing authority, other parish offices and agencies, municipalities, school boards or any special governing district, all as provided by the constitution and state law. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 

Section 2-01. - Composition, Qualifications and Election. 
A.  The legislative power of the City shall be vested in a council consisting of five (5) members elected from districts enumerated in Section 8-01 (Council Districts), one from and by the qualified electors in each district. 
B.  Each member of the council shall be elected for a four (4) year term concurrent with that of the mayor and shall be eligible for reelection. 
C.  A council member shall be a qualified elector of the municipality and of the district from which elected. 
D.  A council member shall have been legally domiciled and shall have actually resided for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the time established by law for qualifying for office in an area which, at the time of qualification, is within the City. A council member also shall have actually resided for at least six (6) consecutive months immediately preceding the time established by law for qualifying for office in an area which, at the time of qualification, is within the district from which elected. 
E.  A council member shall continue to be legally domiciled and to actually reside within the district from which elected during the term of office. Should the legal domicile and/or actual residence of a council member change from the district from which elected, the office shall automatically become vacant, which vacancy shall be filled as set out hereinafter. 
F.  Elections shall be held in accordance with the election laws of the state. 
G.  No person shall be eligible for election to the City Council for more than three (3) consecutive terms. Said term limit to be applied prospectively following the term of the Councilmen elected in the 2012 election. 
(Ord. No. 11,367, 2-26-13) 
Section 2-02. - Changes in District Boundaries; Reapportionment. 
A.  In the event of annexation by the governing body of the City between the time of adoption of this charter and thirty (30) days before the election of the first council provided for herein, the charter commission shall immediately alter, change or rearrange council district boundaries in order to incorporate into such districts those persons living in the newly annexed areas. 
B.  Following the election of the first council under this charter, any ordinance annexing new areas to the City shall prescribe the council district or districts in which said area shall be included, which district or districts shall be contiguous to the area being annexed. 
C.  Not later than one (1) year following official publication of each federal census by the United States Bureau of the Census for the area covered by the City and at least six (6) months prior to the next election for council members, the council by ordinance shall alter, change or rearrange council district boundaries so as to provide for population equality among the districts in compliance with the constitutional requirements of equal representation. Council districts shall be compact to the extent possible and be composed of contiguous territory. 
Section 2-03. - Forfeiture of Office. 
    A council member shall forfeit the office if such member during the term of office: (1) lacks any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter, (2) violates any express prohibition of this charter or (3) is disqualified by law from holding public office. 
Section 2-04. - Vacancies. 
A.  The office of a council member shall become vacant upon death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, forfeiture of office or failure to take office for any reason. 
B.  A vacancy on the council shall be filled according to the method, timetable and procedures established by state law for the filling of vacancies in elected municipal offices. 
Section 2-05. - Compensation. 
A.  A council member shall be paid compensation of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per month, until changed by ordinance. The chairman of the council shall be paid five hundred dollars ($500.00) per month in addition to the regular compensation paid a council member. No ordinance changing the compensation of a council member shall be adopted during the last year of a term of office and no such ordinance shall become effective during the term of the council adopting the ordinance. 
B.  The council, by ordinance, may adopt a system of reimbursement, upon presentation of properly documented receipts, of reasonable expenses necessary to the performance of official duties. 
(Ord. No. 10,312, 5-27-03) 
Section 2-06. - Prohibitions. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided by this charter, a council member shall hold no other City office, City employment or elected public office, during the term for which elected to the council and no former council member shall hold any compensated appointive City office or City employment until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which elected to the council. Nothing in this section shall prohibit a council member from serving as a member of a charter commission, constitutional convention or political party committee. 
B.  Except as provided elsewhere in this charter neither the council nor any of its members shall involve themselves in any manner in the appointment, removal, direction or supervision of any City administrative officer or employee. 
Section 2-07. - Investigations. 
    The council, by the favorable vote of at least two thirds of its authorized membership, may make investigations into the affairs of the City and the related conduct of any City official, officer, employee, department, office or agency and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony and require the production of evidence. The council may provide by ordinance for the punishment, as a misdemeanor, of a person for the willful failure or refusal to obey such subpoena or request for evidence. Investigations by the council shall be for specified purposes. 
Section 2-08. - Independent Audit. 
    The council shall provide for an annual independent postaudit and, upon the favorable vote of at least two thirds of its authorized members, may provide for such additional audits as it deems necessary of the accounts and other evidence of financial transactions of the City, including those of all City departments, offices or agencies. Auditors shall be designated by the council, shall be without personal interest in the affairs subject to audit and shall be certified public accountants or a firm of such accountants. Each annual audit and any special audit shall be submitted to the council at one of its regularly scheduled meetings and shall be a public record, and a summary thereof shall be published at least once in the official journal. 
Section 2-09. - Clerk of Council. 
A.  The council shall appoint a clerk of the council who shall serve in such capacity at the pleasure of the council. The clerk shall be official secretary of the council, shall give notice of special or rescheduled council meetings to its members and the public, shall keep the journal of all council proceedings, and shall perform such other duties as are assigned to the position by this charter or by the council. 
B.  The office of the clerk shall be open and all official records pertaining to the functions and duties of the clerk shall be available during the City's regular office hours. 
Section 2-10. - Council Meetings and Rules. 
A.  The council shall meet regularly at least twice a month at such times and places as the council may prescribe. Special meetings may be held on the call of the mayor, the presiding officer of the council or a majority of the authorized membership of the council and upon no less than twenty-four (24) hours' notice to each member. To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public safety, the council may meet upon call of the mayor, the presiding officer of the council or a majority of the authorized membership of the council upon such notice as it shall be convenient to give. The call convening a special meeting of the council shall state the objects of the meeting. The power of the council to act at a special meeting shall be limited, under penalty of nullity, to the objects specifically enumerated in the call. 
B.  All meetings of the council or its committees shall be held in compliance with state law governing public access to meetings of governing bodies. A meeting closed to the public shall be limited to matters allowed by state law. No final or binding action shall be taken during a meeting closed to the public. 
C.  The council shall establish by resolution its own rules and order of business and shall provide for keeping a journal of its minutes and proceedings. This journal shall be a public record. 
D.  At all regular meetings of the council and at all special meetings held upon no less than twenty-four (24) hours' written notice, the council shall operate from an agenda which shall be made available to the public prior to the meeting. 
E.  The council shall provide by resolution a procedure whereby interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard on any matter relating to City government. 
F.  At the first regular meeting of a newly elected council and annually thereafter, a chairman and vice chairman shall be elected by the council from among the council members. The chairman shall preside at meetings of the council, and in the absence or disqualification of the chairman, the vice chairman shall preside. In the absence or disqualification of both the chairman and vice chairman, the council shall designate one of its other members as temporary presiding officer. The presiding officer of the council shall have the right to vote on all matters to the same extent as any other council member. 
G.  All voting shall be by roll call, and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in the minutes of the council by the individual vote of each council member. Not less than a majority of the authorized membership of the council shall constitute a quorum to transact business, but if a quorum is lost during a meeting, a smaller number may recess from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in the manner and subject to the penalties prescribed by council rules. 
Section 2-11. - Action Requiring an Ordinance. 
A.  An act of the council having the force of law shall be by ordinance. An act requiring an ordinance shall include but not be limited to those which: 
(1)  Adopt or amend an administrative code. 
(2)  Provide a fine or other penalty or establish a rule or regulation for violation of which a fine or other penalty may be imposed. 
(3)  Levy taxes or assessments as provided by law. 
(4)  Appropriate funds and/or adopt the operating budget and capital improvement program for the City. 
(5)  Grant, renew or extend a franchise. 
(6)  Provide for raising revenue. 
(7)  Regulate the rate or other charges for service by the City. 
(8)  Authorize the borrowing of money. 
(9)  Incur debt in any manner authorized by law. 
(10)  Abandon any property owned by the City. 
(11)  Convey or least or authorize the conveyance or lease of any lands or property of the City. 
(12)  Acquire real property on behalf of the City. 
(13)  Extend or contract corporate limits. 
(14)  Adopt or modify an official map, platting or subdivision controls or regulation or the zoning plan. 
(15)  Amend or repeal any ordinance previously adopted. 
(16)  Propose amendments to this charter. 
B.  All general ordinances shall be codified in accordance with Article VI, Section 10 of the constitution. 
C.  Acts other than those referred to above may be done either by ordinance or by resolution. Except as otherwise provided by this charter, all ordinances and resolutions shall be passed by the favorable vote of at least a majority of the authorized membership of the council. 
Section 2-12. - Ordinances in General. 
A.  All proposed ordinances shall be introduced in writing and in the form required for adoption and, except for codifications and the operating budget and capital improvement program, shall be confined to one subject expressed clearly in the title. 
B.  All proposed ordinances shall be read by title when introduced and published in full or by title prior to final consideration. Except as otherwise provided in Section 2-14 (Emergency Ordinances), no ordinance shall be considered for final passage until it has laid over at least seven (7) days from date of publication and a public hearing has been held on the ordinance. 
C.  Upon enactment all ordinances shall be published in full in the official journal by the clerk of the council as soon as practical thereafter provided, however, that ordinances adopting codes of technical regulations or adopting or amending the operating budget or capital improvement program may be published in full or in summary at the council's discretion. Every enacted ordinance, unless it shall specify another date, shall become effective at expiration of ten (10) days after publication by the council. 
Section 2-13. - Submission of Ordinances to the Mayor. 
A.  Every ordinance adopted by the council shall be signed by the presiding officer and presented to the mayor or the mayor's office within three (3) calendar days after adoption, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and state holidays. The clerk of the council shall record upon the ordinance the date and hour of its delivery to the mayor or the mayor's office. 
B.  Within ten (10) calendar days after receipt by the mayor or the mayor's office of an ordinance, excluding Saturdays, Sundays and state holidays, it shall be returned to the clerk of the council with or without the mayor's approval, or with the mayor's veto. The clerk shall record upon the ordinance the date and hour of its receipt from the mayor. If the ordinance has been approved or is not specifically vetoed, it shall be considered finally enacted and become effective as provided in Section 2-12 (Ordinances in General). If the ordinance is vetoed, the mayor shall submit to the council through the clerk a written statement of the reasons for veto. All ordinances that the mayor vetoes shall be vetoed in full, except that the mayor shall have authority to veto individual appropriation items in the ordinances adopting the operating budget and capital improvement program. 
C.  Ordinances vetoed by the mayor shall be submitted by the clerk to the council no later than the next regular meeting held after receipt of the vetoed ordinance from the mayor. Should the council vote, no later than the second regular meeting held after receipt of the vetoed ordinance, to readopt the ordinance by the favorable vote of at least two thirds of its authorized membership, said ordinance shall be considered finally enacted and become law irrespective of the veto by the mayor. 
D.  The right of the mayor to veto as provided in this section shall apply to all ordinances adopted by the council except those which propose amendments to this charter; establish, alter or modify council procedure; or appropriate funds for the council or for auditing or investigating any part of the executive branch. 
Section 2-14. - Emergency Ordinances. 
A.  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or public safety, the council by the favorable vote of at least two thirds of the authorized membership, may adopt an emergency ordinance at the meeting at which it is introduced, provided that no such ordinance may be used to levy taxes or special assessments; grant or extend a franchise; incur debt, except as provided in Section 5-04 B (Emergency Appropriations); adopt or amend an official map, platting or subdivision controls or zoning regulations; or change rates, fees or charges established by the City. Each emergency ordinance shall contain a specific statement of the emergency claimed. 
B.  Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2-13 (Submission of Ordinances to the Mayor), any emergency ordinance adopted by the council shall be signed by the presiding officer and presented to the mayor within six (6) hours after adoption. Within twelve (12) hours after receipt by the mayor of any emergency ordinance, it shall be returned to the clerk of the council with or without the mayor's approval, or with the mayor's veto. If the emergency ordinance has been approved, or is not specifically vetoed, it shall be considered finally enacted and become effective immediately upon receipt by the clerk. If the emergency ordinance is vetoed, the mayor shall submit to the council through the clerk a written statement of the reasons for the veto. The clerk shall record upon the emergency ordinance the dates and hours of its delivery to and receipt from the mayor. Should the council vote, not later than twelve (12) hours after receipt of the vetoed emergency ordinance from the mayor, to readopt the emergency ordinance by the favorable vote of at least two thirds of its authorized membership, said emergency ordinance shall be considered finally enacted and become law immediately upon readoption, irrespective of the veto by the mayor. Upon final enactment such emergency ordinance shall be published in the official journal by the clerk as soon as practical thereafter either in full or in summary at the discretion of the council. 
C.  Emergency ordinances shall be effective for no longer than sixty (60) days. 
Section 2-15. - Codes of Technical Regulations. 
    The council, by ordinance, may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference. The procedure and requirements governing the adopting of such ordinances shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, except that a period of twenty-seven (27) days shall be allowed between the time of introduction and final consideration of the ordinance by the council. During this interim, copies of any proposed code shall be available for public review. A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk of the council in the official records of the City. Such adopted codes of technical regulations shall be published at least by title or by reference in the official journal by the clerk as soon as practical following such final adoption. 
Section 2-16. - Authentication and Recording of Ordinances and Resolutions; Printing and Distribution. 
A.  All finally enacted ordinances and resolutions shall be authenticated, numbered and recorded by the clerk of the council. All ordinances shall be indexed and codified in a book or books kept for this purpose. All resolutions shall be indexed and recorded in the minutes of the council meeting at which the resolution was adopted. 
B.  The council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this charter to be printed or otherwise reproduced promptly following enactment and such printed or reproduced amendments and ordinances, including codes of technical regulations adopted by reference pursuant to Section 2-15 (Codes of Technical Regulations), shall be distributed or sold to the public at reasonable prices. 
Section 2-17. - Power to Levy Taxes. 
    The power to perform any service or provide any facility granted to the City by this charter or by the constitution and general laws of the state shall in all cases carry with it the power to levy taxes and borrow money within the limits and in accordance with procedures prescribed by the constitution and general laws of the state. The council shall have, and is hereby granted, all of the authority to levy and collect taxes, to incur debt, and issue bonds and other evidences of indebtedness, as is now or hereafter conferred on governing authorities of municipalities by the constitution and general laws of the state, or as may be hereafter specially conferred by the electors of the City. Any tax being levied by the City on the effective date of this home rule charter is ratified. 
Section 2-18. - Powers of Enforcement. 
    For the purpose of carrying out the powers generally or specially conferred on the City, the council shall have the power, whenever it deems it necessary, to grant franchises, to require licenses and permits and fix the fees to be paid therefor, to charge compensation for any privilege or franchise granted or service rendered, and to provide penalties for the violation of any ordinance or regulation, as provided by law. 
Section 2-19. - Internal Auditor. 
A.  There shall be an internal auditor responsible solely to the council. He shall be selected by the concurrence of a majority of the elected members of the council and may be removed by the concurrence of at least two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its authorized membership. The internal auditor, at the time of appointment, shall have at least a bachelor's degree in accounting or other financial based curriculum from an accredited college or university and at least three (3) years' experience in internal auditing or professionally qualified as a certified public accountant or as a certified internal auditor. 
B.  The internal auditor shall perform audits of all offices, departments, boards and commissions of the City. These audits shall include but not be limited to the following determinations: 
(1)  Whether financial operations are properly conducted in accordance with standards for governmental accounting and general internal accounting controls. 
(2)  Whether the audited entity is in compliance with the Louisiana Constitution, City Charter, City Ordinances, and all other applicable laws and regulations. 
(3)  Whether the property of the City is properly accounted for and safeguarded from losses. 
C.  The internal auditor shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by ordinance and perform other auditing services of an official nature as may be required by the council. 
D.  For the purpose of performing his duties the internal auditor shall have access to the books and records of all offices, departments, boards, commissions and agencies of the City, and it shall be the duty of all officers and employees thereof to supply to him such information and documents in their possession concerning the affairs of the City as he may request. 
(Ord. No. 9462, 8-23-94) 
ARTICLE III. - EXECUTIVE BRANCH 

Section 3-01. - Executive Authority. 
    The mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City and shall exercise general and administrative authority over all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this charter. 
Section 3-02. - Election. 
    The mayor shall be elected at large by the qualified voters of the City according to the election laws of the state for a four-year term concurrent with that of the council and shall be eligible for reelection. 
Section 3-03. - Qualifications. 
A.  The mayor shall be at least twenty-five (25) years of age, a qualified elector of the municipality and shall have been legally domiciled and shall have actually resided for at least one (1) year immediately preceding the time established by law for qualifying for office in an area which, at the time of qualification, is within the City. 
B.  The mayor shall continue to be legally domiciled and to actually reside within the City during the term of office. Should the legal domicile and/or actual residence of the mayor change from the City, the office shall automatically become vacant, which vacancy shall be filled as set out hereinafter. 
C.  No person shall be eligible for election to the Office of Mayor for more than three (3) consecutive terms. Said term limit to be applied prospectively following the term of the Mayor elected in the 2012 election. 
(Ord. No. 11,367, 2-26-13) 
Section 3-04. - Forfeiture of Office. 
    The office of mayor shall be forfeited if during the term of office the officeholder: (1) lacks at any time any qualification for the office prescribed by this charter, (2) violates any express prohibition of this charter or is (3) disqualified by law from holding public office. 
Section 3-05. - Vacancies. 
A.  The office of mayor shall become vacant upon death, resignation, removal from office in any manner authorized by law, forfeiture of office by the officeholder or failure to take office for any reason. 
B.  A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled according to the method, timetable and procedures established by state law generally for the filling of vacancies in elected municipal offices. 
Section 3-06. - Mayor's Temporary Absence. 
    During the temporary absence of the mayor from the City, the mayor shall designate, by letter filed with the clerk of the council, a qualified officer or employee in the executive branch to serve as acting mayor. 
Section 3-07. - Mayor's Disability. 
A.  Whenever the mayor transmits to the clerk of the council a written declaration stating inability to discharge the powers and duties of the office, and until the mayor transmits to the clerk of the council a written declaration to the contrary, such powers and duties shall be discharged by the chairman of the council as acting mayor. 
B.  Whenever a panel of three (3) qualified medical experts, designated by resolution adopted by the favorable vote of at least two thirds of the authorized membership of the council, transmits to the clerk of the council its written declaration adopted by a majority of the panel that the mayor is unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office, the chairman of the council shall immediately assume said powers and duties of the office as acting mayor. The chairman of the council shall serve as acting mayor until the panel of three (3) qualified medical experts transmits to the clerk of the council its written declaration adopted by a majority of the panel that the mayor's inability has ended. The medical experts shall review the mayor's disability at least every three (3) months until such time as it has been determined that the disability has ended. In the event any panel member dies or becomes otherwise disabled or unwilling to serve, the council shall appoint another qualified medical expert to fill the vacancy. 
C.  Should the mayor be unable to discharge the powers and duties of the office for a period exceeding six (6) consecutive months, the council shall have the authority upon the favorable vote of at least two thirds of its authorized membership to declare the office of mayor vacant due to disability, provided, however, that the council shall hold a public hearing on the issue prior to any such declaration. 
Section 3-08. - Compensation. 
A.  The salary of the mayor shall be ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00) annually until changed by ordinance, but in no event shall be less than ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00) annually. No ordinance changing the salary or granting any other monetary compensation shall be adopted during the last year of a term of office, and no such ordinance shall become effective during the term of the council adopting the ordinance. 
    In addition to the above salary, the Mayor shall receive the following benefits: 
(1)  Retirement benefits paid as for any other regular City employee; 
(2)  City health plan paid 100% (for Mayor and eligible dependents); 
(3)  Paid group term life insurance up to $50,000.00. 
B.  The mayor shall have the option of: 
(1)  Having the City purchase a suitable automobile for him, with the City providing all maintenance, upkeep and repairs and maintaining liability on said automobile; or 
(2)  Providing his own automobile, including all maintenance, upkeep, repairs and insurance, in which case the City shall pay the Mayor a car allowance based on the automobile annual lease value table provided by the Internal Revenue Service, Reg. 1.61-21(d)(2)(iii) for an automobile valued at $26,000.00. 
    In either event, the Mayor shall be supplied with a credit card in the name of the City of Monroe for all gasoline and oil purchases, the billing statement for which will provide documentation of expenses incurred. 
(Ord. No. 10,300, 3-25-03; Ord. No. 10,301, 3-25-03) 
Section 3-09. - Powers and Duties of the Mayor. 
A.  The mayor, as chief executive officer of the City, shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  See that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the council, subject to enforcement by the mayor or by officers subject to the mayor's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(2)  Appoint and suspend or remove all City administrative officers and employees provided for under this charter, except as otherwise provided by law, this charter or civil service or other personnel rules adopted pursuant to this charter. The mayor may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the mayor's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in the officer's department, office or agency. 
(3)  Attend or send a representative to all council meetings with the right to take part in discussion but not to vote. 
(4)  Direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the City, except as otherwise provided by this charter. 
(5)  Prepare and submit the annual budget and five (5) year capital program to the council. 
(6)  Submit to the council and make available to the public, within sixty (60) days after the end of the fiscal year, a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the City as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  Make such other reports as the council may reasonably request to enable the council to conduct its councilmanic function. 
(8)  Keep the council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the council concerning the affairs of the City as deemed desirable. 
(9)  Perform such other duties as are specified in this charter or may be required by the council. 
Section 3-10. - Prohibitions. 
    The mayor shall hold no other elected public office nor any compensated appointive City office or City employment during the term of office for which elected. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the mayor from serving as a member of a charter commission, constitutional convention or political party committee. 
ARTICLE IV. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 4-01. - General Provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter all departments, offices and agencies shall be under the direction and supervision of the mayor, and the heads of all departments created by or under this charter shall be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
Section 4-02. - Legal Department. 
A.  The head of the Legal Department shall be the city attorney. The city attorney, at the time of appointment, shall have been admitted to the practice of law in Louisiana for at least five (5) years. 
B.  The city attorney shall serve as chief legal adviser to the mayor, council and all departments, offices and agencies, shall represent the City in all legal proceedings and shall perform other duties prescribed by this charter or by ordinance. 
C.  Any assistant city attorneys shall be appointed by the city attorney and serve at the pleasure of the city attorney. 
D.  No special legal counsel shall be employed by the City except by written contract and approval of the council. 
Section 4-03. - Department of Administration. 
A.  The head of the Department of Administration shall be the director of administration. The director of administration, at the time of appointment, shall have at least a bachelor's degree in business or public administration or a related field from an accredited college or university and at least three (3) years' experience in a responsible managerial or administrative fiscal position OR at least five (5) years' experience in a responsible managerial or administrative fiscal position. 
B.  The director of administration shall direct and be responsible for the following activities: 
(1)  Collection (except where specifically otherwise provided for by law) and custody of all monies of the City from whatever source. 
(2)  Assistance to the mayor in the preparation of the operating budget and capital improvement program. 
(3)  Maintenance of a record of indebtedness and the payment of the principal and interest on such indebtedness. 
(4)  Ascertaining that funds are available for payment of all contracts, purchase orders and any other documents which incur financial obligation for the City, and that such documents are in accordance with established procedures. 
(5)  Disbursement of all funds from the City treasury. 
(6)  Administration of a uniform central accounting system for all City departments, offices and agencies using nationally accepted standards where applicable. 
(7)  Preparation of a monthly statement of revenues and expenditures which shall be completed and made available for public inspection not later than ten (10) days after the end of each month. 
(8)  Procurement of all personal property, materials, supplies and services required by the City under a central purchasing system for all departments, offices and agencies in accordance with applicable state law, council policy and administrative requirements. 
(9)  Maintenance of an inventory of all City property, real and personal. 
(10)  Investment of all idle City funds, as permitted by law, so as to receive the maximum rate of return. 
(11)  Storage, care and maintenance of all official records and documents of the City. 
(12)  Development and administration of a system of personnel administration that shall provide the means to recruit, select, develop and maintain an effective and responsive work force and shall include policies and procedures for employee hiring and advancement, training and career development, job classification, salary administration, retirement, fringe benefits, discipline, discharge and other related activities. 
(13)  Providing general administrative services. 
(14)  Other actions as may be directed by the mayor. 
Section 4-04. - Police Department. 
A.  The head of the Police Department shall be the police chief who shall be appointed in accordance with applicable state law. 
B.  The police chief shall direct and be responsible for the preservation of public peace and order; prevention of crime; apprehension of criminals; assistance to the courts and other law enforcement officials; and the enforcement of laws of the state and ordinances of the council. 
Section 4-05. - Fire Department. 
A.  The head of the Fire Department shall be the fire chief who shall be appointed in accordance with applicable state law. 
B.  The fire chief shall direct and be responsible for fire prevention; fire extinguishment and salvage operations; inspection and recommendations concerning the fire code of the City; investigations of fires and their causes; and the conduct of the fire safety and prevention program. 
Section 4-06. - Public Works Department. 
A.  The head of the Public Works Department shall be the public works director. The public works director, at the time of appointment, shall be a graduate registered professional engineer with at least three (3) years' related experience in a responsible managerial or administrative position OR shall have at least five (5) years' related public works experience in a responsible managerial or administrative position. 
B.  The public works director shall direct and be responsible for the following activities: 
(1)  Supervision of all contract construction work except as may be related to federally funded urban renewal projects. 
(2)  Maintenance and beautification of City property. 
(3)  Construction and maintenance, performed by the City, of streets, sidewalks, bridges and drainage facilities. 
(4)  Street cleaning. 
(5)  Garbage and trash collection and disposal. 
(6)  Operation of a central facility for the repair and maintenance of all City vehicles and equipment. 
(7)  Water production, treatment and distribution. 
(8)  Sewage collection, treatment and disposal. 
(9)  Operation of the municipal transit system. 
(10)  Operation of the municipal airport. 
(11)  Other such activities as may be directed by the mayor. 
Section 4-07. - Engineering Services Department. 
A.  The head of the Engineering Services Department shall be the city engineer. The city engineer, at the time of appointment, shall be a graduate registered professional engineer with at least three (3) years' related experience in a responsible engineering position. 
B.  The city engineer shall direct and be responsible for the following activities: 
(1)  Engineering services, including traffic engineering, for all City departments, offices and agencies. 
(2)  Mapping and surveying. 
(3)  Custody and maintenance of all maps, plats, surveys and as built drawings of public facilities. 
(4)  Other such activities as may be directed by the mayor. 
Section 4-08. - Planning and Urban Development. 
A.  The head of the Planning and Urban Development Department shall be the planning and urban development director. The planning and urban development director, at the time of appointment, shall have at least a bachelor's degree in planning, architecture or public administration with a planning major and at least five (5) years' experience in a responsible planning position. 
B.  The planning and urban development director shall direct and be responsible for the following activities: 
(1)  Conduct of basic surveys and studies concerning the development of coordinated City resources and facilities plans. 
(2)  Preparation, updating and continuous revision of all community development plans and proposals. 
(3)  Planning, coordination and administration of all activities of the City related to the work of various public and private agencies concerned with housing programs. 
(4)  Preparation of all intergovernmental grant applications on behalf of the City and informing City departments, offices and agencies of all relevant local, state and federal assistance programs. 
(5)  Inspections, licensing and permit issuance in conjunction with the enforcement of zoning ordinances and building and other technical codes. 
(6)  Maintenance of the City map and zoning district map. 
(7)  Administration and operation of all urban renewal programs of the City including supervision of all contract construction work related to federally funded urban renewal projects. 
(8)  Other such activities as may be directed by the mayor. 
Section 4-09. - Community Affairs Department. 
A.  The head of the Community Affairs Department shall be the community affairs director. The community affairs director, at the time of appointment, shall have at least a bachelor's degree in business or public administration or related field from an accredited college or university, and at least (3) years' experience in a responsible managerial or administrative position OR at least five (5) years' experience in a responsible managerial or administrative position. 
B.  The community affairs director shall direct and be responsible for: 
(1)  Recreational and cultural activities such as concerts, art museums and exhibits. 
(2)  Parks and playgrounds. 
(3)  Athletic programs. 
(4)  Operation of the Civic Center, Twin City Queen, Louisiana Purchase Gardens and Zoo and the Forsythe Boat Dock. 
(5)  Other recreational and cultural activities of the City. 
Section 4-10. - Other Departments. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this charter, all City departments, offices, agencies and functions in existence on the effective date of this charter shall continue in existence as organized on that date until reorganized in accordance with Section 4-11 (Administrative Reorganization). 
Section 4-11. - Administrative Reorganization. 
A.  The mayor shall have the right as chief executive officer to propose to the council the creation, change, alteration, combination or abolition of City departments, offices or agencies and/or the reallocation of the functions, powers, duties and responsibilities of such departments, offices or agencies, including those provided for in this charter. 
B.  The council, within sixty (60) days following its receipt of a reorganization proposal from the mayor, shall either approve by ordinance or disapprove, but not amend except with the written consent of the mayor, the proposed reorganization plan. Should the council fail to act within the prescribed time, the plan shall be deemed approved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCIAL PROCEDURES 

Section 5-01. - Fiscal Year. 
    The fiscal year of the City shall be established by the council by ordinance. 
Section 5-02. - Operating Budget Preparation and Adoption. 
    At least ninety (90) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the mayor shall submit to the council a proposed operating budget in the form required by this charter. At the meeting of the council at which the operating budget is submitted, the council shall order a public hearing on it and shall cause to be published in the official journal, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the time and place thereof, a general summary of the proposed budget and the times and places where the copies of the proposed budget are available for public inspection. At the time and place so advertised, the council shall hold a public hearing on the budget as submitted. The budget shall be finally enacted not later than the second-to-last regular meeting of the fiscal year. If the budget has not been enacted by that date, the budget as submitted to the council by the mayor shall become effective. Upon enactment, the budget shall be in effect for the budget year and copies shall be filed with the clerk of the council. The enacted budget shall be reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for use by all offices, departments and agencies of the City, and for the use of interested persons. 
Section 5-03. - The Operating Budget Document. 
A.  The operating budget for the City government shall present a complete financial plan for the ensuing fiscal year and shall consist of at least three (3) parts as follows: 
    Part I shall contain: (1) a budget message, prepared by the mayor, which shall outline the proposed fiscal plan for the City and describe significant features of the budget for the forthcoming fiscal period; and (2) a general budget summary which, with supporting schedules, shall show the relationship between total proposed expenditures and total anticipated revenues for the forthcoming fiscal period and which shall compare these figures with corresponding actual figures for the last completed fiscal year and estimated figures for the year in progress. 
    Part II shall contain: (1) detailed estimates of all proposed expenditures, showing the corresponding estimated expenditures for each item for the current fiscal year and actual figures for the last preceding fiscal year with explanations of increases or decreases recommended related to performance standards or workload measurements, to the extent of availability of such information; (2) detailed estimates of all anticipated revenues and other income, showing the corresponding estimated revenues or income of each item for the current fiscal year and actual figures for the last preceding fiscal year with explanations of increases or decreases; (3) delinquent taxes for current and preceding years, with the estimated percentage collectible; (4) statement of the indebtedness of the City, showing debt redemption and interest requirements, debt authorized and unissued, and conditions of the sinking funds; and (5) such other information as may be requested by the council. 
    Part III shall contain a proposed complete draft of the appropriation ordinance. All appropriations shall be by department and/or program. 
B.  The total of proposed expenditures shall not exceed the total of estimated funds available. 
Section 5-04. - Amendments to Operating Budget. 
A.  Supplemental Appropriations: If during the fiscal year the mayor certifies that there are available for appropriation revenues in excess of those estimated in the operating budget, the mayor may present a supplemental budget for the disposition of such revenues, and the council by ordinance may make supplemental appropriations for the year up to the amount of such excess in the same manner required for adoption of the budget. 
B.  Emergency Appropriations: To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property or the public peace, the council may make emergency appropriations. Such appropriations may be made by emergency ordinance in accordance with the provisions of this charter. To the extent that there are no available unappropriated revenues to meet such appropriations, the council may by such emergency ordinance borrow money in sums necessary to meet the emergency in accordance with procedures established by state law. 
C.  Reduction of Appropriations: If at any time during the fiscal year it appears to the mayor that the revenues available will be insufficient to meet the amount appropriated, the mayor shall report to the council without delay, indicating the estimated amount of the deficit, any remedial action taken and recommendations as to any other steps to be taken. The council shall then take such further action as it deems necessary to prevent a deficit. Subject to the limitations in this section, the council may, by ordinance, reduce any appropriation at any time. 
D.  Transfer of Appropriations: At any time during the fiscal year the mayor may transfer part or all of any unencumbered appropriation within programs or functions. An unencumbered appropriation balance may be transferred from one department, office or agency to another or from one program or function to another only upon council action by ordinance. 
E.  Limitations: No appropriation for debt service may be reduced or transferred and no appropriation may be reduced below any amount required by law to be appropriated or by more than the amount of the unencumbered balance thereof. 
Section 5-05. - Capital Improvement Program and Budget. 
A.  Each year, no later than the time of submission of the operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year, the mayor shall prepare and submit to the council a capital improvement program covering a period of at least five (5) years. The amount indicated to be spent during the first year of the capital improvement program shall be the capital budget for that year. 
B.  The capital program shall include: 
(1)  A clear general summary of its contents. 
(2)  A list of all capital improvements and acquisitions which are proposed to be undertaken for at least the five (5) fiscal years next ensuing with appropriate supporting information as to the necessity for such improvements and acquisitions. 
(3)  Cost estimates, method of financing and recommended time schedules for each such improvement or acquisition. 
(4)  The estimated annual cost of operating and maintaining the capital improvement to be constructed or acquired. 
    The information shall be revised and extended each year with regard to capital improvements still pending or in process of construction or acquisition. 
C.  At the meeting of the council at which the capital improvement program is submitted, the council shall order a public hearing on such capital improvement program and shall cause to be published in the official journal, at least ten (10) days prior to the date of such hearing, the time and place thereof, a general summary of the proposed capital improvement program and the times and places where copies of the proposed capital improvement program are available for public inspection. At the time and place so advertised, the council shall hold a public hearing on the capital improvement program as submitted. The capital improvement program shall be finally adopted not later than the second-to-last regular meeting of the fiscal year. The capital improvement program as finally adopted shall be reproduced and sufficient copies shall be made available for use by all offices, departments and agencies of the City, and for the use of all interested persons. 
Section 5-06. - Administration of Operating and Capital Budgets. 
A.  No payment shall be made or obligation incurred against any allotment or appropriation except in accordance with the approved operating and capital budgets and appropriations duly made and unless the mayor or the mayor's designee first certifies that there is a sufficient unencumbered balance in such allotment or appropriation and that sufficient funds therefrom are or will be available to cover the claim or meet the obligation when it becomes due and payable. However, this provision shall not limit the authority of the City to borrow funds in anticipation of revenues as provided in the general laws of the state. Any authorization of payment or incurring of obligation in violation of the provisions of this charter shall be void and any payment so made illegal. Such action shall be cause for removal of any official, officer or employee who knowingly authorized or made such payment or incurred such obligation or who caused such payment to be authorized or made or obligation to be incurred. Such persons shall also be liable to the City for any amount so paid. 
B.  Nothing in this charter shall be construed so as to prevent the making or authorizing of payments or making of contracts for capital improvements to be financed wholly or partly by the issuance of bonds or to prevent the making of any contract or lease providing for payments beyond the end of the fiscal year, provided that such action is authorized by ordinance. 
Section 5-07. - Lapse of Appropriations. 
    Every appropriation, except an appropriation for a capital expenditure, shall lapse at the close of the fiscal year to the extent that it has not been expended or encumbered. An appropriation for a capital expenditure shall continue in force until the purpose for which it was made has been accomplished or abandoned. The purpose of any such appropriation shall be deemed abandoned if three (3) years pass without any disbursement from or encumbrance of the appropriation. 
Section 5-08. - Bonded Debt. 
    The City is empowered to incur bonded debt in accordance with this charter and the constitution and statutes of the state. When voter approval is required, no resolution shall be passed calling for a referendum to incur a bonded debt until an engineering and economic feasibility report shall have been made to the council and a summary thereof published in the official journal at least thirty (30) days prior to the proposed date of the election, unless the council is required to call such an election pursuant to a petition as provided for under the general laws of this state. 
Section 5-09. - Facsimile Signatures. 
    Facsimile signatures are authorized for negotiable instruments and multiple certificates of indebtedness in those cases where an official is required by law to sign. 
Section 5-10. - Purchasing. 
    Purchasing of all property, supplies, materials and services shall be under a central purchasing system and shall be in accordance with applicable state law, council policy and administrative requirements. 
ARTICLE VI. - INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM, RECALL AND REMOVAL BY SUIT 

Section 6-01. - Initiative and Referendum. 
    The electors of the City shall have the power, except as herein restricted, to propose to the council passage or repeal of ordinances and to vote on the question if the council refuses action, provided such proposed action be within the jurisdiction and authority of the council. This power shall not extend to the proposing or repealing of ordinances making or reducing the appropriation of money, fixing the salaries of City officers or employees or authorizing the repeal or reduction of the levy of any taxes. The initiative power shall be exercised in the following manner: 
(1)  The person or persons proposing the exercise of this power shall submit the proposal to the council which shall specify within thirty (30) days a form of petition for circulation in one or multiple copies as the proposer may desire. The petition shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. 
(2)  Within sixty (60) days after the form of the petition shall have been specified, the person or persons circulating the petition shall obtain the signatures of at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total registered voters of the City. There shall be noted after each signature on the petition the date signed and the address of the signer. Each person circulating a copy of the petition shall attach a sworn affidavit to it stating the number of signers and the fact that each signature was made in the presence of the circulator of the petition. 
(3)  The signed petition shall be filed with the council within sixty (60) days of the specification of the form of the petition and, upon filing, the council shall order a canvass of the signatures through the office of the parish registrar of voters to determine their sufficiency and authenticity. The council's canvass shall be completed within thirty (30) days. If the number of signatures is insufficient or the petition is deficient as to form or compliance with this section, the council shall notify the person or persons filing the petition of such insufficiency or deficiency and allow thirty (30) days for filing of additional papers, at the end of which time the sufficiency and correctness of the petition shall be determined finally. 
(4)  Within thirty (30) days after a petition shall have been certified as sufficient and correct by the council, the council shall cause the proposed ordinance, or a summary thereof, to be published in the official journal of the City at least once together with a notice of the date, time and place when and where it will be given a public hearing and be considered for passage, which notice shall appear at least ten (10) days prior to the time advertised for the hearing. At the time and place so advertised the council shall hold a public hearing, Subsequent to such hearing, the council shall either: 
(a)  Adopt the proposed ordinance submitted in an initiative petition, without substantive amendments, or effect the repeal referred to by such petition, or 
(b)  Determine to submit the proposal to the electors. 
(5)  If the council adopts an ordinance following the submission of an initiative petition as provided above, it shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as other ordinances adopted by the council. 
(6)  If an initiative ordinance is submitted to a vote of the electors as provided in Section 6-01 (4) above, the election shall take place at the next citywide regular or special election already scheduled for other purposes. The results shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting on the proposal. 
(7)  If a majority of the qualified electors voting on a proposed initiative ordinance vote in its favor, it shall be considered adopted upon certification of the election results. If conflicting ordinances are approved at the same election, the one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
(8)  An ordinance adopted by the electorate through the initiative process shall be treated in all respects in the same manner as ordinances adopted by the council provided, however, that it shall not be subject to veto by the mayor. 
Section 6-02. - Recall. 
A.  Any elected official of the City may be removed from office by the electors of the City through a recall process. The recall procedure shall be the same as is provided in the general laws of the state. 
B.  If, in a recall election, the majority of those voting, vote for recall, the officer named in the recall petition shall be removed ipso facto from office, and the vacancy thereby created shall be filled as in the case of ordinary vacancies. 
Section 6-03. - Removal by Suit. 
    Any elected official of the City may be removed from office by court suit as provided for in the constitution and general laws of the state. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7-01. - Legal Process. 
    Legal process against the City shall be served upon the mayor or in the mayor's absence upon the presiding officer of the council. 
Section 7-02. - Conflict of Interest. 
A.  No City official, officer or employee, whether paid or unpaid, shall, directly or indirectly, seek or accept from or provide or offer to any individual, partnership, association or corporation, or other business entity or representative thereof, doing or seeking to do business with the City, any loans (except with banking or other financial institutions), services, payments, excessive entertainment and travel, vacation or pleasure trips, any gift of more than nominal value, or gifts of money in any amount. This provision shall not prohibit any official, officer or employee of the City who is a candidate for public office from accepting campaign contributions and services permitted by law in connection with any such campaign. 
B.  Any City officer, official or employee, whether paid or unpaid, who has a substantial financial interest, direct or indirect or by reason of ownership of stock in any corporation, in any contract with the City or in the sale of any land, material, supplies or services to the City or to a contractor or subcontractor supplying the City shall make known that interest and shall be prohibited from voting or otherwise participating in the capacity of a City officer or employee in the making of such sale or in the making or performance of such contract. 
C.  Any City officer, official or employee who willfully conceals such a substantial financial interest or who willfully violates the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall forfeit the office or position. Violation of this section with the knowledge express or implied of the person or corporation contracting with or making a sale to the City shall render the contract or sale void. 
Section 7-03. - Code of Ethics. 
    The proper operation of the municipal government provided by this charter requires that officers, officials and employees of the City be independent, impartial and responsible to the people; that decisions and policy be made in the best interest of the people, the community and the government; and that the public have confidence in the integrity of its government. In furtherance of these goals, the first council elected under the provisions of this charter, within six (6) months after taking office, shall begin preparation of and, not later than one (1) year after taking office, shall adopt by ordinance a code of ethics that shall apply to all officers, officials and employees of the City, whether elected or appointed, paid or unpaid. The code shall be administered by a board created by the council with qualifications, terms of office, duties and powers provided by ordinance. Members of the board shall be appointed by the council and shall receive no compensation for service. Decisions of the board shall be appealable to the courts. 
Section 7-04. - Amending or Repealing the Charter. 
A.  Proposals to amend or repeal this charter may be made both by the council and by petition signed by not less than twenty-five (25) percent of the total number of registered voters of the City eligible to have participated in the last citywide regular or special election. A petition shall contain the full text of the proposed amendment or amendments. 
B.  The procedures and time limits for filing such a petition and for determining its sufficiency and correctness shall be the same as provided for in Section 6-01 (Initiative and Referendum). Within ten (10) days after a petition has been certified as sufficient and correct, the council shall cause the amendment or amendments being proposed to be published in the official journal of the City. 
C.  Proposals by the council to amend or repeal this charter shall be submitted for ratification to the qualified electors of the City, preferably in an election already scheduled for other purposes, otherwise in a special election called by the council. Proposals by petition to amend or repeal this charter shall be submitted for ratification to the qualified electors of the City at the next citywide regular or special election already scheduled for other purposes occurring not sooner than ninety (90) days after final determination of a petition's sufficiency and correctness. The results shall be determined by a majority vote of the electors voting on any particular proposal. 
D.  Proposals by the council and by petition may be submitted to the voters at the same election and voters may, at their option, accept or reject any or all such proposals. Should conflicting proposals be approved at the same election, the one receiving the greater number of affirmative votes shall prevail to the extent of such conflict. 
E.  No amendment or repeal shall shorten the term for which any official was elected or reduce the salary of office for that term. 
Section 7-05. - Personnel Administration. 
A.  Prior to being effective, any proposed system of personnel administration shall be submitted by the mayor to the council for approval and adoption in an administrative code. 
B.  No employee holding a City position at the time this charter takes full effect, who was serving in that same or comparable position at the time of its adoption, shall be subject to competitive tests as a condition of continuance in the same position. In all other respects, such employee shall be subject to any personnel system adopted in accordance with the provisions of this charter. 
C.  The following shall not be members of the classified personnel system of the City: 
(1)  All elected City officials. 
(2)  The mayor's secretary and any assistants to the mayor. 
(3)  Persons employed on a temporary or contractual basis. 
(4)  The city attorney and any assistant city attorneys. 
(5)  Heads of departments created by or under this charter or continued in accordance with the provisions of this charter. 
(6)  Any employee appointed directly by the council. 
Section 7-06. - Employee Representation. 
A.  Nothing in this charter shall prohibit the council from contracting with an employee organization with respect to compensation, hours, grievances, working conditions, or other conditions of employment in a manner not inconsistent with this charter or any system of personnel administration adopted by the council. 
B.  In the absence of applicable state or federal law, the council, prior to recognizing any bargaining agent or agents, shall adopt an ordinance specifying the procedure to be followed by an employee organization or organizations seeking recognition as the bargaining agent or agents, the issues that are and are not subject to negotiation and the procedure to be followed in the event of an impasse in negotiations. If a general law exists defining such practices, the council may comply with the provisions of the law. 
C.  Upon the recommendation of the mayor, the council, by ordinance, may recognize a bargaining agent or agents. 
D.  All negotiations by the City with a recognized bargaining agent shall be by the mayor or the mayor's designee. Final approval of any labor contracts with City employees shall be by ordinance. 
Section 7-07. - Bonding of Officers. 
    The director of administration and such other City officers or employees as the council may designate shall give bond in the amount and with the surety prescribed by the council. The premiums on such bonds shall be paid by the City. 
Section 7-08. - Oath of Office. 
    All elected officials of the City shall take the oath of office before entering upon the duties of their offices. The oath may be administered by any person qualified by law to do so. 
Section 7-09. - Boards and Commissions. 
A.  The mayor may appoint boards and commissions to provide advice regarding the operations of City services or other activities. No such board or commission shall exercise any administrative or legislative responsibility. This provision shall not apply to a board or commission created by ordinance or in accordance with general state law. 
B.  A member of an advisory board or commission shall receive no compensation for service and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
C.  Members of all existing boards and commissions shall complete their terms of office, except as may be provided by action of the council. 
Section 7-10. - Council Confirmation of Mayoral Appointments. 
    The mayor shall submit the names of all appointees requiring council confirmation to the council for its review and consideration not later than the next regular meeting held after appointment. The council shall act on the matter of confirmation not later than the second regular meeting held after receipt from the mayor of notification of appointment. Should the council fail to act within the prescribed time, confirmation shall be deemed to have been given. 
Section 7-11. - Reconstitution of Government. 
    In the event of war or public disaster that incapacitates the mayor and/or a majority of the council, the remaining members of the government may act on an emergency basis and shall appoint such other officials as are necessary to reconstitute a government for the City. It shall be the intent of this section that these emergency powers shall subsist only so long as an emergency exists and that regularly constituted elections shall be held as soon as it is judicially determined that conditions permit their being held. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSITIONAL PROVISIONS 

Section 8-01. - Council Districts. 
A.  Council District One shall consist of that part of the city bounded by a line extending northwesterly along the center line of Eighteenth Street from Hudson Lane to Forsythe Avenue; northeasterly along the center line of Forsythe Avenue to Deborah Drive; northerly along the center line of Deborah Drive and continuing northerly along an extension of the center line of Deborah Drive to the intersection of the north line of Country Club Estates Unit No. 3 then easterly along the north line of Country Club Estates Unit No. 3 to the city limit; northerly along the city limit and continuing along the city limit to an extension of the center line of Hudson Lane; northeasterly along an extension of the center line of Hudson Lane to point of beginning. (Total population: 11,416; white: 11,185, 98 per cent; and minority: 231, 2 per cent) 
B.  Council District Two shall consist of that part of the city bounded by a line extending northwesterly along the center line of Eighteenth Street from Hudson Lane to Forsythe Avenue; northeasterly along the center line of Forsythe Avenue to Deborah Drive; thence northerly along the center line of Deborah Drive to the north line of Country Club Estates Unit No. 3; thence easterly along the north line of Country Club Estates Unit No. 3 to the city limit; southeasterly along the city limit and continuing along the city limit to the Sherrouse property line; southerly along the Sherrouse property line to its intersection with DeSiard Street; then easterly along DeSiard Street following the city limit line back to its intersection with the Sherrouse property line; then continuing southwesterly along an extension of Gerald Street to the center line of Grammont Street; then southwesterly along the center line of Grammont Street to the center line of U.S. Highway 165; then southerly along the center line of U.S. 165 to the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks; then southwesterly along the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks to center line of South Twenty-Sixth Street; then northerly along South Twenty-Sixth Street to the center line of DeSiard Street; then southwesterly along the center line of DeSiard Street to North Nineteenth Street; then northwesterly along the center line of North Nineteenth Street to the Washington-Lamy Connector; northeasterly along the center line of Washington-Lamy Connector to North Twenty-First Street; northwesterly along the center line of North Twenty-First Street to Louisville Avenue; northeasterly along the center line of Louisville Avenue to Oliver Road; northwesterly along the center line of Oliver Road to Hudson Lane; and southwesterly along the center line of Hudson Lane to the point of beginning. (Total population: 11,691; white: 8,414, 72 per cent; and minority: 3,277, 28 per cent) 
C.  Council District Three shall consist of that part of the city bounded by a line extending northeasterly along the center line of Hudson Lane from the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks to Oliver Road; southeasterly along the center line of Oliver Road to Louisville Avenue; southwesterly along the center line of Louisville Avenue to North Twenty-First Street; southeasterly along the center line of North Twenty-First Street to Washington-Lamy Connector; southwesterly along the center line of Washington-Lamy Connector to North Nineteenth Street; southeasterly along the center line of North Nineteenth Street to DeSiard Street; northeasterly along the center line of DeSiard Street to South Twenty-Sixth Street; southerly along the center line of South Twenty-Sixth Street to Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks; northeasterly along the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks to the center line of U.S. Highway 165; northerly along the center line of U.S. Highway 165 to Grammont Street and then northeasterly along the center line of Grammont Street to Gerald Street; northeasterly along the center of Gerald Street and continuing northeasterly along the extension of the center line of Gerald Street to the Sherrouse property line; then southerly along the Sherrouse property line to the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks; then northeasterly along the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks to the city limit (west property line of Ouachita Parish High); then northerly along the city limit back to the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks at Kenilworth Drive; then northeasterly along the city limit line and continuing along city limit line to the northeast corner of G.O. Dooley Addition, then northeasterly along the old city limit line [2] to Interstate 20; then westerly along the center line of Interstate 20 to Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks; northeasterly along the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks continuing along the western spur of the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks to the point of beginning. (Total population: 11,568; white: 442, 4 per cent; and minority: 11,126, 96 per cent) 
D.  Council District Four shall consist of that part of the city bounded by a line extending northeasterly along the center line of Hudson Lane from the western city limit to the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks, southeasterly along the Missouri Pacific Railroad tracks to Interstate 20; easterly along the center line of Interstate 20 to Texas Avenue, southwesterly along the center line of Texas Avenue to South Eighth Street; then southeasterly along the center line of South Eighth Street to Orange Street; northeasterly along the center line of Orange Street to South Twelfth Street; southeasterly along the center line of South Twelfth Street to Crescent Drive; then southwesterly along the center line of Crescent Drive to South Twelfth Street; southeasterly along the center line of South Twelfth Street to Temple Drive; southwesterly along the center line of Temple Drive to South Fifth Street; southeasterly along the center line of South Fifth Street to Winnsboro Road; southwesterly along the center line of Winnsboro Road to Wilson Street; southerly along the center line of Wilson Street to Thomas Avenue; westerly along Thomas Avenue to Alabama Street; northerly along the center line of Alabama Street to Phillip Street; then westerly along the center line of Phillip Street to the Missouri Pacific Railroad track; northerly along the Missouri Pacific Railroad track to Pargoud Drive (Hippolyte Avenue); southwesterly along the center line of Pargoud Drive (Hippolyte Avenue) to Dick Taylor Street; southerly along the center line of Dick Taylor Street to Jack McEnery Street; easterly along the center line of Jack McEnery Street to Polk Street; southerly along the center line of Polk Street to Lidell Avenue; easterly along the center line of Lidell Avenue to Jackson Street; southerly along the center line of Jackson Street to Vernon Street; westerly along the center line of Vernon Street to South Grand Street; southeasterly along the center line of South Grand to Ivy Place; westerly along the center line of Ivy Place and continuing along an extension of the center line of Ivy Place to the city limit; northerly along the city limit and continuing along the city limit to point of beginning. (Total population: 11,587; white: 7,418, 64 per cent; and minority: 4,169, 36 per cent) 
E.  Council District Five shall consist of that part of the city bounded by a line extending from the intersection of South Eighth Street and Texas Avenue, northeasterly along Texas Avenue to the center line of Interstate 20; easterly along the center line of Interstate 20 to the old city limit line; [3] southerly along the old city limit line to the northeast corner of G.O. Dooley Addition; thence continuing westerly along the present city limit line to its intersection with the extension of Ivy Place; then northeasterly along center line of Ivy Place to South Grand Street; northwesterly along the center line of South Grand to Vernon Street; northeasterly along the center line of Vernon Street to Jackson Street; northerly along the center line of Jackson Street to Lidell; westerly along the center line of Lidell Avenue to Polk Street; northerly along the center line of Polk Street to Jack McEnery Street; westerly along the center line of Jack McEnery Street to Dick Taylor Street; northerly along the center of Dick Taylor Street to Pargoud Drive (Hippolyte Avenue); northeasterly along the center line of Pargoud Drive (Hippolyte Avenue) to the Missouri Pacific Railroad track; southerly along the Missouri Pacific Railroad to the extension of the center line of Phillips Street, then easterly along the center line of Phillips Street to Alabama Street; southerly along the center line of Alabama Street to Thomas Avenue; easterly along the center line of Thomas Avenue to Wilson Street; northerly along the center line of Wilson Street to Winnsboro Road; easterly along center line of Winnsboro Road to South Fifth Street; northwesterly along the center line of South Fifth Street to Temple Drive, then northeasterly along the center line of Temple Drive to South Twelfth Street; northwesterly along the center line of South Twelfth Street to Crescent Drive; along the center line of Crescent Drive back to South Twelfth Street; northwesterly along the center line of South Twelfth Street to Orange Street, southwesterly along the center line of Orange Street to South Eighth Street, northwesterly down the center line of South Eighth Street to the point of beginning. (Total population: 11,335; white: 1,791, 16 per cent; and minority: 9,544, 84 per cent) (Ord. No. 7494, 3-8-83; Ord. No. 7583,  1-5, 9-13-83) 
Editor's note- At the discretion of the editor, the provisions of Ord. No. 7494, adopted March 8, 1983, (and as later amended) have been included as amending  8-01, setting out council districts. Ord. No. 7583 did not expressly amend the Charter. The description included in the note immediately following this editor's note is apparently the description of the old city limit line. 
Note: 
Beginning at the northeast corner of G.O. Dooley Addition; thence north 02 degrees 45 minutes east along the east line of the Southwest quarter of Section 5, a distance of 313.28 feet to the north line of water line easement to the City of Monroe, Louisiana; thence north 86 degrees 52 minutes east along the north line of said easement, measure a distance of 384.27 feet to the westerly right-of-way of Ruffin Drive Extension; thence along the curve (the chord of which is 91.48 feet bearing north 37 degrees 11 minutes 40 seconds east and a radius of 60 feet) of the right-of-way of Ruffin Drive Extension in a northerly direction, measure a distance of 104.04 feet to the point of curve; thence north 03 degrees 08 minutes west along the westerly right-of-way line of Ruffin Drive Extension, measure a distance of 181.12 feet; thence south 86 degrees 44 minutes 11 seconds west, a distance of 418.12 feet to the east line of the Southwest quarter of Section 5, Township 17 North, Range 4 East; thence north 02 degrees 45 minutes east along the east line of Southwest quarter of Section 5, a distance of 281.36 feet to the north right-of-way line of Ruffin Drive; thence measure easterly along the north line of Ruffin Drive a distance of 895.71 feet; thence measure north 03 degrees 08 minutes west, a distance of 407.81 feet to the north line of the Southeast quarter of Section 5; thence north 86 degrees 42 minutes east along the north line of Southeast quarter of Section 5, a distance of 1,637.81 feet to the west right-of-way line of Nutland or Endom Road; thence northwesterly along a curve to the left, having a radius of 904.36 feet, a distance of 151.50 feet to the point of tangency of said curve; thence north 17 degrees 23.95 minutes west, a distance of 609.34 feet; thence northwesterly along a curve to the left, having a radius of 163.22 feet, to a distance of 213.83 feet to the intersection of the southerly right-of-way line of Salem Drive and the westerly right-of-way line of Nutland Road; thence northeasterly along the easterly projection of the south right-of-way line of Salem Drive approximately 60.00 feet to the east right-of-way line of Nutland Road; thence southeasterly along the east right-of-way line of Nutland Road to the south line of the property of the Monroe District, Board of Missions United Methodist Church in Southeast quarter of Northeast quarter, Section 5, Township 17 North, Range 4 East, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana; thence a deflection angle of 72 degrees 38 minutes 10 seconds to the left a distance of 149.27 feet to the east line of Section 5, Township 17 North, Range 4 East; thence at a deflection angle of 82 degrees 42 minutes to the left along the said east line of Section 5, Township 17 North, Range 4 East, a distance of 790.03 feet to the southerly right-of-way of Perry Street, which is northeast corner of Southeast quarter of Northeast quarter, Section 5, Township 17 North, Range 4 East; thence southwesterly along the south right-of-way line of Perry Street and westerly projection of the south right-of-way line of Perry Street; to intersection with the west right-of-way line of Nutland Road; thence north 25 degrees 30.95 minutes west a distance of 1,371.76 feet; thence northwesterly along a curve to the right having a radius of 556.54 feet a distance of 235.31 feet to the point of tangency of the curve; thence north 01 degrees 17.45 minutes west, a distance of 295.5 feet to the southerly line of Tract No. 2, as described in deed acquisition by American Telephone and Telegraph Company recorded in Conveyance Book 637, page 128, Ouachita Parish Records; thence north 84 degrees 40 minutes west, measure 78.81 feet to the easterly right-of-way of State Farm Drive (Ramada Drive); thence north 06 degrees 40 minutes 16 seconds west along the easterly right-of-way of State Farm Drive (Ramada Drive) 333.05 feet, thence north 06 degrees 55 minutes 07 seconds west along the easterly right-of-way of State Farm Drive (Ramada Drive) 337.05 feet to intersection with the southerly right-of-way line of I-20. 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
See note at end of section. 

--- (3) --- 
See note at end of section. 

Section 8-02. - Continuation of Actions. 
A.  All writs, actions, suits, proceedings, civil or criminal liabilities, prosecutions, judgments, sentences, contracts, franchises, debt or other obligations due by the City, rights or causes of action, claims, demands, titles and rights existing on the effective date of this charter shall continue unaffected. All sentences for punishment for ordinance violations or for crime shall be executed according to their terms. 
B.  All actions, ordinances, and administrative rules and regulations of the City in force prior to the effective date of this charter shall, insofar as they are not inconsistent with this charter, remain in full force and effect until amended or repealed by the council or until they expire by their own limitation. 
Section 8-03. - Special Districts. 
    Any special district heretofore established and existing in the City shall continue to exist to effectuate the purpose for which it was created, to complete any works begun or authorized therein, to pay the debts of the district and to levy taxes and other charges as may have been or may be legally authorized in the district. 
Section 8-04. - Special Legislative Acts. 
    All special legislative acts pertaining to the City, insofar as they are in conflict with the provisions of this charter, shall henceforth be inoperative and of no effect. 
Section 8-05. - City Retirement Systems. 
    No pension and retirement system of the City presently in existence shall be affected in any way by this charter. All such pension and retirement systems shall remain in full force and effect and shall be carried out and regulated in accordance with applicable laws and procedures. 
Section 8-06. - City of Monroe School Board Not Affected. 
    Nothing in this home rule charter shall affect in any way the rights, powers, and duties of the City of Monroe School Board. 
Section 8-07. - Declaration of Intent. 
    This charter shall be liberally construed in aid of its declared intent which is to establish for the people of the City effective home rule free from legislative interference as to the structure and organization of its local government, and with the power and authority to manage its local affairs, all as contemplated and intended by the provisions of Article VI, Sections 5 and 6 of the constitution. 
Section 8-08. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this charter is declared invalid for any reason, or the application thereof to any person or circumstances held invalid, said provision shall not affect the validity of this entire charter or any other provision thereof, and the remainder of this charter and the applicability of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. 
Section 8-09. - Schedule of Transition. 
    The provisions of this charter pertaining to the election of City officials created hereunder shall become effective on the date this charter is adopted. The remaining provisions of this charter shall become effective on the date of taking of office of the newly elected officials provided for by this charter, such date being established in Section 8-10 (Election of Officials). 
Section 8-10. - Election of Officials. 
A.  Municipal elections for the officials provided for by this charter shall be held on the dates established by general state law applicable to the City. Persons elected under the provisions of this charter shall take office at noon on the first Monday in July next following their election. 
B.  All municipal officers elected under provisions of law applicable to the City prior to the adoption of this home rule charter shall continue to hold their offices and discharge the duties thereof until the officials elected under the provisions of this charter have taken office. 
Section 8-11. - Charter Ballot. 
    The ballot form for the referendum on this charter shall be: 
 "Shall the home rule charter and plan of government for the City of Monroe, prepared and submitted by the duly appointed Charter Commission according to Article VI, Section 5 of the Constitution of Louisiana and other applicable law, be adopted?" ? YES 
? NO  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
The Home Rule Charter as set out in this volume became effective July 7, 1980. The following table shows the disposition of amendments to the Charter. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Referendum 
Date 
(if any)  Section 
Disposition 7494  3- 8-83 8-01 7582  9-13-83 8-01 9462  8-23-94 11- 8-94       Added 2-19 10,300  3-25-03 3-08A. 10,301  3-25-03 3-08B. 10,312  5-27-03 2-05A. 11,367  2-26-13 11-26-13       Added 2.01G. 3.03C.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated and cited as the "City of Monroe Code." 
(Code 1958,  1-1) 
State Law reference- For method and procedure for adopting a code of ordinances, R.S. 33:1361-33:1363. 
Sec. 1-2. - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city council: 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Monroe" followed it. 
    City clerk or clerk. The clerk of the council. 
    Computation of time. In computing a period of time allowed or prescribed by ordinance, the date of the act, event or default after which the period begins to run is not to be included. The last day of the period is to be included, unless it is a legal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next day which is not a legal holiday. 
    A half-holiday is considered as a legal holiday. A legal holiday is to be included in the computation of a period of time allowed or prescribed, except when: 
(1)  It is expressly excluded; 
(2)  It would otherwise be the last day of the period; or 
(3)  The period is less than seven (7) days. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Code of Civ. Proc. Art. 5089. 
    Council. The words "the city council" or "the council" shall be construed to mean the Council of the City of Monroe. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper and proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or a servant, agent or employee. 
    Mayor. Whenever the word "mayor" is used it shall be construed to mean the mayor of the city. 
    May/Shall. "May" is discretionary; "shall" is mandatory. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Nontechnical and technical words. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word oath shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner or usufructuary of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Parish. The words "the parish" or "this parish" shall mean the Parish of Ouachita. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, clubs, societies, firms, partnerships, and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. The word "property" shall include movable and immovable property as such terms are defined in the Louisiana Civil Code. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall mean any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, and all beaches, canals or other waterways. 
    Residence. The term "residence" shall be construed to mean the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Louisiana. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts, and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant. The words "tenant" or "occupant" applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean seven (7) days. 
    Written or in writing shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1958,  1-2) 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines are amended or reenacted. 
(Code 1958,  1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect: 
(1)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(2)  The administrative ordinances of the city, not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such Code; 
(3)  Any ordinance fixing salaries or compensation of officers or employees of the city; 
(4)  Any appropriation or budget ordinance; 
(5)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(6)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or vacating any such plat; 
(8)  Any ordinance annexing property to the city; 
(9)  Any taxation ordinance of the city not inconsistent herewith; 
(10)  Any ordinance rezoning property or granting special uses; 
(11)  Any ordinance relating to local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(12)  Any ordinance fixing rates, charges or fees for garbage, water or sewer services or any combination of such services; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Cross reference- Mobile sign ordinances saved from repeal,  3-2; alcoholic beverage ordinances saved from repeal,  4-1. 
Sec. 1-5. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(b)  The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance of the city in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
Sec. 1-6. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1958,  1-4) 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
    All ordinances subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code of Ordinances by the city council. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances of Monroe, Louisiana, is hereby amended to read as follows: ..." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
    In the event a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of Monroe, Louisiana, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _______, which said section reads as follows: ..." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(Code 1958,  1-7) 
Charter reference- Adoption of ordinances,  2-12 et seq. 
Cross reference- Amendments to subdivision regulations,  32-25; amendments to zoning ordinance,  37-56 et seq. 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code-Generally. 
(a)  A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _______ to _______" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code); and 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Same-Exclusion of special or temporary ordinances. 
    Ordinances hereafter adopted which are not of a general or permanent nature shall be numbered consecutively, authenticated, published and recorded in the book of ordinances, but shall not be prepared for insertion in this Code, nor be deemed a part hereof. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1958,  1-7) 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with any provision of this Code and where no specific penalty is provided therefore, the violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment within the discretion of the court, together with court costs and expenses. Each day any violation of, or failure to comply with, any provision of this Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1958,  1-8; Ord. No. 10,397, 5-11-04) 
Cross reference- Responsibility for collection of fines,  11-1; authority to parole or release prisoners,  11-3. 
Sec. 1-12. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city council without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1958,  1-5) 
Chapter 1.5 - ADJUDICATED PROPERTIES 

Sec. 1.5-1. - Policy and purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to implement the provisions of R.S. 33:2892.1 through 2892.9 of Subpart G entitled "Tax Adjudications within the City of Monroe" of Part II of Chapter 6 of Title 33 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, providing procedures for the sale of adjudicated properties. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-2. - Applicable within City of Monroe. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any tax adjudication of residential and commercial property within the city limits of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-3. - Procedure for sales initiated by individuals. 
(a)  Whenever any person desires to purchase any unredeemed property adjudicated to the City of Monroe for unpaid taxes due, charges pursuant to R.S. 33:1236 or paving and other local improvement assessments for which the adjudication was made, he shall, with an application to purchase, deposit with the tax collector of the City of Monroe an amount of money sufficient to cover the expenses of the sale, including advertising, taxes due, and other costs associated with said sale as evidence of good faith in the application. 
(b)  The tax collector shall determine the amount of money to be deposited. The tax collector's determination of the amount of monies to be deposited by the purchaser shall be equal to the expenses of the sale, including advertising, taxes due, and other costs associated with such sale as evidence of good faith in the application. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-4. - Notice requirement. 
(a)  Upon deposit made to purchase unredeemed property, the tax collector shall immediately notify the tax debtor by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the tax debtor at his last known addresses. Other interested parties shall be notified by publication in the official journal of Ouachita Parish, that he through the City of Monroe will take actual corporeal possession of the property so adjudicated to the city for five (5) years or more and that ownership will be transferred to a specifically named individual. The advertisement shall publish on two (2) consecutive days. 
(b)  The mailed notice and advertisement shall set forth the legal description of the property; inclusive of the owner of record, if known, the tax lot, block number, and street addresses; and the terms of the sale. Publication and mailing proof shall be obtained by the City of Monroe. 
(c)  When a mortgagee is identified by public recordation, constructive notice by publication shall be supplemented by notice mailed to the mortgagee's last known available address by certified mail, return receipt requested or by personal service. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-5. - Order of seizure and possession. 
(a)  After a lapse of ten (10) days from the last date of publication of notice described in R.S. 33:2892.3 and section 1.5-3 or from the arrival of the return of service card or from the return of the unopened certified letter(s), the tax collector for the City of Monroe shall declare by affidavit that a certain particularly described property is no longer subject to redemption and that five (5) years or more have lapsed since the recording of the proces-verbal in the conveyance records of the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. A certified copy of the proces-verbal shall be attached to the affidavit. 
(b)  The affidavit shall list the last known owners prior to the tax adjudication and any other interested parties. The affidavit shall also state, when applicable, the following: 
(1)  That notice of delinquency had been sent or published on a certain date. 
(2)  That the tax collector provided notice to each person holding a properly recorded mortgage, when applicable. 
(3)  That the advertisement for tax sale occurred on a certain date and was published in the official journal of Ouachita Parish. 
(4)  That the subject property was appraised, advertised, and offered for sale and failed to sell on a certain date. 
(5)  That the subject property was appraised and advertised and offered for sale a second time on a certain date and failed to sell, when applicable. 
(6)  That the proces-verbal was recorded in the conveyance records of the Ouachita Parish clerk of court on a certain date. 
(7)  That a particularly named individual has applied to purchase said property and has deposited the requisite amount to cover the expenses of the sale including advertising, taxes due, and other costs associated with the sale. 
(8)  That notice was provided in accordance with R.S. 33:2892.3 and section 1.5-3. 
(c)  A copy of the proof of publication and the return receipt or a copy of the unopened certified letter(s) shall be submitted with the affidavit when applicable. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-6. - Sale of property adjudicated to municipality; order of possession. 
    Upon the presentation of the affidavit, the attached certified copy of the proces-verbal, the proof of publication to any judge of competent jurisdiction (such jurisdiction to be determined by the value and situs of the immovables therein described and not the amount of the taxes) and when applicable, the return of service card or the unopened certified letter(s), the judge may in chambers grant an ex parte order of possession and transfer of ownership if he is satisfied that all notices and due process of law have been afforded the former owner. The order shall place the City of Monroe in possession of the subject property, thereby authorizing the city to perfect a sale to the named purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-7. - Placing purchaser in possession of property. 
(a)  The granting of the ex parte order of possession and transfer of ownership shall vest in the purchaser an absolute and perfect title to the property conveyed, without any claim thereto by any former owner and free of all mortgages, liens, privileges and encumbrances whatsoever. 
(b)  Any former owner, including heirs, assignees or other successors, shall be subject to the mortgages, liens, privileges and encumbrances if the former owner possessed the property at the time it became burdened. 
(c)  The ex parte order of possession and transfer of ownership shall have effect against third persons from the time it is filed for registry in the office of the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-8. - Commercial property. 
    The sale of unredeemed commercial property shall be for no less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the appraised value, plus advertising costs, taxes owed and other costs associated with said sale on its advertisement. The minimum price in the second advertisement shall not be less than one-third ( 1/3 ) of the appraised value, plus advertising costs, taxes owed, and other cost associated with the sale. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-9. - Failure to purchase. 
    If after the notice of intent to take actual corporeal possession of property and to transfer ownership has been published in the official journal of Ouachita Parish, but before the signing of the ex parte order of possession and transfer of ownership, the applicant or the potential purchaser declines to purchase the subject property, he shall be responsible for paying the cost of advertisement and any other costs associated with the preparation of the sale of the unredeemed property to him. Said property shall revert to the status of adjudicated property and the last known tax debtor shall be liable for the expenses of the sale, including advertising, taxes due, and other costs associated with the sale of the property. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-10. - Donation of adjudicated property. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the unredeemed property adjudicated to the City of Monroe for five (5) years or more that is subject to donation to a nonprofit organization, which is recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) or 501(c)(4) nonprofit organization. 
(Ord. No. 10,624, 9-26-06) 
Sec. 1.5-11. - Transfer of property fee. 
    A one hundred dollar ($100.00) fee is hereby assessed to complete the legal documents necessary for the transfer of property adjudicated to the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 10,961, 9-8-09) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- City court, Ch. 11; civic center, Ch. 11.5; offenses against government,  12-181 et seq.; municipal refuse collection service,  16-16 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - City emblem. 
(a)  The emblem which has been designed by L. G. Balfour Company, having as its central figure and theme a replica of the animated-motion color fountain which is to be located in front of the Monroe Civic Center and being complimented by landscaped areas on either side thereof, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk is hereby adopted as the "Emblem of the City of Monroe". 
(b)  The city emblem shall be used only for purposes of promoting and advertising the city and shall not be reproduced by any person for private profit. No person may reproduce the emblem for any purpose without obtaining prior written permission from the mayor. 
(Code 1958,  2-37-2-39) 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Charter reference- Employees,  7-05 et seq. 
Cross reference- Impersonation of city officers,  12-224; police; Ch. 28. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-26-2-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STATE RETIREMENT SYSTEM 

Sec. 2-41. - Policy and purpose. 
    It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend the provisions of Chapter 18 of Title 33, Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended, providing retirement to eligible officers and employees of the city. 
(Code 1958,  2-15) 
Sec. 2-42. - General authorization to take action. 
    In pursuance of such policy expressed in section 2-41 of this Code, and for such purpose, the officers and employees of the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations, the coverage of eligible officers and employees to be retroactive to June 30, 1956. 
(Code 1958,  2-16) 
Sec. 2-43. - Withholdings from salaries. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of officers and employees for the purposes provided in this division hereof and hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by the board of trustees in accordance with Chapter 18 of Title 33, Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended, and shall be paid over to the board of trustees in such amounts and at such times as are designated by state laws, and regulations of such agency. 
(Code 1958,  2-17) 
Sec. 2-44. - Payment of contributions and assessments. 
    Employee contributions and assessments for administrative expenses shall be paid from amounts appropriated for such purposes to the board of trustees in accordance with applicable state laws and regulations of such board of trustees. 
(Code 1958,  2-18) 
Sec. 2-45. - Records and reports. 
    The city clerk and the director of administration shall maintain such records and submit such reports as may be required by applicable state laws or regulations of the board of trustees. 
(Code 1958,  2-19) 
Secs. 2-46-2-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, ETC.[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Charter reference- Boards and commissions,  7-09. 
Cross reference- City electrical board,  14-41 et seq.; historical preservation commission,  18.5-26 et seq.; regional planning commission,  26-26 et seq.; plumbing board,  27-31 et seq.; board of adjustment,  37-41 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-76. - Residential requirements of fire and police civil service board members. 
    The two (2) members of the Monroe Fire and Police Civil Service Board elected from the Monroe Fire Department and the Monroe Police Department shall be residents of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, for at least five (5) years next preceding their election as provided for Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:2476(B). 
(Ord. No. 7385, 5-11-82) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7385, adopted May 11, 1982, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion as  2-76 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection,  15-1 et seq.; police,  28-1 et seq. 
Secs. 2-77-2-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF MASUR MUSEUM OF ART 

Sec. 2-101. - Created. 
    There is hereby created the board of trustees of the Masur Museum of Art. 
(Code 1958,  2-32) 
Sec. 2-102. - Membership. 
(a)  The membership of the board of trustees of the Masur Museum of Art shall be as follows: 
(1)  The mayor, 
(2)  The president of the city school board, 
(3)  The president of the chamber of commerce, 
(4)  The president of the junior chamber of commerce, 
(5)  The president of the junior charity league, 
(6)  The president of the art center, 
(7)  The president of the little theater, 
(8)  The president of the Northeast Louisiana Archeological Society, 
(9)  The president of Northeast Louisiana State College, 
(10)  Six (6) members at large who are residents of the city. 
(b)  The members at large of the board of trustees shall be appointed by the council. Two (2) of the first six (6) of such members shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years, two (2) for terms of four (4) years, and two (2) for terms of six (6) years. Upon the expiration of any term, successors shall be appointed for terms of six (6) years each. 
(Code 1958,  2-33, 2-34) 
Sec. 2-103. - Organization. 
    The members of the board of trustees of the Masur Museum of Art shall meet as soon as practicable after their appointment for the purpose of organization. At that meeting they shall elect a chairman and such other officers as they may deem necessary or appropriate, and shall adopt such rules and regulations governing the affairs of the board as may be necessary in order for it to carry out the purpose for which it is created. 
(Code 1958,  2-35) 
Sec. 2-104. - Powers and duties. 
    The Board of Trustees of the Masur Museum of Art shall administer, subject to the approval of the mayor, all of the affairs of the Masur Museum of Art. Such general powers and duties shall include, without limitation, the following special powers and duties: 
(a)  To develop a program or plan for the operation of the museum, including the scope of its activities. 
(b)  To make rules and regulations for the operation and use of the museum. 
(c)  To select qualified persons to operate the museum. 
(d)  To prepare and present annually to the mayor of the city a proposed budget for the maintenance and operation of the museum. 
(e)  To foster and encourage an interest in art in the Monroe area. 
(Code 1958,  2-36) 
Secs. 2-105-2-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS ENTERPRISE PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9090,  1-19, adopted September 12, 1989, has been treated as superseding the provisions of former Art. IV, minority business enterprise program. Former Art. IV,  2-115-2-139, derived from Ord. No. 7322, adopted October 13, 1981; Ord. No. 7347, adopted January 19, 1982; and Ord. No. 7932, adopted July 8, 1986. The appendix to Ord. No. 7932, which contains a variety of instructions and forms to be used in all bid solicitations, is not set out herein, but a copy is on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 

Sec. 2-115. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section. 
    Contract means a mutually binding legal relationship or any modification thereof obligating the seller to furnish supplies or services, including construction, and the buyer to pay for them. For purposes of this article a lease is a contract. 
    Contracting authority means by city official or group of officials vested with authority to conduct procurement activities. 
    Contractor means one who participates, through a contract or subcontract, in any program covered by this article and includes leases. 
    Joint venture means an association of two (2) or more businesses to carry out a single business enterprise for profit for which purpose they combine their property, capital, efforts, skills and knowledge. 
    Small business concern means a small business as defined pursuant to Section 3 of the Small Business Act and relevant regulations promulgated pursuant thereto; except that a small business concern shall not include any concern or group of concerns controlled by the same socially and economically disadvantaged individual or individuals which have annual average gross receipts in excess of fourteen million dollars ($14,000,000) over a previous three-year period. The secretary of department of transportation shall adjust this figure from time to time for inflation. 
    Small and disadvantaged business (DBE) means a small business concern which is at least fifty-one (51) per cent owned by one or more socially or economically disadvantaged individuals, or, in the case of any publicly owned business, at least fifty-one (51) per cent of the stock of which is owned by one or more socially and economically disadvantaged individuals and whose management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more of the socially and economically disadvantaged individuals who own it. 
    Socially and economically disadvantaged individuals means those individuals who are citizens of the United States (or lawfully admitted permanent residents) and who are women, Black Americans, Hispanic Americans, native Americans, Asian-Pacific Americans, or Asian-Indian Americans, and any other minorities or individuals found to be disadvantaged by the Small Business Administration pursuant to Section 8(a) of the Small Business Act, provided the city shall make a rebuttable presumption (subject to challenge by a third party in accordance with procedures contained elsewhere herein) that individuals in the following groups are socially and economically disadvantaged: 
(1)  "Women." 
(2)  "Black Americans" which includes persons having origins in any of the Black racial groups of Africa. 
(3)  "Hispanic Americans" which includes persons of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Central or South American, or other Spanish or Portuguese culture or origin regardless of race. 
(4)  "Native Americans" which includes persons who are American Indians, Eskimos, Aleuts, or native Hawaiians. 
(5)  "Asian-Pacific Americans" which includes persons whose origins are from Japan, China, Taiwan, Korea, Vietnam, Laos, Cambodia, the Phillipines, Samoa, Guam, the United States Territories of the Pacific, and Northern Marianas. 
(6)  "Asian-Indian Americans" which includes persons whose origins are from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri-Lanka. 
The City of Monroe may determine on a case-by-case basis, that individuals who are not a member of one of the above groups are socially and economically disadvantaged. The City of Monroe may accept as socially and economically disadvantaged any person who has been so certified by the Small Business Administration under its 8(a) program provided, however, that it shall be the responsibility of the person to provide the city acceptable evidence of current 8(a) certification, and provided that the city may require and ask for additional information about the person and his/her business operations. 
    Women-owned business (WBE) means a small business concern which (a) is at least fifty-one (51) per cent owned by one or more women, or in the case of any publicly owned business, at least fifty-one (51) per cent of the stock is owned by one or more women; and (b) whose management and daily business operations are controlled by one or more women who own it. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  4, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-116. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the disadvantaged business enterprise program is to provide guidance in the implementation of the disadvantaged business enterprise plan of the City of Monroe so as to increase the participation of DBE businesses in procurement activities awarded by the city pursuant to DOT-assisted programs. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  1, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-117. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of the disadvantaged business enterprise program is to: 
(1)  Coordinate the implementation of a comprehensive DBE program. 
(2)  Design steps to overcome barriers to increase utilization of DBEs. 
(3)  Provide guidance to personnel in all departments vested with authority to advertise bids and to conduct related procurement activities which may involve DBE businesses. 
(4)  Establish goal-setting methods and reporting systems for DBE programs in each affected department. 
(5)  Ensure a concerted effort to attain projected annual goals for DBE program. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  2, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-118. - Policy statement. 
    It is the policy of the City of Monroe, in compliance with Title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, Part 23, as amended, issued by the United States Department of Transportation to establish procedures by which DBEs will have maximum opportunity to participate in DOT-assisted contracts. Title 49, as amended, requires that the City of Monroe, its bidders and its contractors utilize small and disadvantaged and women-owned businesses to the maximum extent feasible in all phases of its procurement practices. This is done by providing an equal opportunity for DBEs/WBEs identifying and assisting in DBE/WBE certification for maximum contract participation in the areas of construction, professional services, equipment and supplies, and generally fulfilling whatever other procurement requirements the city may have with respect to DOT-assisted contracts. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  3, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-119. - Scope. 
    This procedure applies to all City of Monroe departments, divisions and organizations conducting any type of procurement activity. Women are a protected class, not a minority, although it is recognized that the term "small and disadvantaged business enterprise" refers to both minorities and females. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  5, 6, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-120. - Procedures. 
    To the extent legally practicable, the City of Monroe will ensure that all contractors participating in federally funded or assisted contracts of the city comply with applicable federal prevailing wage laws and that all contractors providing services, materials or supplies to the city provide employment opportunities to minorities and females equal to those provided to all other groups or individuals. Such contractors will also be expected to take positive steps toward the utilization of DBEs and WBEs to the maximum extent feasible, consistent with sound procurement principles and applicable law. 
    Upon request, the city will provide DBEs/WBEs with information on the preparation of bid specifications, fulfillment of general requirements, job performance requirements and procurement opportunities and prerequisites for bidding on contracts. The City of Monroe encourages joint ventures among DBEs/WBEs and between majority and minority firms bidding for city contracts. 
    The City of Monroe will use its best efforts to ensure that DBEs and WBEs are informed of current and future procurement activities through utilization of newspapers (including minority-owned newspapers), local minority chambers of commerce and other DBE/WBE assistance organizations as well as through direct contact with DBE/WBE entrepreneurs. 
    As evidence of its intent to vigorously pursue the object of this DBE program, the city has designed a disadvantaged business enterprise coordinator to operate the DBE office by administering and monitoring the city's DBE program. Each affected city department will designate a liaison to have overall responsibility for promotion of disadvantaged business/women business enterprise in his/her department. This policy statement shall be circulated throughout the city's organization and to minorities, females and the nonminority community. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  7, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-121. - Responsibilities. 
(a)  The general responsibility for administration of the DBE program rests with the mayor. 
(b)  The director of planning and urban development under the direction of the mayor is responsible for the administration, implementation and review of these procedures. 
(c)  The disadvantaged business enterprise office is responsible for meeting with contractors and community groups, participation in conferences, provisions of management and technical assistance, briefing of managers and supervisors, preparation of administrative directives of DBE program operations and coordination of DBE task force. 
(d)  The DBE task force, appointed by the mayor, will serve as an advisory council to assist in DBE policy development. This task force will be made up of eleven (11) persons representing local DBE/WBE businesses, economic development organizations, chamber of commerce representatives, construction industry, national associations, and purchasing officials from private industry, with majority of the task force being selected from DBE/WBE businesses. The task force will review the programs and similar groups in other cities, provide city officials with information and policy decisions made in their organization, and subsequently establish a disadvantaged/women business enterprise purchasing council with the city. 
(e)  The purchasing officials within the office of the chief administrative office (CAO) will maintain a liaison function with the DBE coordinator and other officials responsible for monitoring departmental activities. 
(f)  The DBE coordinator will be responsible for management of the DBE program, identification of priority areas for DBEs/WBEs efforts, identifying goals and maintaining specific information on DBEs/WBEs as to capabilities, areas of need and potential development, assist in arranging joint ventures and in the development of procedures to facilitate maximum utilization of small and disadvantaged women businesses. The DBE coordinator will also participate in seminars, and coordinate with procurement and legal procedures. 
(g)  The purchasing agent is responsible for day-to-day operations through direct utilization of his staff to ensure conformance with DBE policies and procedures. 
(h)  The head of the department will act as or appoint a liaison to represent that department's DBE/WBE activity. 
(i)  A liaison appointed from each department knowledgeable in contracting/procurement activities will be responsible for ensuring departmental participation in the DBE program. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  8, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-122. - Disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) liaison officer. 
    The City of Monroe has designated the director of planning and urban development as disadvantaged business enterprise coordinator to serve as the city's liaison officer for the disadvantaged business enterprise program. 
    The coordinator reports directly to the mayor. The day-to-day implementation of the DBE program shall be assigned to the EEO/compliance department. This department will be responsible for: 
(1)  Disseminating information on available business opportunities so that DBEs/WBEs are provided an equitable opportunity to bid on city contracts. 
(2)  Carrying out technical assistance to DBEs/WBEs through coordination with other minority assistance programs such as NIRAL, Urban League, United Business Alliance, Minority Contractors' Association, and other organizations which provide assistance in areas of procurement, loan packaging, management services and technical assistance, and construction contractors' assistance. 
(3)  Maintaining and updating a directory of disadvantaged and women-owned business enterprises. 
(4)  Monitoring and reporting on affected city departments' efforts at meeting DBE goals. 
(5)  Performing whatever other tasks necessary to assure the effectiveness of the city's DBE program. 
(6)  Providing technical assistance to bid review committees to determine DBE/WBE utilization for DOT-assisted contract awards. 
The support staff for the DBE coordinator will be the purchasing agent, clerk typist II, the city attorney, the city engineer and the equal opportunity/compliance officer. All department heads will serve, or designate a representative to serve as DBE liaison for their departments. These individuals will report to the coordinator at least on a quarterly basis on the progress made toward achieving the DBE goals. 
(Ord. No. 9090  II, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-123. - Procedure to ensure DBEs/WBEs equitable opportunity to compete for contracts and subcontracts. 
    The City of Monroe shall develop and use affirmative action techniques to facilitate DBE/WBE participation in procurement activities. These techniques shall include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Arranging solicitations, time for the presentation of bids, quantities, specifications and delivery schedules so as to facilitate the participating DBEs and WBEs. 
(2)  Providing technical assistance to DBEs and WBEs in overcoming barriers such as the inability to obtain bonding or financing. 
(3)  The DBE coordinator will verify that all bid packages include the DBE goal statement, provisions for DBE/WBE participation, contractor assurance. Listing of prospective state/national contractors will also be included. Information and communication programs on contracting procedures and specific contracting opportunities will be available, with such programs being bilingual where appropriate. 
(4)  A bid review committee comprised of the DBE coordinator, the city engineer and an attorney of the city's legal department shall be established to review all phases of the bid process, including, but not limited to, the evaluation of good faith efforts, and the consideration and award of each contract under this DBE program. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  III, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-124. - Use of minority and women-owned banks. 
    There are no minority or women-owned banks in the Monroe area. However, there is a minority bank in the planning stage, presently, and should this materialize, the city will thoroughly investigate the full extent of services offered and make the greatest feasible use of these banks. Prime contractors will also be encouraged to use these banks. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  IV, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-125. - Disadvantaged business enterprise (DBE) directory. 
    The City of Monroe maintains a directory to facilitate identifying DBEs and WBEs with capabilities relevant to general contracting requirements and to particular solicitations. The directory is available even though all DBEs/WBEs are not certified. It is available to bidders and proposers to assist in their efforts to meet the DBE/WBE requirements. Included are specific firms which the department of transportation, City of Monroe, Louisiana, minority business registry, or the small business administration have determined to be eligible DBEs and WBEs. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  V, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-126. - DBE/WBE eligibility and joint ventures involving DBEs and WBEs. 
    To ensure that the DBE program only benefits firms owned and controlled by disadvantaged individuals or women, the City of Monroe shall certify the eligibility of DBEs and WBEs and joint ventures involving DBEs and WBEs that are named by competitors by completing the forms in Attachment A and/or B. 
    The city shall require prime contractors to make "good faith efforts" to replace a DBE or WBE contractor that is unable to perform successfully with another DBE or WBE. The city shall reserve the right to approve all substitutions of subcontractor before bid opening and during contract performance, in order to ensure the substitute firms are eligible DBEs or WBEs. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  VI, 9-12-89) 
Editor's note- Attachments and schedules are included in the appendix which was attached to Ord. No. 9090, but not included herein. See the editor's note to Art. IV of this chapter. 
Sec. 2-127. - Percentage goal. 
(a)  Overall goal. The overall goal for the City of Monroe is twelve (12) per cent for DBE participation. These goals relate to the involvement of DBEs/WBEs in all DOT-assisted contracts and purchases made by the City of Monroe. In no case shall this goal constitute a fixed quota. The following factors were considered in arriving at this goal: The overall goal shall be reviewed on an annual basis. The review process shall analyze projected versus actual DBE/WBE participation during the previous fiscal year. Whatever revisions considered necessary shall be recommended by the task force of the city to the city council who shall adopt said recommendations or set said goal. Said goal shall be submitted to the department of transportation for approval. 
(b)  Contract goal. Contract goal will be set on each specific prime contract with subcontracting possibilities in accord with the provisions of 49 CFR, 23.45(g) which the bidder or proposer must meet or exceed or demonstrate that it made good efforts to meet but could not meet. These efforts will be reviewed by a DBE coordinator or on an individual basis. 
(c)  Geographic area. The City of Monroe and contractors shall, at a minimum, seek DBEs and WBEs in the same geographic area in which they seek contractors or subcontractors generally for a given solicitation. If the goal cannot be met by using DBEs and WBEs from this geographic area, the city and contractors shall expand the search to a reasonably wider geographic area. 
(d)  Publication of goal. When the DBE goal is submitted to the department of transportation for approval, it will also be published. The publication will inform the public that the goal and a description of how it is selected will be available for inspection during normal business hours at city hall for thirty (30) days from the date of notice, and comments on the goal will be accepted for forty-five (45) days from the date of publication of this notice. The notice will be published in general circulation media, available minority focus media, and trade association publications and will state that the comments are for informational purposes only. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  VII, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-128. - Procedures to require that DBEs/WBEs be identified by name by competitors for contract prior to award of contract. 
(a)  All bidders/proposers will be required to provide an assurance of meeting the DBE goal at the time of bid opening. Schedule C will be submitted within a reasonable allotted time prior to contract award, to be determined by the DBE liaison officer. Schedule C provides: 
(1)  The names and addresses of DBE and/or WBE subcontractors; 
(2)  A description of the work each is to perform; and 
(3)  The dollar value of the participation by each named DBE and/or WBE firm. 
(b)  Agreements between a bidder/proposer and/or DBE/WBE in which the DBE/WBE promises not to provide subcontracting quotations to other bidders/proposers are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  VIII, 9-12-89) 
Editor's note- Attachments and schedules are included in the appendix which was attached to Ord. No. 9090, but not included herein. See the editor's note to Art. IV of this chapter. 
Sec. 2-129. - Good faith efforts. 
    If the DBE/WBE participation submitted in response to section 2-128 does not meet the DBE contract goal, the apparent successful competitor shall satisfy the recipient that the competitor has made good faith efforts to meet the goal. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  IX, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-130. - Selection criteria to ensure that prime contracts are awarded to competitors that meet DBE goals. 
    To ensure that prime contracts are awarded to competitors who meet DBE goals, the selection criteria, which is outlined in Attachment 3 will be followed. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  X, 9-12-89) 
Editor's note- Attachments and schedules are included in the appendix which was attached to Ord. No. 9090, but not included herein. See the editor's note to Art. IV of this chapter. 
Sec. 2-131. - Compliance of subrecipients, contractors and subcontractors to the DBE requirements. 
    Any time that the City of Monroe has any subrecipients, they all must comply with the DBE requirements outlined in this program. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XI, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-132. - DBE set-asides pursuant to 49 CFR 23. 
    As used in 49 CFR 23, the term "Set-Aside" refers to an arrangement in which a particular contract is reserved for competition solely among a selected category of bidders (example, disadvantaged business/women's business enterprises). 
    It is the opinion of the City of Monroe that the regulations (49 CFR 23) do not require the use of set-asides on any particular contract but that the use of set-asides are optional and can be used on contracts as a means of meeting DBE goals. 
    The City of Monroe does not view set-asides as currently necessary to meet its DBE goal and elects to seek to attain such goal through awards of prime contracts to DBE/WBE firms by means of contract goal processes elsewhere detailed in this program. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XII, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-133. - DBE requirements for transit vehicle manufacturers. 
    Transit vehicle manufacturers who wish to bid on UMTA-assisted transit vehicle procurement contracts shall have a UMTA-approved DBE program. Manufacturers will be required by the City of Monroe to certify that they have such program as a condition for bidding on UMTA-assisted contracts. Bid invitations issued for UMTA-assisted transit vehicles shall include the provisions listed below: 
(1)  Policy. It is the policy of the department of transportation that small and disadvantaged business and women's business enterprises as defined in 49 CFR, Part 23, as amended, shall have the maximum opportunity to participate in the performance of contracts financed in whole or in part with DOT financial assistance under this agreement. Consequently, the DBE requirements of 49 CFR, Part 23, as amended, apply to this agreement. 
(2)  DBE obligation. The contractor agrees to ensure that small and disadvantaged business enterprises as defined in 49 CFR, Part 23, as amended, have the maximum opportunity to participate in the performance of DOT-assisted contracts and subcontracts. The contractors shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in the awarding and performance of DOT-assisted contracts. 
(3)  Contractor obligation. Contractors and subcontractors failing to carry out the above requirements are to be advised that failure to meet the provisions in (a) and (b) above shall constitute a breach of contract. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XIII, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-134. - Policy concerning leases. 
    The following action shall be taken concerning leases: 
(1)  The City of Monroe shall not exclude DBEs or WBEs from participation in business opportunities by entering into long-term exclusive agreements with non-DBEs for the operation of major transportation-related activities or major activities for the provision of goods and services to other city facilities. 
(2)  Such contracting shall be included in the city's overall goal. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XIV, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-135. - Maintenance of records and reports. 
(a)  In order to monitor the progress of its DBE program, the city shall maintain a record-keeping system which will identify and assess DBE/WBE contract awards, prime contractors' progress in achieving DBE affirmative action efforts. 
(b)  Specially, the city shall maintain records showing: 
(1)  Procedures which have been adopted to comply with the requirements of the article. 
(2)  Awards of DBEs/WBEs. These awards shall be measured against projected DBE/WBE awards and/or goals. To assist in this effort, the city shall obtain regular reports from prime contractors on their progress in meeting contractural DBE/WBE obligations. 
(3)  Specific efforts to identify and award contracts to DBEs/WBEs. 
(c)  Records shall be available upon the request of an authorized officer or employee of the city and appropriate governmental agency and upon the request of members of the public. 
(d)  The city shall submit reports confirming in frequency and format the existing contract-reporting requirements of the applicable department element. Where no such contract-reporting requirements exist, DBE reports shall be submitted quarterly. These reports shall include as a minimum: 
(1)  The number of contracts awarded to DBEs/WBEs; 
(2)  A description of the general categories of contracts awarded to DBEs/WBEs; 
(3)  The dollar value of contracts awarded to DBEs/WBEs; 
(4)  The percentage of the dollar value of all contracts awarded during this period which were awarded to DBEs/WBEs; and 
(5)  An indication to what extent the percentage met or exceeded the goal specified in the application. 
(e)  The records and reports shall provide information relating to firms owned and controlled by disadvantaged persons separately from information relating to firms owned and controlled by women. If the records and reports include SBA 8(a) contractors that are not disadvantaged or women, information concerning these contractors shall also be recorded and reported separately. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XV, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-136. - DBE Reporting forms. 
(a)  Where prime contractors or suppliers have indicated DBE/WBE participation at a particular rate and for certain tasks or suppliers, actual work performed or supplies provided by the DBEs/WBEs will be reported using the DBE report form and submitted with request for payment. These report forms will be reviewed by the minority business enterprise coordinator subsequent to completion of the project to assess needs for modifications in the contracting procedure which will increase DBE/WBE participation. 
(b)  The city's purchasing agent will prepare a listing indicating goods and services purchased on a quarterly basis. The list will be reviewed by the DBE coordinator to assist in identifying areas where qualified DBEs/WBEs should be considered and to ensure they are properly notified of purchasing activities. 
(c)  Departments will be required to submit a quarterly report indicating dollar ($) amounts and percentage (%) of DBE/WBE utilization in all procurement activities as well as details on anticipated DBE/WBE participation for the following year. 
(d)  DBE participation reports will be compiled by the DBE coordinator to formulate an overall quarterly report of submission to the mayor and of the City of Monroe and in turn to any federal agency requiring this information. 
(e)  The mayor of the City of Monroe will receive a monthly status report from the DBE coordinator outlining potential problem areas, progress made in achieving the goals of the program, and indications of any policy decisions which may be needed. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XVI, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-137. - Communications programs. 
    The City of Monroe will utilize the following methods of communicating more effectively with interested businesses who desire to participate in the DBE program. These methods will seek to improve the firm compliance with city procedures, particularly the bid process. 
(1)  In order to assist minority and nonminority contractors in meeting the requirements of the bid process, pre-bid conferences will be held where practical, for the purpose of explaining DBE/WBE requirements and for identifying minority and nonminority contractors showing an interest in contracting with the city. 
(2)  Joint venture and subcontractural arrangements between minority and nonminority businesses will be encouraged at these pre-bid conferences. In order that DBEs/WBEs will have sufficient time to review the documents and prepare bids, bidding documents will be made available to minority economic development groups and trade associations in a timely manner at no cost. 
(3)  Additionally, minority economic development groups and social agencies will be contacted for assistance in locating DBEs/WBEs with the expertise or products sought by the City of Monroe. 
(4)  The city will advertise bid requests for proposals and invitations for bids in a minority-owned newspaper in the Monroe area. 
(5)  A "bidder's handbook," which contains valuable information for use by nonminority businesses, will increase the awareness of those interested businesses to the city's procedure and its processes. 
(6)  The City of Monroe will sponsor seminars and workshops designed to acquaint DBEs/WBEs with the procurement personnel and with the local companies; and seminars designed to provide DBEs/WBEs with information about how to do businesses with organizations including the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XVII, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-138. - Counting participation toward meeting DBE goal. 
    DBE/WBE participation shall be counted toward meeting goals set in accordance with DOT's DBE regulations at 49 CFR, Part 23 and the City of Monroe's program as follows: 
(1)  Once a firm is determined to be an eligible DBE or WBE in accordance with the provisions specified in this program, the total dollar value of the contract awarded is counted toward the applicable goal. 
(2)  The total dollar value of a contract to a firm owned and controlled by both disadvantaged males and nondisadvantaged females is counted toward the goal for DBEs, in proportion to the percentage of ownership and control of each group in the business. The total dollar value of a contract with a firm owned and controlled by disadvantaged women is counted toward the DBE goal. 
(3)  The City of Monroe or contractor employing a DBE or WBE firm may count toward its goal a portion of the total dollar value of a contract with a joint venture eligible under the DBE/WBE eligibility criteria specified herein equal to the percentage of the ownership and control of the DBE or WBE partner in the joint venture. 
(4)  The city or a contractor will count toward its goal only expenditures to DBEs or WBEs that perform a commercially useful function in the work of a contract. A DBE or WBE is considered to perform a commercially useful function when it is responsible for execution of a distinct element of the work of a contract and carrying out its responsibilities by actually performing, managing and supervising the work involved. To determine whether a DBE/WBE is performing a commercially useful function, the city or a contractor shall evaluate the amount of work subcontracted, industry practices and other relevant factors. 
(5)  Consistent with the normal industry practices, a DBE or WBE may enter into subcontracts. If a DBE or WBE contractor subcontracts a significantly greater portion of the work of the contract than would be expected on the basis of normal industry practices, the DBE/WBE shall be presumed not to be performing a commercially useful function. The DBE/WBE may present evidence to rebut this presumption as final, subject to review by the department of transportation in instances of DOT-assisted contracts. 
(6)  The city or a contractor may count toward its DBE goal expenditures for materials and supplies obtained from DBE/WBE suppliers and manufacturers provided that the DBEs/WBEs assume the actual and contractural responsibility for the provision of the materials and supplies. The city or a contractor may count its entire expenditure to a DBE/WBE manufacturer (i.e., a supplier that produces goods from raw material or substantially alters them before resale). The city will count sixty (60) per cent of its expenditures to DBE/WBE suppliers that are not manufacturers, provided that such suppliers perform a commercially useful function in the supply process. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XVIII, 9-12-89) 
Sec. 2-139. - Grievance procedure. 
(a)  Types of complaints. In order to assure the effectiveness of this procedure, an individual involved in city procurement activities may file a complaint regarding: 
(1)  Any component of the program which they feel has been administered in a discriminatory manner; 
(2)  Failure of prime contractors to cooperate with DBE/WBE businesses; 
(3)  Failure of DBE/WBE subcontractors to fulfill their contract commitments; and 
(4)  Any other aspect of the contracting procedure which might limit the implementation of the DBE program. 
(b)  Filing date. The complaint shall be filed in writing or communicated directly to the DBE coordinator within thirty (30) days from the date of an alleged violation unless good cause for delay is shown. Good cause to be determined by the DBE coordinator. 
(c)  Complaint processing. When complaints are filed with the DBE program coordinator, the CAO, the department involved, the respondent and the complainant will be notified within ten (10) days if the complaint is to be investigated. The complainant's specific allegations and any data needed are identified in a written communication to the respondent. Complaints filed against the DBE coordinator will be handled pursuant to these procedures by another individual appointed by the mayor. 
(d)  Intimidation. No recipient, contractor or other person shall intimidate, threaten or discriminate against an individual who files a complaint. All files maintained on complaints will be kept confidential whenever possible. 
(e)  Follow-up. Those responsible for initiating any remedial action as a result of a complaint will be required to ensure actions are taken within thirty (30) days from the date findings are issued. 
(f)  Quarterly reports. The DBE program coordinator will submit a quarterly report on the status of complaint activities to the mayor of the City of Monroe, who in turn will submit a report to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 9090,  XIX, 9-12-89) 
Secs. 2-140-2-148. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SMALL BUSINESS PROCUREMENT PROGRAM[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7330, adopted Nov. 24, 1981, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of  I-VII as Ch. 2, art. V,  2-149-2-156, was at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Authority for procurement by municipalities from small businesses, R.S. 38:2233. 

Sec. 2-149. - Statement of policy. 
(a)  It is the policy of the city to involve small businesses, small businesses owned and operated by socially or economically disadvantaged persons, and small businesses owned and operated by women in all phases of procurement activities and to afford them the maximum feasible opportunities in the procurement of goods and services, excluding construction, by the city. 
(b)  In order to accomplish this objective, it is the intent of the city to implement a small business procurement program, pursuant to R.S. 38:2233, which designates and sets aside for awarding to small businesses, small businesses owned and operated by socially or economically disadvantaged persons and small businesses owned and operated by women an amount not to exceed ten (10) per cent of the value of the anticipated total city procurements of goods and services, excluding construction, for each prospective fiscal year. This program shall commence with the fiscal year 1982-1983 of the city. The small business set-aside shall be designated and appropriated at the council meeting during which the general operating budget is adopted each fiscal year thereafter. 
(c)  The city and its respective departments, divisions and offices shall urge prime contractors engaged in contractual obligations with the city to seek and use the services of small businesses, small businesses owned and operated by socially or economically disadvantaged persons, and small businesses owned by women to perform subcontractual services and as authorized dealers under the awarded city contracts. 
(d)  The city shall not prohibit or discourage small business from seeking procurement awards through the normal solicitation and bidding processes, but shall encourage all small business to utilize the normal bidding process. 
(Ord. No. 7330, Intro. , 11-24-81) 
Sec. 2-150. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this program and its procedures for implementation, the following definitions shall be employed: 
(a)  Small business means a business entity organized for profit, including an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, association or cooperative, which is domiciled in and has its principal place of business in the City of Monroe or Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, and which is not either dominant in its field of operation or an affiliate or subsidiary of a business dominant in its field of operation. 
(b)  Dominant in its field of operation means exercising a controlling or major influence in a business activity in which a number of businesses are engaged. In determining if a business is dominant, the following criteria, among others, shall be considered: Number of employees; volume of business; financial resources; competitive status or position; ownership or control of materials, processes, patents, license agreements and facilities; sales territory; and nature of business activity. The following businesses shall be deemed dominant in their field of operation: 
(1)  Manufacturing businesses which employ more than twenty (20) persons and have in the preceding three (3) fiscal years exceeded a total of three (3) million dollars ($3,000,000.00) in gross receipts. 
(2)  Nonmanufacturing businesses which employ more than ten (10) persons and have in the preceding three (3) fiscal years exceeded a total of three (3) million dollars ($3,000,000.00) in gross receipts. 
(c)  Affiliate or subsidiary of a business dominant in its field of operation means a business which is at least twenty (20) per cent owned by a business dominant in that field of operation or by partners, officers, directors, majority shareholders, or their equivalent of a business dominant in that field of operation. 
(d)  Socially or economically disadvantaged person means a person who has been deprived of the opportunity to develop and maintain a competitive position in the economy because of social or economic disadvantage. This disadvantage may arise from cultural, social or economic circumstances or background or physical location. 
(e)  Women-owned business means a business that is at least fifty-one (51) per cent owned by a woman or women who also control and operate it. "Control" in this context means exercising the power to make policy decisions. "Operate" in this context means being actively involved in the day-to-day management. In determining whether a business is fifty-one (51) per cent owned by a woman or women shall not be diminished because she is part of a community property regime. 
(Ord. No. 7330,  I, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 2-151. - Listing of anticipated goods and services. 
    All departments, divisions and offices of the city shall identify all anticipated goods and services purchased by their respective departments, divisions and/or offices that are eligible for inclusion in the set-aside program. The purchasing office shall collect said information and compile the same into a comprehensive listing identifying said goods and services, showing the quantities of each item purchased during the preceding year. 
(Ord. No. 7330,  II, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 2-152. - Certification of small businesses. 
(a)  The program and urban development department (contract administrators) shall assume the responsibility of identifying and certifying small business, small business owned and operated by socially or economically disadvantaged persons, and small businesses owned and operated by women eligible for this program. 
(b)  An informational data sheet form will be prepared and made available to all interested businesses to be used for identification and certification purposes. This form will provide for all of the information necessary to identify a business as being eligible for this program and will provide for self-certification in affidavit form. It shall also provide for a listing or catalog of the goods and services the business can provide, along with the business's capabilities and experience. 
(c)  The program and urban development contract administrators shall have the authority to verify the eligibility of any business who applies for the program. In the event of disqualification or decertification, the business so disqualified or decertified may appeal to the city council, by written notice to the clerk of the council. 
(d)  The program and urban development contract administrators shall, on a continuing basis, revise and update the listing and profiles of prequalified and eligible small businesses, small businesses owned and operated by social and economically disadvantaged persons, and small businesses owned and operated by women. 
(Ord. No. 7330,  III, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 2-153. - Small business procurement list. 
(a)  In order to provide for the maximum utilization of small businesses, small businesses owned and operated by socially or economically disadvantaged persons, and small businesses owned by women, the department of administration and the purchasing office shall determine what commodities and services anticipated to be procured by the city can be feasibly procured from these businesses. This task will involve using the information generated in sections 2-151 and 2-152 to match goods and services with prospective vendors. 
(b)  Upon completion of this process, the director of administration and the purchasing office shall prepare recommendations regarding purchases that should be procured from small businesses under this program and direct the respective departments of the city to proceed with the implementation of this program. 
(c)  The respective departments, divisions and offices of the city shall refer to the small business procurement listing of eligible small businesses and their capabilities for identifying prospective vendors for the solicitation of goods and services. 
(Ord. No. 7330,  IV, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 2-154. - Procurement through direct solicitation. 
    Individual procurements made under this program from small businesses, small businesses owned and operated by socially or economically disadvantaged persons, and small businesses owned and operated by women which are less than the amount required to be advertised and bid under the provisions of the Public Bid Law (R.S. 38:2212) shall be made by direct solicitation; and the city purchase requisition, purchase order, invoice and delivery form for such eligible procurements shall contain the notation "SBP" at the side of each item price and at the side of the total amount of said procurement. 
(Ord. No. 7330,  V, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 2-155. - Procurements through bid process. 
    In the event that the procurement sought under this program for goods or services is in an amount which must be advertised and bid under the provisions of the Public Bid Law (R.S. 38:2212), the following procedure shall be adhered to: 
(1)  The procuring department shall notify small businesses, small businesses owned and operated by socially or economically disadvantaged persons, and small businesses owned and operated by women that a contract is being let out for bid. In this notice, the type of contract, whom to see for bid documents, the time of the opening and the contract dates should be given. By employing this method in addition to the normal solicitation procedures, a good response should be assured to the invitation to bid and possibly increase the competitiveness of bidding. 
(2)  The normal solicitation procedures for advertising and bidding under the Public Bid Law (R.S. 38:2211, et seq.) will be followed, except that when advertising set-aside contracts the advertisement shall be headed or entitled "Small Business Set-Aside." This notice should appear as the heading and not in the main body of the notice. 
(3)  Bid documents or specifications given to prospective bidders for small business set-aside shall clearly state that all bids must identify the bidder as an eligible small business under the program and that the eligibility shall be subject to verification. 
(4)  In the event all bids are rejected due to economic feasibility or other budget requirements or in the event no bids are received, the procurement involved shall be removed from the program, without detriment to the program, and shall be processed through normal solicitation procedures or rebid under the program, whichever is more feasible. 
(Ord. No. 7330,  VI, 11-24-81) 
Sec. 2-156. - Reports. 
(a)  Each department shall be responsible for filing a monitoring report with the purchasing office on a quarterly basis within five (5) days of the quarter for all goods and materials purchased, except for purchases made through "country store." The department of administration will include purchases made to stock the "country store" in its departmental quarterly report. The report shall be made in conformance with the format in exhibit 1. 
(b)  The purchasing office shall compile the information from the departmental quarterly reports into a summary report and submit the summary report to the city council within fifteen (15) days of the quarter. This summary report shall be made in conformance with the format in exhibit 2. 
(Ord. No. 7330,  VII, 11-24-81) 
Editor's note- Exhibits 1 and 2, referred to in this section, are not printed herein, but are on file and available for inspection in the offices of the city. 
Chapter 3 - ADVERTISING AND SIGNS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Advertising from aircraft,  7-30; buildings, Ch. 9; signs in Monroe Air-Industrial Park,  22-23; permit for amplifier or loudspeaker,  23-1; sound trucks,  23-2; advertising on limousines,  35-125. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Advertisements, posters, etc., over streets. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to install or cause to be installed, or to hang or cause to be hung any signs or banners, or any form of advertisement or notice across any street in the city, without express authority from the mayor. 
(Code 1958,  23-1) 
Secs. 3-2-3-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RESERVED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,459, adopted Feb. 25, 2014, repealed Art. II in its entirety. Former Art. II,  3-16-3-29, pertained to mobile signs and derived from Ord. No. 7361,  1-14, adopted Feb. 23, 1982; Ord. No. 7883, adopted Feb. 25, 1986; Ord. No. 9048, adopted Feb. 28, 1989. 

Secs. 3-16-3-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFF-PREMISES ADVERTISING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,321, adopted June 10, 2003, repealed Art. III in its entirety and enacted similar provisions to read as herein set out. Former Art. III derived from Ord. No. 7877, adopted Feb. 11, 1986; and Ord. No. 7940, adopted Aug. 12, 1986. 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 37. 

Sec. 3-46. - Purpose of article. 
(1)  Signs constitute a separate and distinct use of the land upon which they are placed and affect the use of adjacent streets, sidewalks and other public places and adjacent private places open to the public. The unregulated construction, placement and display of signs constitute a public nuisance detrimental to the health, safety, convenience and welfare of the residents of the city. 
(2)  The purpose of this article is to establish reasonable and impartial regulations for all off-premises advertising signs in order to: reduce traffic hazards caused by such unregulated signs which may distract and confuse, and impair the visibility of, motorists and pedestrians; ensure the effectiveness of public traffic signs and signals; protect property values by ensuring the compatibility of property with that surrounding it; provide an attractive visual environment throughout the city; protect the character and appearance of the various neighborhoods in the city; attract tourists to the city; protect the public investment in streets, highways, and other public improvements; and protect and improve the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(3)  The regulations contained in this article advance these significant government interests and are the minimum amount of regulation necessary to achieve them. 
(4)  The article shall apply to all persons, firms, partnerships, associations, and/or corporations owning, developing, occupying, leasing, or having control or management of any off-premises advertising signs, or of the property where such signs are found, located within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-47. - Definitions. 
    Animated sign. Any sign or portion of a sign having parts or electronically controlled color changes or lights that depict action or give motion to the sign and includes flashing lights. (This does not include "time and temperature" signs.) 
    Back-to-back sign. A structure with two (2) parallel sign faces oriented in opposite directions, not more than ten (10) feet apart. 
    Billboard/off-premises advertising signs/digital signs. An off-premises advertising sign displaying digital static images controlled by electronic or other digital or dynamic media. (Includes, but is not limited to, dynamic displays, dynamic signs, electronic message boards, electronic billboards, flashing signs, and LED signs.) This chapter will regulate the behavior and light-intensity of these types of signs: 
(1)  Displayed image will remain static for at least eight (8) seconds before changing. 
(2)  Change of message must be accomplished within one second or less. 
(3)  All digital signs must meet the following brightness standards: 
a.  No sign may be brighter than is necessary for clear and adequate visibility. 
b.  No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance as to impair the vision of a motor vehicle driver with average eyesight or to otherwise interfere with the driver's operation of a motor vehicle. 
c.  No sign may be of such intensity or brilliance that it inteferes with the effectiveness of an official traffic sign, device or signal. 
d.  The sign shall automatically adjust the intensity of its display according to natural ambient light conditions. 
e.  If the city finds that a digital sign causes glare or otherwise impairs the vision of the driver of a motor vehicle or otherwise interferes with the operation of a motor vehicle, the owner of the sign, within twelve (12) hours of a request by the city, shall reduce the intensity of the sign to a level acceptable to the city. 
(4)  Digital display may be located on both sides of an off-premises sign. 
(5)  Signs cannot resemble traffic control devices or be animated. 
(6)  Owners of digital signs must coordinate with the city to display, when appropriate, real-time emergency information such as Amber Alerts or natural disaster directives. 
(7)  Such signs shall not contain or display animated, moving video or scrolling advertising. 
(8)  Such signs shall not consist of a static image projected upon a stationary object. 
(9)  Such signs shall not be a mobile sign located on a truck, trailer or any other type of motorized vehicles. 
(10)  Such signs shall not be constructed or placed in such a way that the light from the sign shines into residentially zoned areas or areas that are predominately residential in use. 
(11)  The digital displays must be designed and equipped to freeze the device in one position if a malfunction occurs. The displays must also be equipped with a means to immediately discontinue the display if it malfunctions, and the sign owner must immediately stop the display when notified by the city that it is not complying with the standards of this chapter. 
    Changeable copy sign. A sign, or portion thereof, with characters, letters or illustrations that can be changed or rearranged mechanically without altering the face or the surface of the sign. 
    Dynamic display. Any characteristics of a sign that appears to have movement or that appears to change, caused by any method other that physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change the image without having to physically or mechanically replace the sign face or its components. This also includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing, blinking, or animated display and any display that incorporates rotating panels, LED lights manipulated through digital input, "digital ink" or any other method or technology that allows the sign face to present series of images or displays. (Includes LED signs, digital signs, electronic billboards and electronic message boards.) 
    Flashing sign. A sign which exhibits changing light or color effect by any means, so as to provide intermittent illumination or the illusion of intermittent flashing light but any means. Any mode of lighting which resembles zooming, twinkling, sparkling, fading or enhancing. Electronic or other digitally displayed signs which are static for more than one hour shall not be considered to be a flashing sign. 
    Flip sign. A sign, usually the size of a traditional billboard that displays two (2) or more different ad messages in the space of just one sign face. The sign utilizes a turning triangle, cube or "louver" to achieve this look. The ad messages are displayed in a predetermined order and for set amounts of time each, usually six (6) or seven (7) seconds. Each side of the louvers together displays a different ad or message. 
    Interstate and US highways. That portion of the national system of interstate, national and/or defense highways located within this city as officially designated by the State of Louisiana and approved by the United States government. As of the effective date of this section and for purposes of this article the interstate and US Highways which are officially designated as such are: Interstate 20, US Highway 165, US Highway 165 (Business) and US Highway 80. 
    Jumbo sign. Any off-premises advertising sign with a total square footage per side in excess of two hundred fifty (250) square feet, inclusive of embellishments. No jumbo sign shall exceed a maximum area of four hundred fifty (450) square feet per side. 
    Light emitting diode (LED). High resolution, multi-colored and ever changing messages. 
    Lot. Any contiguous parcel of land legally defined by survey abutting a dedicated public way. 
    Major sign. Any off-premises advertising sign with a total square footage per side in excess of seventy-two (72) square feet, but less than or equal to two hundred fifty (250) square feet, inclusive of embellishments. 
    Minor sign. Any off-premises outdoor advertising sign with a total square footage per side of seventy-two (72) square feet or less, inclusive of embellishments. 
    Mobile billboard. An off-premises advertising sign mounted on a vehicle or trailer that can become part of the traffic flow or be parked at specific locations. A vehicle which advertises the company of its primary use is not considered to be a mobile bill board. 
    Off-premises advertising sign. Any outdoor advertising sign, display, figure, painting, drawing, message, plaque, poster, billboard, flag, or any other thing which is designed, intended or used to advertise or inform, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is located. The advertising or information content is visible from any place on the main travel way of the interstate system or any public street in the city. The term "off-premises outdoor advertising" does not include signs with subject matter relating to the premises on which it is located (on-premises signs) or signs of noncommercial nature placed on the premises by the owner or occupant thereof, and such on-premises advertising or identifying structures shall not be considered "outdoor advertising" structures for any purpose of this section. ("Sign" includes the base, supports and other structural members.) Off-premises signs do not include: 
(1)  On-premises signs advertising or identifying activities conducted on the property upon which they are located. 
(2)  On-premises signs which are created solely to advertise or identifying products sold on the property upon which they are located. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Signs used exclusively to identify candidates in political campaigns, popularly referred to as "yard signs," which are thirty-five (35) square feet or less in size, and which are mounted or otherwise attached to a base or structure which can easily be removed from the ground by hand, and which are temporary in nature (that is, to be removed, no later than ten (10) days after final election returns become official). 
(5)  Signs thirty-five (35) square feet or less in size advertising a specific parcel of real estate being developed, or being sold or leased, provided that such parcel of real estate is located no more than five hundred (500) feet from such a sign and provided that the sign will be removed no later than six (6) months after the date it is erected. 
(6)  Signs painted or otherwise imprinted on any structure legally placed in the right-of-way of any public street in the city, provided such structure is not imbedded in the ground, asphalt, concrete or other such substances, also provided that the sign face does not extend beyond the border of the structure, and finally, provided that the structure's primary use is not for advertising purposes. 
(7)  Bus bench signs that are located at designated City of Monroe Transit Authority bus stops and have written permission from the General Manager of the City of Monroe Transit Authority and the Traffic Engineer for the City of Monroe. (This includes bus shelters.) 
    Property line. The lines bounding a lot defined as follows: 
(1)  Front property line means the line separating the lot from the street. 
(2)  Rear property line means the line opposite the front lot line. 
(3)  Side interior property line means any property line other than the front property line or rear property line. 
    Public street. Any street, expressway, thoroughfare or highway prescribed in the master plan for streets and roads but not included in the above definition of interstate system. 
    Sign. An identification, description, illustration, or device which is affixed to or represented directly or indirectly upon a building, structure, or land and which directs attention to a product, place, activity, person, institution or business. (Includes structural elements, bases, sign faces, trim and borders.) 
    Sign face. The area or display surface used for the message, which includes the display area, border and trim but excluding the base, supports and other structural members facing traffic moving in one direction. 
    Sign, stacked. An advertising structure built with two (2) or more sign faces set (or stacked) on top of one another and facing traffic moving in one direction. 
    Sign, static. A sign face without any action, movement, flashing or color changes. There is nothing used other that the ad message itself and illumination thereof to bring attention to the sign. 
    Snipe sign. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc. 
    V-type sign. A structure or structure with two (2) or three (3) sign faces, forming the shape of a "V" or a triangle when viewed from above, with an angle between any two (2) faces of not more than forty-five (45) degrees. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 10,491, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 10,740, 9-11-07; Ord. No. 10,849, 10-14-08; Ord. No. 11,702, 8-9-16) 
Sec. 3-48. - Districts where permitted. 
    The zoning laws of the City of Monroe, contained in Chapter 37 of the Monroe City Code, shall set forth the zoning districts where off-premises signs which conform with the provisions of this article may be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-49. - Building permits. 
(1)  Required; placement of sign. No off-premises advertising sign shall be located, relocated, altered or utilized for display purposes without an approval from the planning commission. A sign permit must then be issued by the building inspector for that location. A certificate of occupancy is required from the planning and zoning division before the building permit can be issued. The building permit must be placed on the sign when erected so as to be clearly visible to the building inspector for at least two (2) weeks after the sign is erected. No permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or for a change in copy on printed or changeable copy signs. 
(2)  Permit process. 
(a)  All applications for an off-premises advertising sign permit shall submit a plat indicating the exact location of the sign, property lines, and setbacks, all measurements of the sign (height, length, square footage per face), number of faces and any other pertinent information. Louisiana-stamped engineering plans shall be submitted in addition to the plat. 
(b)  Once planning approval has been obtained from the planning commission and the placement of the sign has been permitted, the applicant shall construct the sign within six (6) months from the issuance of the permit. Should the sign not be constructed within that period of time, a new permit shall be required. The zoning administrator shall have the discretion to grant extensions under special circumstances. (For example, construction delays, weather and other conditions beyond the control of the permit holder.) Appeals to this decision may be made to the board of adjustments. 
(c)  Sign companies shall provide to the planning and zoning division, an inventory of all signs indicating the following information: size, number of faces, means of illumination, location, date of permit, and permit number (if available) within sixty (60) days of enactment of this ordinance [Ordinance. No. 10,321]. By December 31, 2003, and annually thereafter, sign owners shall provide to the planning and zoning division an inventory of all signs, including those newly constructed or dismantled. Notice of inventory update requirement shall be mailed by certified letter, return receipt required, or by registered mail by the planning and zoning division within thirty (30) days of the inventory due date. The planning and zoning division shall not make the inventory of signs available to the public unless required by law. 
(d)  No permit shall be issued for any sign unless the sign company requesting the permit provides proof that the contractor installing the sign is a Louisiana-licensed contractor licensed to operate in the City of Monroe, and, is in compliance with all requirements of the licensing requirements. 
(e)  Sign companies will need to sign a maintenance agreement with the City of Monroe regarding any easements adjacent to any off-premises signs. This agreement will also need to be approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-50. - State and federal regulations. 
    An off-premises sign permit shall not be issued whenever the issuance of the permit would result in the maintenance of a sign in violation of any state or federal regulation. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-51. - Size of off-premises signs. 
    The maximum area of an off-premises sign face shall be four hundred fifty (450) feet and shall not contain more than one static sign face for each side of display. 
    When two (2) off-premises sign faces are placed back to back or V-type on the same structure with an angle between them of not more than forty-five (45) degrees, each sign face shall conform to the maximum size limitations. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, two (2) sign faces are only allowed if the faces are placed back to back or V-type. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-52. - Location of off-premises signs. 
    Property facing public streets and all other property which is zoned so as to permit the construction and maintenance of off-premises signs shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  V-type or back-to-back off-premises signs shall be considered one sign. 
(2)  No off-premises sign shall be located in such a manner as to obscure, or otherwise physically interfere with the effectiveness of any official traffic sign, signal or device, or to obstruct or physically interfere with a driver's view of approaching or intersecting traffic. 
(3)  No off-premises sign shall be permitted in any residentially zoned area as defined in the zoning ordinance of the City of Monroe. 
(4)  No off-premises sign shall be located within five hundred (500) feet from the property line of any residentially zoned property, including B-1 (transition business district) developed residentially. 
(5)  No off-premises advertising sign shall be erected or maintained upon or directly above the roof of any building structure. 
(6)  The minimum distance between any off-premises sign shall be no less than one thousand (1,000) feet on the same side of the street. The minimum distance between any off-premises sign on opposite sides of the street shall be no less than five hundred (500) feet measured radially. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-53. - Setback requirements. 
(1)  No portion of any off-premises sign may be located within the thirty-foot visibility triangle required at intersections by the zoning code of the City of Monroe. 
(2)  Each off-premises sign shall be set back at least twenty-five (25) feet from any road or street right-of-way line, measured from the sign's closest point of reference. Side setback shall be ten (10) feet from the side property line. When an off-premises sign is located in the side corner yard, the setback shall be twenty-five (25) feet from any road or street right-of-way line, measured from the sign's closest point of reference. 
(3)  No part or foundation or support of any off-premises sign shall be placed on, in, or over any public property, including public rights-of-way, upon telephone or utility poles, or natural features such as trees and rocks without written consent of the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 11,069, 5-25-10) 
Sec. 3-54. - Height of off-premises signs. 
    There shall be a minimum clearance from the bottom of an off-premises sign face from the grade of the public street to which the sign is oriented, or from the ground directly beneath the sign face, whichever is of greater height, according to the size of the sign face and a maximum height, as follows: 
(1)  For minor signs, the minimum clearance shall be six (6) feet, and the maximum height shall be fifteen (15) feet. 
(2)  For major signs, the minimum clearance shall be eight (8) feet, and the maximum height shall be twenty (20) feet. 
(3)  For jumbo signs, the minimum clearance shall be ten (10) feet, and the maximum height shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
    No off-premises sign shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height, except where a sign face would not be plainly visible to passing traffic at a height of thirty-five (35) feet, the sign may be raised to a maximum height of fifty (50) feet. This distance shall be measured from the grade of the public street to which the sign is oriented, or from the ground directly beneath the sign face (whichever is higher) to the highest point of the off-premises sign. The city engineer, planning and urban development director and the zoning administrator shall be charged with verifying that the sign is not plainly visible at thirty-five (35) feet. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-55. - Lighting of off-premises signs. 
    Off-premises signs may be illuminated, subject to the following restrictions: 
(1)  No revolving or rotating beam or beacon of light that simulates any emergency light device shall be permitted as part of any sign. Flashing devices shall not be permitted upon a sign, however, illuminated signs which indicate customary public information, such as time, date, temperature or other similar information shall be permitted. 
(2)  External lighting, such as floodlights, thin-line and goose-neck reflectors, are permitted, provided the light source is directed on the face of the sign and effectively shielded so as to prevent beams or rays of light from being directed on any portion of the public street. 
   Table 1-Bulk Requirements 
Minor 
Signs Major 
Signs Jumbo 
Signs Maximum area of total sign face per side (square feet) 72 square feet 250 square feet 450 square feet Maximum height of sign (feet) 35 feet 35 feet 35 feet Minimum clearance (feet) 6 feet 8 feet 10 feet Minimum setback requirements 25 feet from front property line 
  
25 feet from side corner property line 
  
10 feet from side property line 25 feet from front property line 
  
25 feet from side corner property line 
  
10 feet from side property line 25 feet from front property line 
  
25 feet from side corner property line 
  
10 feet from side property line Distance between signs Minimum distance between any off-premises sign shall be no less than one thousand (1,000) feet on the same side of the street.  
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 11,069, 5-25-10) 
Sec. 3-56. - Number of faces. 
(1)  No off-premises sign shall be constructed with more than one static face per side. 
(2)  All sign faces shall be perpendicular to the road upon which they front, unless the sign is a V-shaped sign. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-57. - Construction standards. 
(1)  All off-premises signs shall be constructed in accordance with the electrical and safety requirements of the building code of the city. 
(2)  Except for permitted banners, flags, temporary signs and window signs conforming in all respects with the requirements of this article, all signs shall be constructed of permanent materials and shall be attached to the ground, a building or another structure by direct attachment to a wall, frame or structure. 
(3)  Visible backs of off-premises signs shall be suitably painted, galvanized or otherwise covered to present a neat and clean appearance. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-58. - Prohibited off-premises signs. 
(1)  Off-premises signs which shall not be permitted to remain or to be erected include: 
(a)  Signs which are obsolete structures not meeting construction standards, and are unsafe, signs that have been blank for six (6) months or more, and signs which have been erected after the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10,321] without a building permit having been issued therefore. 
(b)  Signs which are not clean and in good repair. 
(c)  Signs which are illegal under state law or other regulations. 
(d)  Signs that are not securely fixed on a substantial structure. 
(e)  Signs which attempt or appear to attempt to regulate, warn, or direct the movement of traffic, or which interfere with, imitate, or resemble any official traffic sign, signal, or device. 
(f)  Signs which are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other natural features without written permission. 
(g)  Signs which are nonconforming and damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than sixty (60) per cent of their replacement cost. 
(h)  Signs that prevent free ingress of egress to or from any doors, windows, or fire escapes; or that are attached to a standpipe or fire escape. 
(i)  Stacked signs (other than those which lawfully exist on the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10,321]). 
(j)  Signs located on public property, unless placed thereon under lease arrangements or otherwise permitted by legal authority. 
(k)  Signs which contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene nature as defined by law. 
(l)  Signs which contain as part of the message mirror-like surfaces. (Note: 1" reflective discs that do not cover more than 5 per cent of the sign surface and produce no traffic impeding glare are permitted.) 
(m)  Signs which are constructed so as to periodically change the direction toward which any plane containing the sign surface area is oriented. 
(n)  Signs which emit smoke, vapor, particles or odor. 
(o)  Snipe signs. 
(p)  Signs which are not consistent with the standards in this section. 
(q)  Flip signs with the exception of the Interstate 20 corridor and U.S. Hwy 165. (Other than those which lawfully exist on the effective date of this ordinance [Ordinance No. 10,321].) 
(r)  Any sign not specifically permitted in this chapter. 
(s)  Mobile billboards or portable trailer signs. 
(2)  No new signs shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of the following roads, routes, and streets: 
S. 2nd Street. 
N. 19th Street. 
Armand Street. 
Berg Jones Lane to U.S. Hwy 165 S., that portion of the entrance to the Louisiana Garden and Zoo. 
Broadmoor Boulevard. 
Forsythe Avenue. 
Jackson Street. 
Kansas Lane Connector from DeSiard Street to U.S. Hwy 165. 
Lamy Lane. 
Louisville Avenue. 
Oliver Road. 
Tower Drive. 
Washington Street. 
Winnsboro Road. 
(3)  No electronic or digital sign shall contain or display any animation, moving video or scrolling advertising. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 10,849, 10-14-08; Ord. No. 11,069, 5-25-10) 
Sec. 3-59. - Authority to enforce. 
    The code enforcement officer shall have the authority to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Upon presentation of the proper credentials, the officer may enter any building, structure or premises in the city to perform any duty imposed on the officer by this section. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-60. - Enforcement. 
(1)  In the event the code enforcement officer shall find that any off-premises sign or sign location is unsafe, is a menace to public health, safety, or welfare, or is in violation of any of the provisions, standards, purpose and intent of this article, the City Code, or any other applicable code of body of law, the officer shall serve written notice on the holder of the permit, or in the absence of a valid permit, on either any owner of the sign, or on any possessor or any owner of property on which the sign is located. 
(2)  Such written notice shall state, with reasonable specificity, the reason or reasons the sign is unsafe, a menace, or is otherwise in violation. If the sign is determined unsafe or a menace, the violation must be corrected or remedied within five (5) days from the receipt of the written notice. If the violation cannot be corrected in compliance with the applicable laws, within the five-day period, the sign shall be removed at the permit holder's expense, or in the absence of a valid permit, at the expense of any owner or possessor on whom the written notice is served. All other violations must be corrected or remedied within thirty (30) days or the sign shall be removed at the permit holder's expense. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-61. - Service of notice. 
(1)  Written notice shall be made by certified mail, return receipt requested, or by registered mail, and is deemed effective on the date the notice is received by the permit holder, owner, or possessor (as applicable) at their last known address, or upon personal service, from the date such written notice is delivered to the permit holder, owner, or possessor (as applicable). 
(2)  The written notice shall include all existing violations at the location in question, and only one notice shall be required. If the violation is not corrected, or the sign is not removed within five (5) days after receiving written notice, a citation shall be issued by the code enforcement office immediately. 
(3)  For the purposes of the this section, all applicants for off-premises sign permits shall provide the code enforcement officer with the name, street address, and phone number of a person residing within the City of Monroe, who will be authorized to receive written notice of any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-62. - Penalties. 
    Violations of any section or part of this article shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment not exceeding twenty (20) days or both at the discretion of the court. Each day such violation shall exist shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-63. - Nonconforming signs. 
(1)  Any off-premises sign legally existing prior to the effective date of this article and not complying with the provisions of this article, may continue in existence, except as provided in section 3-60 and except as provided in section 37 of the zoning laws of the City of Monroe. 
(2)  All building permits previously issued for signs not yet erected will be valid for six (6) months from the date of issuance. No renewals shall be granted for signs or locations which would be in violation of this article. 
(3)  Any changes to an off-premises sign, which legally exists prior to the effective date of this ordinance and not complying with the provisions of this article, shall require approval and attainment of a permit. 
(4)  A nonconforming sign may be replaced by another equal-sized or smaller nonconforming sign of the same type (i.e., static sign to static sign) in the same location provided a new certificate of occupancy is obtained from the planning and zoning office. 
(5)  New digital or electrical billboards/off-premises signage is limited to conforming signs only. Conversion of nonconforming signs to digital or electrical signs may be permitted with planning commission approval. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 10,849, 10-14-08) 
Sec. 3-64. - Variances. 
    No variance from the provisions of this chapter shall be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03) 
Sec. 3-65. - Fees. 
(1)  Building fees. The building inspector shall collect a fee for each off-premises sign building permit as follows: 
$1.00 per square foot for all signs - minor, major and jumbo. 
(2)  Annual fees. 
(a)  Listed. The building inspector shall collect an annual fee of seventy-five dollars ($75.00) per major sign, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) per jumbo sign. 
(b)  Building permit fee in lieu of annual fee. The sign building permit fee shall serve in lieu of an annual fee from the time the permit is issued until December 31 of the year of issuance. 
(c)  Duration; renewal. The annual fee shall be for the period January 1 through December 31 of each year, and shall be renewable in November of each year, beginning November 2003. 
(d)  Penalty for unpaid taxes. Any annual fee that is not paid on or before January 1 shall, in addition to the fee, bear a penalty of ten (10) per cent per month until paid. 
(Ord. No. 10,321, 6-10-03; Ord. No. 11,580, 5-26-15) 
Secs. 3-66-3-69. - Reserved. 
Chapter 3.5 - ALARMS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9174, adopted Oct. 23, 1990, amended the Code by adding a new Ch. 6.5. In order to maintain Code format and follow the alphanumeric sequence, the aforesaid has been redesignated as Ch. 3.5. 

Sec. 3.5-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context indicates a different meaning: 
    Alarm system. Any assembly of equipment or devices, mechanical or electrical, which is designed, arranged or used for the detection of a hazardous condition or an unauthorized entry or attempted entry into a building, structure or facility, or for alerting persons of a hazardous condition, unauthorized entry or the commission of an unlawful act to, on or within a building, structure or facility and which emits a sound or flashing light, or transmits a signal or message when activated, to which the police department and/or fire department of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, is expected to respond, provided however that this definition shall not include an alarm system installed in a vehicle. 
    Alarm user. Any person in control of any building, structure or facility or to a portion thereof wherein an alarm system is maintained. 
    City. The City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    City council. The city council of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    False alarm. Any sound or flashing light, signal or message which elicits a response from the police department and/or fire department of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, which an investigation indicates no hazardous condition, unauthorized entry or the commission of an unlawful act to, on or within a building, structure or facility or which it is otherwise determined that a situation requiring a response from the police and/or fire department did not in fact exist. 
    Fire department. The fire department of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    Police department. The police department of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 9174, 10-23-90) 
Sec. 3.5-2. - Alarm system operating requirements. 
(a)  An alarm system shall be adjusted to suppress false indications due to: 
(1)  Transient changes in water pipe pressure; 
(2)  Flashes of light; 
(3)  Wind noise caused by rattling or vibration of windows, doors or walls; 
(4)  Vehicular noise; 
(5)  Electrical power fluctuations; 
(6)  Other forces or factors unrelated to an actual emergency. 
(b)  All alarm users shall provide the police and fire departments with the name, telephone number and address of at least two (2) authorized persons, who shall be available to respond and who shall arrive at the building, structure or facility where an alarm has been activated within thirty (30) minutes when requested to do so by the police or fire department. All alarm users shall promptly notify the police and fire departments of any change in the designation or manner of contacting such persons. 
    All alarm users shall provide the police department and fire department with a local address at which to mail or deliver any notifications or reports provided for herein. All alarm users shall promptly notify the police and fire departments of any change of such address. 
(c)  Audible alarms shall be adjusted so that the alarm will not sound longer than thirty (30) minutes, and must be reset before sounding again. 
(d)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section may be punishable by a fine not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for not more than ten (10) days or both at the discretion of the court. 
(Ord. No. 9174, 10-23-90) 
Sec. 3.5-3. - False alarms. 
(a)  Whenever an alarm system is activated in the city, thereby requiring an emergency response to the location from the police department and/or fire department, the senior official of the police or fire department on the scene of the activated alarm who has overall command of the situation shall inspect the area protected by the alarm system and shall determine whether the alarm was a false alarm. 
(b)  If said senior official at the scene of the activated alarm system determines that the alarm is a false alarm, he shall make a report of the false alarm, which report shall be filed in the records of both the police department and fire department and a notification of the false alarm shall be mailed or delivered to the alarm user at the address provided for in section 3.5-2(b). 
(c)  Any alarm user may appeal the determination of a false alarm to the chief of the department of the senior official making the report. Such appeal must be made within fifteen (15) days of the delivery or mailing of the notification provided for in section 3.5-3(b). 
(d)  An alarm user may appeal the decision of the chief to the city council by written request delivered to the clerk of the city council. Such appeal shall be made within fifteen (15) days of the decision of the chief. Upon receipt of such written request, the clerk of the city council shall set a hearing at the next available regular council meeting, which shall not be less than fifteen (15) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the receipt of the appeal request. The clerk of the city council shall also provide written notice, setting forth the date and time of the appeal hearing, to the alarm user and the respective chief at least ten (10) days prior to the said hearing. 
(e)  Nothing contained herein shall prevent any alarm user from appealing the decision of the city council to any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 9174, 10-23-90) 
Sec. 3.5-4. - Assistance and compliance with officials on site. 
    All persons in, on, about or who respond by coming to the site of an alarm activation shall obey all reasonable requests for assistance by the police and/or fire department personnel, including but not limited to identify themselves, stating their purpose at the site, or leaving the premises on request. 
    Such persons shall also promptly notify police and/or fire personnel of any and all known hazards to said personnel which exist within the building, structure, facility or area. 
(Ord. No. 9174, 10-23-90) 
Sec. 3.5-5. - Fees for false alarms. 
(a)  The alarm user shall be charged a fee for false alarms pursuant to the following schedule: 
(1)  One through three (3): No charge 
(a warning shall be included in the notification), 
(2)  Four (4) to six (6): $25.00 each occurrence, 
(3)  Six (6) to twenty-four (24): $50.00 each occurrence, 
(4)  Twenty-five (25) or more: $200.00 each occurrence. 
(b)  Alarms shall be counted for the twelve-month period previous to the date of any false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 9174, 10-23-90) 
Sec. 3.5-6. - Exceptions. 
    An alarm user shall not be held accountable for a false alarm caused by: 
(1)  Natural or man-made catastrophe; 
(2)  Vandalism; 
(3)  Telephone line outage; 
(4)  Electrical line outage; 
(5)  Severe weather conditions. 
The alarm user shall have the burden of proving these causes. 
(Ord. No. 9174, 10-23-90) 
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Operation of aircraft under influence of alcohol,  7-31; operation of aircraft under influence of drugs,  7-32; sale of alcohol or purchases of alcohol by minors,  12-127; public intoxication,  12-153(b)(3). 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, R.S. Tit. 26. 

Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms have the respective meanings ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context indicates a different meaning: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverage means beer, distilled spirits, and wine containing one-half of one (0.5) per cent or more of alcohol by volume. Beer includes but is not limited to ale, lager, porter, stout, sake and other similar fermented beverages brewed or produced from malt wholly or in part or from any substitute therefor. Distilled spirits include alcohol, ethanol, or spirits or wine in any form including all dilutions and mixtures thereof from whatever process produced. 
a.  Beverages of low alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing not more than six (6) per cent of alcohol by volume. 
b.  Beverages of high alcoholic content means alcoholic beverages containing more than six (6) per cent of alcohol by volume. 
(2)  Dealer means any person who engages in the sale or distribution, at wholesale or retail, of alcoholic beverages within the city. 
(3)  Manufacturer means any person who, directly or indirectly, personally or through any agency, engages in the making, blending, rectifying or other processing of alcoholic beverages in the city. 
(4)  Wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to licensed wholesale dealers or licensed retail dealers within the city. 
(5)  Retail dealer means any person who offers for sale, exposes for sale, has in his possession for sale or distribution, or sells, alcoholic beverages in any quantity to persons other than licensed wholesale or retail dealers. 
(6)  Saloon means a place where any person draws or removes alcoholic beverages from their containers for sale or consumption on the premises. 
(7)  Package house means a place where a person sells alcoholic beverages in closed containers, prepared for transportation and consumption off the premises. 
(8)  Handle means sell, use, distribute, store, consume, or otherwise handle. 
(9)  Class A retail dealer shall mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content at retail for consumption on or off the licensed premises. 
(10)  Class B retail dealer shall mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content at retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers only and only for consumption off the licensed premises. 
(11)  Bottle club means any establishment whereby the owner, corporation, partnership or their employees do not sell, serve, handle, dispense or store alcoholic beverages, but in which patrons are allowed to consume alcoholic beverages in the premises from the patron's own store, stock or supplies of alcoholic beverages. 
(12)  Premises means a licensed establishment where alcoholic beverages are kept, sold, stored or consumed which includes the lot of the licensed establishment, but shall exclude the sidewalk, street curb and street adjacent thereto. 
(13)  Monroe City Government Complex and/or city governmental complex means any facility of the city, including but not limited to the Monroe Civic Center, its surrounding buildings and the Twin City Queen. 
(14)  Hotel-motel hospitality rooms means any room in a bona fide hotel or motel which is used for the purpose of the hospitable consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
(15)  Class A liquor retail dealer shall mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content at retail for consumption on or off the licensed premises. 
(16)  Class B liquor retail dealer shall mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages of high or low alcoholic content at retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers and only for consumption off the licensed premises. 
(17)  Class C beer retail dealer shall mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content at retail for consumption on or off the licensed premises. 
(18)  Class D beer retail dealer shall mean any person who sells alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content at retail in bottles, cans or other sealed containers only and only for consumption off the licensed premises. 
(19)  Private club means an organization with limited and restricted membership which is nonprofit in nature and classified as tax-exempt by all state and federal taxing authorities. 
(20)  Valid identification shall mean a driver's license, state identification card, selective service card or other lawful identification which on its face establishes the age of the person and for which there is no reason to doubt the authenticity or correctness of the identification; provided however that if the identification does not contain a picture of the person identified then such identification must be corroborated by a pictured identification card issued by a lawful governmental agency or subdivision thereof. No form of identification mentioned above shall be accepted as proof of age if it is expired, defaced, mutilated, or altered. If the driver's license, state identification card, selective service card or other lawful identification is a duplicate, the person shall submit additional identification which contains the name, date of birth, and picture of the person. In addition, an educational institution card, check cashing card, or employee identification card shall not be considered as lawful identification for the purpose of this paragraph. 
(21)  Class R dealer shall mean any person operating a restaurant meeting the requirements of sections 4-1(22) and 4-12.1, who has obtained a class R license (in conjunction with a class A or class C license or defined above) to sell, serve or allow the consumption of beer and/or wine in conjunction with the service of meals to be consumed on the premises between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(22)  Restaurant, for purposes of this chapter, shall mean an establishment: 
a.  Which operates a place of business whose purpose and primary function is to take orders for, prepare and serve food and food items on the premises: 
b.  Which serves alcoholic beverages in conjunction with meals; 
c.  Which serves food on all days of operation; 
d.  Which grosses sixty (60) per cent of its average monthly revenue from the sale of food and food items; 
e.  Which maintains separate sales figures for alcoholic beverages; and 
f.  Which operates a fully equipped kitchen used for the preparation of uncooked foods for service and consumption of such food on the premises. 
(23)  The term purchase means to acquire by payment of money or other consideration. 
(24)  The term public possession means the possession of any alcoholic beverage for any reason, including consumption on any street or highway, or in any public place or any place open to the public, including a club which is de facto open to the public. "Public possession" does not include the following: 
a.  The possession or consumption of any alcoholic beverage: 
1.  For an established religious purpose. 
2.  At a function sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit organization under 26 U.S.C. 501(c) where an individual had received or purchased a ticket for admission. 
3.  When a person under twenty-one (21) years of age is accompanied by a parent or legal custodian twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
4.  For medical purpose when prescribed or administered by a licensed physician, pharmacist, dentist, nurse, hospital, or medical institution. 
5.  In private residences. 
b.  The sale, handling, transport, or service in dispensing of any alcoholic beverage pursuant to lawful employment of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age by a duly licensed manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer of alcoholic beverages. 
(Code 1958,  4-1; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 7409, 6-22-82; Ord. No. 7416, 7-27-82; Ord. No. 7994, 4-28-87; Ord. No. 8097, 5-10-88; Ord. No. 9228, 5-28-91; Ord. No. 9531, 8-8-95) 
State Law reference- Definitions, R.S. 26:2, 26:241, 26:581, 26:641, 26:711. 
Sec. 4-2. - License-Required, prior payment of fee before issuance; high-content license includes low-content license. 
    Every retail dealer and every wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content or alcoholic beverages of high alcoholic content and any private club or bottle club is hereby required to obtain from the city for each year an appropriate license to conduct such business during each year in which such business is to be conducted, the issuance of which shall be conditioned upon the prior payment of the license fee levied in section 4-13. A license to sell alcoholic beverages of high alcoholic content shall include, and obviate the necessity of, a license to sell alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content. 
(Code 1958,  4-2; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81) 
Cross reference- Licenses and taxation, Ch. 20; occupational licenses,  20-21 et seq.; sales and use tax,  20-41 et seq. 
Sec. 4-2.1. - Same-Exceptions; city government complex, hotel-motel hospitality rooms. 
    The city governmental complex and any hotel-motel hospitality rooms shall be exempt from the licensing requirements set forth in sections 4-2. 
(Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81) 
Sec. 4-3. - Same-Prerequisite to engaging in business, posting. 
    No person, corporation or partnership shall engage in either of the businesses of selling, offering for sale, possession for sale, or allowing the consumption of or distribution of alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content or alcoholic beverages of high alcoholic content without first obtaining the necessary license required hereunder. All licenses issued hereunder must be posted in a conspicuous place in the licensed premises. 
(Code 1958,  4-3; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81) 
Sec. 4-4. - Same-Council to determine issuance, certificate of approval. 
(a)  The right to determine what persons shall or shall not be issued permits hereunder shall be vested in the city council. 
(b)  No permit hereunder, whether new or renewal, shall be issued by the tax collector unless he has received a certificate evidencing the approval of the application for a permit by the city council. 
(Code 1958,  4-4) 
Sec. 4-5. - Same-Sale by wholesaler only when retailer's permit displayed, exceptions. 
    No wholesale dealer shall sell to any retail dealer any of the alcoholic beverages described in section 4-1 hereof, unless the retail dealer has posted in a conspicuous place in his establishment the permit required hereunder; provided, a wholesale dealer may sell such liquors to a retail dealer commencing a new business, or occupying or taking over an established business for which a license and permit has been issued, if such retail dealer produces a certificate from the tax collector of the city dated not more than thirty-five (35) days prior to the sale of liquors, evidencing the application for a license or permit hereunder. 
(Code 1958,  4-5) 
Sec. 4-6. - Same-Separate license required; transferability; changing location and other changes. 
(a)  Separate licenses shall be required for each place of business operated by a retail dealer, wholesale dealer bottle club or private club. All licenses issued hereunder shall be personal and nontransferable and shall become void upon the death of the licensee. If the business changes hands during the period for which the license was issued, a new license must be applied for and paid to the city tax collector within fifteen (15) days of the date of change. The original licensee failing to notify the city tax collector of any such change in the license within the fifteen (15) calendar day period shall be assessed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day of noncompliance. A retail dealer or wholesale dealer shall conduct his business only in the licensed premises, which premises shall include the lot of the licensee but shall exclude the sidewalk, street curb, and street adjacent thereto; and no license issued hereunder shall authorize the conducting of business in any changed location except upon application therefor submitted to the city council, which may grant or deny it as it deems advisable. 
(b)  Should the location of the place of business be changed during the period for which the license was issued, a new license must be applied for and paid to the city tax collector within fifteen (15) days of the date of change. The original licensee failing to notify the city tax collector of such change within the said fifteen-day period shall be assessed ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day of noncompliance. 
(c)  Should the: (1) Name of the business, (2) address of the licensee, or (3) any of the requirements of section 4-11 herein change during the period for which the license was issued, such license must be sent to the city tax collector within fifteen (15) days of the date of change so that the proper change may be noted thereon. The city tax collector shall collect from the licensee requesting the change an administration fee of ten (10) per cent of the license fee or a minimum fee of twenty dollars ($20.00), whichever is greater, for any such license change. A licensee failing to notify the city tax collector shall be assessed an additional ten dollars ($10.00) per day for each day of noncompliance. 
(Code 1958,  4-6; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 7851, 11-12-85) 
State Law reference- Personal nature of license R.S. 26:75, 26:275. 
Sec. 4-7. - Same-Revocation, refusal to issue. 
    In the exercise of its police power, whenever deemed advisable and for the general welfare, under this chapter or any applicable law of Louisiana, the city council may, for good cause, revoke any permit previously issued. If any retail dealer has conducted, operated or permitted his place of business so as to become a dive, disorderly place or nuisance, any application for the renewal of his license or permit hereunder may be refused. 
(Code 1958,  4-7) 
State Law reference- Suspension or revocation of permits by municipality, R.S. 33:4785 et seq. 
Sec. 4-8. - Same-Ineligibility of spouse to obtain. 
    No permit shall be issued to any applicant who is the spouse of a person who is himself ineligible for a permit, unless such applicant is legally separated from such spouse. 
(Code 1958,  4-7.1) 
Sec. 4-9. - License applications-Where and when filed, delinquency penalty. 
(a)  All applications for licenses for new businesses shall be filed with the tax collector of the city. 
(b)  Applications for renewals for a license shall be filed with the tax collector of the city on or before the thirty-first day of October for the ensuing year. 
(c)  Should any retail dealer, wholesale dealer, bottle club or private club fail to file an application for the renewal of a license for the ensuing year on or before the thirty-first day of October, a delinquency penalty shall be imposed of five (5) per cent of the amount due for the permit applied for if the failure is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) per cent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof during which the failure continues. If the application for the renewal of a license is not filed until on or after January first of the year for which the license is required, the application may be denied. 
(Code 1968,  4-8; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81) 
Sec. 4-10. - Same-Requirements, stamping, submitting to officers for investigation, submitting to council. 
(a)  All applications for new or renewal licenses shall be in writing, shall be sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, and shall contain the information and shall be accompanied by the documents set forth and detailed in section 4-12. 
(b)  The tax collector shall immediately stamp upon each application the year, month and day on which it was received and shall verify that the applicant, and/or any person required to have the same qualifications of the applicant and/or the predecessor in business of such applicant or other person, is not delinquent in the payment of remittance of any sales, use, occupational or other tax, license fee, etc., due the city. 
(c)  The tax collector, if he finds that no delinquency exists, shall deliver the application to the director of administration, who shall deliver the same, upon completion of his evaluation, to the zoning administrator for appropriate approval. The zoning administrator shall then deliver the application to the chief of police or his designee, who shall immediately make an investigation of the applicant and of his character and reputation. If the applicant is a partnership, an investigation as to the character and reputation of each member thereof shall be conducted. If the applicant is a corporation, the same investigation of each officer, manager and person in charge of such corporation shall be conducted. When the investigation is completed, a written statement of the results thereof shall be made and filed with the director of administration, who shall in turn submit the same to the mayor and the city council. 
(Code 1968,  4-9; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 7462, 11-24-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions as to state permit, R.S. 26:78, 26:85, 26:278, 26:283. 
Sec. 4-11. - Same-Qualifications of applicant. 
(a)  Every applicant for an alcoholic beverage license shall meet the following qualifications and conditions: 
(1)  Is a person of good character and reputation and over twenty-one (21) years of age. 
(2)  Is a citizen of the United States and of the state and a resident of the state continuously for a period of not less than two (2) years next preceding the date of the filing of the application, provided that: 
a.  The requirements as to Louisiana citizenship do not apply to wholesalers or retailers who held permits on or prior to January 1, 1946. 
b.  For purposes of a class B retailer dealer's permit only, the applicant shall not be required to meet the qualifications of residence set forth herein. 
(3)  Is the owner of the premises or has a bona fide written lease therefor. 
(4)  Has not been convicted of a felony under the laws of the United States, or of this or any other state or country. 
(5)  Has not been convicted in this or in any other state or by the United States or any other country of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, contributing to the delinquency of juveniles, keeping a disorderly place, letting a disorderly place, or illegally dealing in narcotics. 
(6)  Has not had a license or permit to sell or deal in alcoholic beverages, issued by the United States, by any state, or by any municipality or other political subdivision of any state authorized to issue permits or licenses with respect to alcoholic beverages, revoked within five (5) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against him in a case involving alcoholic beverages by the courts of the city or any other political subdivision, or this or any other state, or the United States for five (5) years prior to the application. 
    However, if the applicant has had only one conviction for violating the provisions of this chapter within five (5) years of the application, the granting of a permit or of a renewal shall be within the discretion of the city council. If the applicant has had two (2) such convictions within five (5) years of the application, the application for a permit or for a renewal shall be denied. 
(7)  Has not been adjudged by any alcoholic beverage control board of this state to have violated, or been convicted by any court of violating, any of the provisions of this chapter or of the alcoholic beverage control laws of this state or of the alcoholic beverage control laws or ordinances of any other state or political subdivision. 
(8)  Is not delinquent in the payment or remittance of sales, use, occupational or any other tax, license, fee, etc., due the city. 
(b)  If the applicant is a partnership or anyone in partnership with or financed by another, all members of the partnership or all the persons in any way financially interested in the business shall also possess the qualifications required of an applicant. The application shall state the full names and proper residence addresses of all partners and persons financially interested; and each shall furnish his affidavit showing his qualifications, as required of an applicant. 
(c)  If the applicant is a corporation, it shall be either organized under the laws of the state or qualified to do business within this state; and all officers and directors and all stockholders owning in the aggregate more than five (5) per cent of the stock and the person or persons who shall conduct or manage the business shall possess the qualifications required of an applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application, provided that: 
(1)  If the corporate applicant was the holder of a permit from the City on December 31, 1971, the officers, directors and stockholders shall not be required to meet the requirements of citizenship and residence in the state. 
(2)  With respect to applications for class A and class B permits only, the officers, directors and stockholders shall not be required to meet the requirements of citizenship and residence in the state. 
(d)  If the applicant's business is to be conducted wholly or partly by one or more managers, agents, servants, employees or other representatives, that person shall possess the qualifications required of the applicant, to be shown by the affidavit of each accompanying the application. 
(e)  If the applicant, or any person required to have the same qualifications, does not possess the required qualifications, the permit may be denied. 
(f)  If the applicant, or any other person required to have the same qualifications as the applicant or the predecessor in business of such applicant or other person, is delinquent in the payment or remittance of any sales, use, occupational or other tax, license, fee, etc., due the city, the application for permit shall be denied unless the tax collector, in his discretion, has consented to a partial and/or installment repayment of the delinquency, in which case the permit may be issued conditioned upon the applicant's compliance with the terms of said agreement. 
(Code 1958,  4-10; Ord. No. 7302, 7-28-81; Ord. No. 7463, 11-24-82; Ord. No. 9531, 8-8-95) 
State Law reference- Similar requirements, R.S. 26:80, 26:280. 
Sec. 4-12. - Same-Contents of application; fingerprinting of applicant; advertisement of new application. 
(a)  Every application for a license to engage in the sale at retail or wholesale of alcoholic beverages shall set forth and contain the following: 
(1)  The full name of the applicant, his correct home address and an accurate description and the correct address of the premises wherein the business is to be conducted, which latter address shall be considered the proper address for all notices to the applicant required by this chapter or by state law. 
(2)  The year, month, day and place of his birth. If the birth of the applicant occurred outside the United States, the applicant shall declare, if true, that he is a naturalized citizen of the United States and shall attach to the application a certificate of the clerk of court wherein the naturalization occurred, showing that the applicant was naturalized, and give the date of the order or judgment granting such naturalization. If such information cannot be set forth in any printed form which may be furnished, then it shall be set forth in a sworn statement which the applicant shall attach to his application. 
(3)  A statement, if true, that the applicant has continuously resided in Louisiana for two (2) years prior to the filing of the application. 
(4)  A statement that the applicant is the owner of the premises to be licensed or has a bona fide written lease therefor, in which latter event the name of the lessor shall be shown in the application and a duplicate original or certified copy of such lease shall be filed by the applicant with the application on request of the secretary-treasurer, police department or city council. 
(5)  A statement that the applicant has not been charged with or convicted of a felony or misdemeanor under the laws of the United States, or any other state or country, or under the ordinances of the city or any other municipality or political subdivision; or, if such convictions or charges have occurred, a complete list thereof, including the name of the court, the state and city or parish or county where each charge was made, the nature of each charge and the disposition thereof. (i.e., conviction and sentence received, dismissal without trial, acquittal or pending). 
(6)  A statement that no alcoholic beverage license or permit issued to the applicant or a partnership in which he was a partner or a corporation in which he was an officer, director or stockholder owning more than five (5) per cent of the stock, has been revoked within five (5) years prior to the filing of the application, and that no conviction by any court or adverse judgment against him, or a partnership or corporation in which he was interested as aforesaid, with respect to alcoholic beverages has ever occurred; or, if any such revocation or conviction has occurred, a full and complete disclosure regarding the same shall be made a part of the application and sworn to by the applicant. 
(7)  If the application is for a new business and is not for the renewal of a license which has theretofore been issued to him and which has not been revoked, then the applicant for such new license shall attach to his application a separate document (if no space is provided therefor in the application form), which shall be sworn to before an officer authorized to administer oaths, showing the following: 
a.  The cities, towns and places in the United States where he has lived. He shall give, if possible, the names of the streets and the numbers thereof of each place where he has resided. 
b.  The work in which he has been engaged for the ten (10) years preceding the date of his application, with full details and particulars. 
c.  Whether he has ever been known by any name other than the name given in the application. If so, he shall give the name or names under which he has been known or the name which he has assumed and the places where such name has been used. 
d.  Whether he has ever conducted a house of prostitution or been interested in any way or manner in the operation of such place, and whether he has been convicted of violating the White Slave Law. 
e.  Whether he has sold or possessed for sale narcotics of any kind, or whether he is an alcoholic or a user of dope or narcotics. 
f.  The places where he has operated saloons or cocktail lounges or other places where alcoholic beverages were sold; the places where he has worked in bars or lounges, either as a bartender or in any other capacity. 
(b)  In order to carry out its duty to properly investigate all applicants for alcoholic beverage licenses, the police department may require any applicant to submit to a fingerprint test in order that his background may be checked. Failure to submit to such a test on request of the police department shall be grounds for the denial, suspension or revocation of any alcoholic beverage permit. 
(c)  Each applicant for a license to conduct a new business shall give notice in the official journal of the city that he is applying in the city for a license to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages in the city, and shall attach to such application a certificate by the publisher of the official journal that such notice has been published for the period required by law. 
(d)  Any misstatement, concealment or suppression of fact in any application or accompanying affidavit or document shall be sufficient ground for the denial, suspension or revocation of a license. 
(Code 1958,  4-10.1) 
Sec. 4-12.1. - Same-Additional requirements for class R license. 
(a)  In addition to the other requirements set forth in this chapter, an applicant for a class R license shall attach to its application: 
(1)  Proof of issuance of a city class A or class C license; 
(2)  A copy of an affidavit from the local health department and the city building inspector showing compliance with all applicable health and sanitary requirements; and 
(3)  An affidavit establishing that the establishment grosses sixty (60) per cent of its average monthly revenue from the sale of food and food items, including sales records, sales tax receipts, receipts for purchases of food, food items and alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  For new restaurant establishments without prior business experience on which to determine the gross revenue from the sale of the items as set forth in subsection (a)(3) above, a temporary license, which shall be valid for sixty (60) days, may be granted by the city council, to allow the establishment to make such a determination. Any establishment which has been granted a temporary license hereunder shall submit the necessary documentation as set forth in subsection (a)(3) above prior to the expiration of the sixty-day period. The fee for the temporary license shall be as set forth in section 4-13(j). 
(Ord. No. 8097, 5-10-88; Ord. No. 9228, 5-28-91) 
Sec. 4-13. - Alcoholic beverage business-License fees. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee against all persons, corporations or partnerships who may engage in the business of selling, either retail or wholesale, offering for sale, serving, or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages in the city. The fees are assessed as follows: 
(a)  Class A liquor retail dealer ..... $500.00 
(b)  Class B liquor retail dealer (off-premises only) ..... 500.00 
(c)  Class C beer retail dealer ..... 75.00 
(d)  Class D beer retail dealer (off-premises only) ..... 60.00 
(e)  Class E private clubs ..... 500.00 
(f)  Class F bottle clubs ..... 100.00 
(g)  Class G wholesale liquor ..... 500.00 
(h)  Class H wholesale beer ..... 100.00 
(i)  Class R ..... 25.00 
(j)  Class R temporary ..... 10.00 
(Code 1958,  4-11; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 7851, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 8097, 5-10-88; Ord. No. 9340, 11-24-92) 
Cross reference- Licenses and taxation, Ch. 20. 
State Law reference- State permit fees, R.S. 26:71, 26:271. 
Sec. 4-14. - Same-Compliance with zoning requirements. 
    All licenses issued hereinabove shall comply with appropriate zoning ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1958,  4-12; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81) 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:81, 26:281. 
Sec. 4-15. - Same-Full fee regardless of date of commencing business. 
    In the event a business shall commence subsequent to the first day of January of any year, a full year's license fee shall be collected regardless of time of commencement. 
(Code 1958,  4-13) 
Sec. 4-16. - Federal and state licenses and permits required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, keep or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage defined in this chapter without first obtaining from the United States and the state every license and permit, if any, authorizing such person to engage as dealer in intoxicating liquors defined by the United States and the state. 
(b)  If a dealer in beverages of low alcoholic content fails to file a return and pay the tax due on the beverages within the time provided in R.S. 26:345, he shall be subject to a penalty of five (5) per cent on the amount of the tax if the period of delinquency is ten (10) days or less or twenty (20) per cent on the amount of the tax if the period of delinquency is greater than ten (10) days. If an attorney is called on to assist in collection, there shall be an additional sum due equal to ten (10) per cent of both the amount of the penalties and tax due. 
(Code 1958,  4-14; Ord. No. 7316, 9-22-81) 
Sec. 4-17. - Gallonage tax-Amount, basis. 
    In addition to all permits, licenses and taxes presently imposed, or permitted to be imposed, there is hereby levied a tax on all alcoholic beverages of low alcoholic content, of one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) per barrel, or at a like rate on any other quantity or fractional part of such barrel, which tax shall be based on the amount of such beverage sold within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Code 1958,  4-15) 
State Law reference- Local gallonage tax authorized, R.S. 26:492. 
Sec. 4-18. - Same-Authority, collector. 
    The tax provided for herein shall be collected by the state collector of revenue and the amount thereof so collected remitted by the collector of revenue to the city quarter in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 26:493 et seq., and under such rules and regulations as the collector of revenue may promulgate agreeable with the provisions of law. 
(Code 1958,  4-16) 
Sec. 4-19. - Closing hours. 
(a)  All places of business where alcoholic beverages are kept, sold, stored for sale at retail, served or consumed shall close their places of business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of any Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, Friday and Saturday; and between the hours of 2:00 a.m. on Sunday until 12:00 noon on Sundays. 
(b)  During the hours when the premises shall be closed as provided under subsection (a), all business activity shall cease except as specifically authorized or provided by the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1958,  4-17; Ord. No. 8097, 5-10-88; Ord. No. 9590, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 10,073, 9-26-00; Ord. No. 10,647, 12-12-06; Ord. No. 10,689, 4-24-07) 
Sec. 4-19.1. - Same-Exemptions-City governmental complex; hotel-motel hospitality rooms. 
    The closing hours as set forth in section 4-19 shall not apply to the city governmental complex or hotel-motel hospitality rooms. 
(Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 9590, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 10,875, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 4-19.2. - Same-Private clubs. 
    A bona fide private club, as defined herein, shall be exempt from the closing hours set forth in section 4-19. 
(Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 9590, 4-23-96) 
Sec. 4-20. - Same-Exceptions; merchandise to be concealed during such hours. 
    The provisions of section 4-19 requiring that the premises shall be closed and that all business activities shall cease shall not apply to any bona fide cigar stand, newsstand, drugstore, restaurant, hotel, motel or grocery store; provided no cigar stand, newsstand, drugstore, restaurant, hotel, motel or grocery store herein exempted from the closing provisions of section 4-19 shall sell, serve, display or allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages and is hereby prohibited from selling, serving, displaying or allowing the consumption of alcoholic beverages in or on the premises during the hours so prohibited, such places of business shall keep all alcoholic beverages covered up. The provisions hereof are not intended to permit any place of business herein designated to remain open where that business is forbidden to remain open by any other provision of this Code. 
(Code 1958,  4-18; Ord. No. 8097, 5-10-88) 
Sec. 4-21. - Same-Frequenting places during such times. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the proprietor or his employee, to stay or be found in any barroom, saloon or other place where alcoholic beverages are kept and sold between the hours when such places are required to be closed. 
(Code 1958,  4-19) 
Sec. 4-22. - Sale in lodging houses prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, or keep for sale, any alcoholic beverage controlled by this chapter in any place or premises used as a dwelling house, a boardinghouse, a lodging house, or a rooming house; provided, nothing in this section shall apply to duly licensed hotels. 
(Code 1958,  4-20) 
Sec. 4-23. - Sleeping on premises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lie or sleep on the counters, tables, chairs or floor or other place in any barroom, saloon or other place wherein alcoholic beverages are kept and sold. 
(Code 1958,  4-21) 
Sec. 4-24. - Proximity to schools, churches, etc. 
(a)  No license as defined in section 4-2 shall be granted to and no alcoholic beverage business shall be conducted on any premises situated within three hundred (300) feet or less of public playground or of a building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library, or school. 
(b)  This distance shall be measured as a person walks using the sidewalks, if available, from the nearest point of the property line of the church, synagogue, library, playground or school to the nearest point of the premises to be licensed or such method as may hereafter be prescribed by state law. In the absence of sidewalks, this distance may be conducted by measuring in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the church or synagogue, public library, playground, school, or full-time day care center to the nearest point of the premises to be licensed. Such alternative method of measurement shall only apply prospectively to the issuance of a new alcohol permit issued on or after May 23, 2006, the adoption date of Ordinance No. 10,592. 
(c)  The restrictions contained in this section do not apply to premises which are maintained as a bona fide hotel, motel, railway car or fraternal organization, nor to any premises licensed to deal in alcoholic beverages for one year prior to the effective date of this section [June 23, 1981]. 
(d)  In the event a retail or wholesale business has an interruption of the continuity of business for a period in excess of six (6) months, in order to reopen for business, the requirements set forth above in subsection (a) must be complied with. 
(e)  Any manufacturing, wholesale or retail business exempted from the coverage of subsection (a) by the applicability of subsection (c) or any city, state or federal statutory or constitutional provision shall be so exempted or protected only to the extent of the class of license issued legally permitted to be on the premises as of the date that the public playground or building used exclusively as a church or synagogue, public library or school began operations. 
(f)  A church, synagogue or other place of worship may waive the distance requirement stated above. Such waiver shall be irrevocable as long as the premises is used as a church, synagogue or other place of worship. 
(Code 1958,  4-22; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 9031, 11-9-88; Ord. No. 10,592, 5-23-06; Ord. No. 10,796, 4-8-08) 
State Law reference- Location restrictions, R.S. 26:81, 26:281. 
Sec. 4-25. - Reservation of rights to council. 
    The city reserves all rights that it might have under existing state laws relative to the issuance and revocation of permits. 
(Code 1958,  4-23) 
Sec. 4-26. - Unlawful acts. 
    The following acts are hereby prohibited; and no person holding a license or permit under this chapter of any nature whatsoever, and no agent, associate, employee or representative or servant of any such person, shall do or permit to be done any such acts on or about the licensed premises: 
(1)  Sell or serve alcoholic beverages (a) to any intoxicated person or (b) to any person under the age of twenty-one (21) years unless such person submits valid identification as set forth in subsection 4-1(20) of this chapter. 
(2)  Invite, permit or allow any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to come upon or visit the premises of any place of business where alcoholic beverages are the principal commodity sold, handled, distributed or consumed, except as provided in this chapter. 
(3)  Invite, permit or allow any person to loiter on the exterior of the licensed premises of any place of business where alcoholic beverages are the principal commodity sold, handled, distributed, or consumed. 
(4)  Permit any prostitute to frequent the licensed premises. 
(5)  Permit any disturbance of the peace, obscenity, or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on or about the licensed premises. 
(6)  Sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of beverage, the sale or possession of which is not authorized under the dealer's permit. 
(7)  Employ or permit females, commonly known as "B Girls," to solicit patrons for drinks and to accept drinks from patrons and receive therefor any commission, or to receive remuneration therefor in any other way. 
(8)  a.  Employ anyone under eighteen (18) years of age in any establishment where the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages constitutes the main business unless the said minor is a musician performing in a band on the premises under written contract with the permittee for a specified period of time and the musician is under the direct supervision of his parent or guardian; or, 
b.  If the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages does not constitute the main business, an employee under seventeen (17) years of age shall not be permitted to sell, mix, dispense or serve alcoholic beverages. 
(9)  Fail to keep the licensed premises well lighted, and all outside windows and doors open to view from the sidewalk or outside, or to keep the premises clean and sanitary. 
(10)  Sell, serve, permit the sale or consumption of any of the alcoholic beverages described in section 4-1 hereof during the hours prohibited in section 4-19 hereof. 
(11)  Sell or permit the sale or consumption of any of the alcoholic beverages described in section 4-1 hereof, on the sidewalk, street curb or street adjacent to the premises for which the permit or license is issued. 
(12)  Intentionally conduct illegal gambling, as now or may hereafter be defined by law, on the retail dealer's premises. 
(13)  Operate a wholesale, retail or other alcohol-related business, as defined in section 4-1, without first applying for and obtaining a permit therefor. 
(14)  Permit any person on the licensed premises unless such person has on his or her person valid identification as specified in subsection 4-1(20) herein establishing that the person meets the requirements of this chapter for admission on the premises. 
(15)  Sell or serve any alcoholic beverages at a price fixed on an "all you can drink" basis after the hour of 10:00 p.m. 
(16)  Illegally sell, offer for sale, possess, or permit the consumption on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of controlled dangerous substance as defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes 40:961. 
(Code 1958,  4-24; Ord. No. 7267, 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7295, 6-23-81; Ord. No. 7414, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 7653, 3-13-84; Ord. No. 7994, 4-28-87; Ord. No. 8097, 5-10-88; Ord. No. 9531, 8-8-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 26:90, 26:286. 
Sec. 4-27. - Violations-Penalties, persons responsible. 
(a)  Any permittee or licensee or any agent or employee of such permittee or licensee convicted of violating any of the provisions of subsection 4-26(1) shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for more than six (6) months, or both. Any permittee or licensee or any agent or employee of such permittee or licensee convicted of violating any other of the provisions this chapter shall be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code, unless the specific provisions or provisions violated have express penalties set forth therein in which the express penalty provisions will apply. 
(b)  Any conviction under the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for revocation or suspension of the violator's permit. A conviction under this chapter of a licensee's or permittee's agent, associate, employee, representative or servant shall be considered the licensee's or permittee's conviction for purposes of suspension or revocation of his permit. 
(Code 1958,  4-25; Ord. No. 7654, 3-13-84; Ord. No. 9531, 8-8-95) 
State Law reference- Suspension or revocation of permits by municipality, R.S. 33:4785 et seq. 
Sec. 4-28. - Same-Untruthful statements. 
    Any person making any untruthful statements in the application for a permit or in any of the documents to be attached to the application, as herein provided, and violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11 of this Code. Any false statement made in connection with any application shall also be sufficient cause for refusing to issue a permit under the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1958,  4-26) 
Sec. 4-29. - Same-Seizure and sale of beverage. 
    Any alcoholic beverage seized as a result of the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be ordered and confiscated and sold by the city and the proceeds from such sale shall be placed in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1958,  4-27) 
Sec. 4-30. - Sale at service stations prohibited; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful to sell alcoholic beverages at any establishment where gasoline or motor fuel is sold except for sales of alcoholic beverages packaged in bottles, cans or other sealed containers for consumption off the licensed premises, and provided that such sales shall not constitute the principal business activity of the licensed retail dealer. 
(Code 1958,  4-28) 
Sec. 4-31. - Purchase, possession or consumption by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to purchase or have public possession as defined in this chapter of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Anyone under the age of seventeen (17) who is found guilty of violating this section shall be dealt with in the manner provided by law for juveniles. 
(c)  Anyone over the age of seventeen (17) who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. Any person apprehended while violating the provisions of this section shall be issued a citation by the apprehending law enforcement officer, which shall be paid in the same manner as provided for the offender of local traffic violations. 
(d)  Any alcoholic beverages found in the possession of a person under the age of eighteen (18) in violation of this section shall be considered contraband and confiscated by any authorized law enforcement officer. Such contraband shall be then disposed of in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7414, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 9531, 8-8-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.12. 
Sec. 4-32. - Minors prohibited on licensed premises; exceptions. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of eighteen (18) to visit, loiter, or enter in or upon the premises of any place of business licensed under this chapter, except for any bona fide drugstore, restaurant, hotel, motel or grocery store, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for anyone under the age of eighteen (18) to visit, loiter or enter in or upon any portion of the premises of any drugstore, restaurant, hotel, motel or grocery store used exclusively for the sale, consumption or serving alcoholic beverages, subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Exceptions. Minors are prohibited on licensed premises except under the following: 
(1)  For an established religious purpose; 
(2)  At a function sponsored by a bona fide nonprofit organization under 26 U.S.C. 501(c) where an individual had received or purchased a ticket for admission; 
(3)  When a person under twenty-one (21) years of age is accompanied by a parent or legal custodian twenty-one (21) years of age or older; 
(4)  The sale, handling, transport, or service in dispensing of any alcoholic beverage pursuant to lawful employment of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age by a duly licensed manufacturer, wholesaler, or retailer of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  Anyone under the age of seventeen (17) who is found guilty of violating this section shall be dealt with in the manner provided by law for juveniles. 
(d)  Anyone over the age of seventeen (17) who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. Any person apprehended while violating the provisions of this section shall be issued a citation by the apprehending law enforcement officer, which shall be paid in the same manner as provided for the offender of local traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 7417, 7-13-82; Ord. No. 9531, 8-8-95) 
Sec. 4-33. - Requirement to display sign; fetal alcohol syndrome. 
(a)  Each person holding a license under the provisions of this chapter shall post and display in a conspicuous place on each licensed premises a sign which shall clearly read as follows, to wit: 
    "WARNING: Drinking alcoholic beverage during pregnancy may cause severe physical or mental birth defects." 
(b)  Signs required to be posted or displayed herein shall not be less than eight (8) inches by ten (10) inches, with letters not less than three-eighths of an inch in height. Said signs must be substantially similar in design and color as the sample attached to this section, by reference, and available for inspection at the office of the clerk of the council. 
(c)  The City of Monroe may make such warning signs available to licensees under this chapter. 
(d)  Any licensee or permittee who shall violate the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) upon the first conviction and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) upon the second and subsequent convictions. In the case of a corporation, the officer or agent in charge shall be subject to prosecution for any violation by such corporation, and upon conviction may be punished as provided above. 
(Ord. No. 7900, 4-8-86) 
Sec. 4-34. - Purchase, consumption and public possession of alcoholic beverages-By persons over seventeen but under age twenty-one; penalties. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person over the age of seventeen (17) but under the age of twenty-one (21) to purchase or have public possession of any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(c)  Any person apprehended while violating the provisions of this section shall be issued a citation by the apprehending law enforcement officer, which shall be paid in the same manner as provided for the offender of local traffic violations. 
(Ord. No. 7994, 4-28-87; Ord. No. 9531, 8-18-95) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.12. 
Sec. 4-35. - Unlawful purchase of alcoholic beverages by persons on behalf of persons under twenty-one. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person, other than a parent or legal custodian, as specified in R.S. 14:93.10(2)(a)(iii) and subsection 4-1(24)(a)3. of this chapter, to purchase on behalf of a person under twenty-one (21) years of age any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7994, 4-28-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93.13. 
Sec. 4-36. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9531, adopted Aug. 8, 1995, repealed former section 4-36 in its entirety which pertained to the public consumption and possession of alcoholic beverages of persons between the ages of 18 and 21 and derived from Ord. No. 7994, adopted Apr. 28, 1987. 
Sec. 4-37. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9531, adopted Aug. 8, 1995, repealed former  4-37 in its entirety which pertained to the voidability of former  4-34-4-37 and derived from Ord. No. 7994, adopted Apr. 28, 1987. 
Chapter 5 - AMBULANCE SERVICES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,897, adopted Nov. 27, 2018, repealed Ch. 5,  5-1-5-9, 5-21-5-30, 5-51-5-54, 5-71-5-73, and enacted a new Ch. 5 as herein set out. Former Ch. 5 pertained to similar subject matter and was derived from Ord. No. 10,645, Arts. I-IV, adopted Nov. 28, 2006; Ord. No. 11,763, adopted April 11, 2017. 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 18; occupational licenses,  20-21 et seq. 
State Law reference- Power of municipality to regulate ambulances, R.S. 33:4791, 47:4791.1. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 5-1. - Name. 
    The ordinance from which this chapter derives shall be known as the "Uniform Ambulance Service Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-2. - Purpose and intent. 
    In order to ensure that quality ambulance service is available to all residents of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana this chapter is intended to provide for the license of a sole licensed provider for ambulance service in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, and to provide for the uniform regulation of ambulance service throughout Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-3. - Findings and declaration. 
    The Monroe City Council, in accordance with R.S. 33:4791.1, does hereby find and declare the following: 
(a)  The provision of consistent high-quality emergency and non-emergency ambulance service, and all aspects attendant to emergency and non-emergency operations provided by qualified personnel with advanced life support equipment, is essential to health, safety and welfare of the citizens and people within Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
(b)  Exclusive access by an ambulance service, for the provision of emergency medical services, to the 911 or other emergency communication dispatcher in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana is essential to maintaining quick response time and consistency of care. 
(c)  It is in the best interest of the citizens of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana to license, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, with an exclusive provider of emergency and non-emergency ambulance service in Monroe. Such an exclusive license will best allow the City of Monroe to demand accountability and performance from that provider with respect to response times, and to guarantee the stability and accessibility of ambulance service in Monroe, Ouachita Parish for a set term. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-4. - Territorial applicability. 
    Upon adoption by the Monroe City Council, the provisions of this chapter shall become effective within the incorporated areas of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-5. - Cooperation with other local governing authorities. 
    The Monroe City Council authorizes its mayor to enter into such local services agreements and/or cooperative endeavor agreements with the governing authority(ies) of Ouachita Parish as are necessary and proper to use the Ouachita Council of Governments ("OCOG") and the OCOG Ambulance Service Advisory Board to periodically select and license a sole provider of ambulance service in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana and to provide for the uniform regulation and oversight of such service throughout Ouachita Parish pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-6. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Advanced life support (ALS): 
(a)  Advanced life support transport means transportation by ground ambulance vehicle permitted at the ALS level by the state and parish, medically necessary supplies and services and either an ALS assessment by ALS personnel or the provision of at least one (1) ALS intervention. Patients with emergency medical conditions as defined below shall be provided with ALS transport. 
(b)  Advanced life support assessment means an assessment performed by an ALS crew as part of an emergency response that was necessary because the patient's reported condition at the time of dispatch suggested that ALS intervention was needed. An ALS assessment does not necessarily result in a determination that the patient requires an ALS level of service. 
(c)  Advanced life support intervention means a procedure that is in accordance with state and local laws, beyond the scope of authority of an emergency medical technician. These procedures include, but are not limited to: 
  Intravenous therapy; 
  Manual defibrillation/cardioversion; 
  Endotracheal intubation; 
  Central venous line insertion or monitoring; 
  Cardiac pacing; 
  Chest decompression; 
  Surgical airway; 
  Intraosseous lines; 
  Intravenous, intramuscular or subcutaneous medication administration; 
  Inhalation, sublingual or rectal medication administration; 
  Monitoring of pulse oximetry; 
  Monitoring of end-tidal carbon dioxide. 
(d)  Advanced life support personnel means an individual trained to the level of advanced EMT or paramedic as defined by state laws and regulations, who is qualified to perform enhanced advanced skills that include being able to administer a limited number of medications and perform other interventions. 
(e)  Advanced life support ambulance service means the level of service attained when (i) the ambulance service provider is licensed as an advanced life support ambulance service by the Louisiana Bureau of EMS and (ii) the ambulance service provider's vehicles are permitted as advanced life support vehicles by the Louisiana Bureau of EMS and each ambulance is occupied by at least one (1) ambulance driver certified as an EMT, advanced EMT or paramedic, and at least one (1) patient attendant minimally certified as a paramedic by the Louisiana Bureau of EMS. 
    Basic life support (BLS) means transportation by ground ambulance vehicle and medically necessary supplies and services, plus the provision of BLS procedures as defined by the Louisiana Bureau of EMS. The ambulance must be staffed by a driver who is, at a minimum, qualified as an EMT and a patient attendant who is, at a minimum, qualified as an EMT. 
    Ambulance committee. The OCOG ambulance committee shall administer the operations contract and serve as the regulatory entity for the ambulance ordinances/chapter and all medical transportation providers within the parish. Said committee shall consist of three (3) voting members to be appointed by the Ouachita Council of Governments (OCOG). The committee members may be OCOG members or their designees with representation as follows: 
  One (1) member representing Ouachita Parish. 
  One (1) member representing the City of Monroe. 
  One (1) member representing the City of West Monroe. 
The contract administrator shall serve in an ex-officio capacity on the committee. 
    Contract administrator shall mean the person appointed by the OCOG ambulance committee to administer the ambulance chapter and operations contract. All communications between the parish, cities, advisory board and the operations contractor will be facilitated the contract administrator. The OCOG ambulance committee shall fix the compensation, if any, of the contract administrator. 
    Ambulance and medical transportation vehicles. 
Ambulance means any authorized emergency vehicle, permitted as an ambulance by the State Bureau of EMS, equipped with warning devices, designed and operated as a part of a regular course of conduct or business to transport a sick or injured individual or which is advertised or otherwise held out to the public as such. The operations contractor may use parish-permitted ambulances for non-ambulance medical transportation service (NAMTS) but NAMTS providers may not transport patients in NAMTS vehicles. The OCOG ambulance committee may establish minimum standards for all medical transportation vehicles, including, but not limited to: ALS ambulance vehicles; BLS ambulance vehicles; and emergency medical response vehicles ("EMRVs"). 
Nonambulance medical transportation vehicle means any wheelchair van or similar non-ambulance vehicle operated by a non-ambulance medical transportation service (NAMTS) provider. NAMTS providers may not transport patients in NAMTS permitted vehicles. The OCOG ambulance committee may establish minimum standards and licensing requirements for all non-ambulance medical transportation vehicles. 
    Ambulance service or ambulance provider "Ambulance service" or "ambulance provider" means any person, firm, association, or government entity licensed by the State Bureau of EMS, owning, controlling, or operating any business or service which furnishes, operates, conducts, maintains, advertises, engages in, proposes to engage in, or professes to engage in the business or service of transporting, in ambulances, individuals who may need medical attention during transport. This applies to emergency ambulance calls and non-emergency ambulance calls. However, "ambulance service" and "ambulance provider" shall not include any of the following: 
(a)  A volunteer nonprofit organization or municipal nonprofit organization operating an invalid coach or coaches. 
(b)  An entity rendering assistance to a licensed ambulance or ambulances in the case of a major disaster. 
(c)  A licensed hospital providing non-ambulance transportation when such transportation originates at a licensed hospital. 
(d)  A licensed hospital providing non-emergency transportation from its campus to a long-term care or rehabilitation facility. 
(e)  An entity operating an ambulance or ambulances from a location outside of the state to transport patients from a location outside of the state to a location inside the state or to transport a patient or patients from a medical facility inside of the state to a location outside of the state. 
(f)  An entity providing transportation to employees who become sick or injured during the course of their employment from a job site to the nearest appropriate medical facility. 
    Emergency medical condition shall mean a medical condition manifesting itself by acute symptoms of sufficient severity (including severe pain, and/or symptoms of substance abuse) such that a prudent layperson, who possess an average knowledge of health and medicine, could reasonably expect the absence of immediate medical attention to result in placing the health of the individual (or, with respect to a pregnant woman, the health of the woman or her unborn child) in serious jeopardy, serious impairment to bodily functions, or serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part. Except in major catastrophes and in disaster situations (as declared by appropriate elected officials) only ambulances that are permitted at the ALS level with ALS personnel may transport patients with emergency medical conditions. 
    Emergency ambulance call shall mean a situation that is classified (at time of dispatch) as a priority one (1) or two (2) under the emergency dispatch protocols established by the NAEMD (National Association of Emergency Medical Dispatch) or APCO (Association of Public Safety Communications Officials), or when the exact circumstances are unknown, but the nature of the request is suggestive of a true emergency where a patient may be at risk. ALS and BLS ambulances or EMRVs may respond to emergency ambulance calls, but only ALS ambulances may transport patients with emergency medical conditions. 
    Emergent ambulance call from a hospital shall mean a call that, at the time the call is made, presents circumstances in which there is an immediate need for a patient to be transported by ambulance from a hospital in Monroe, Ouachita Parish (the "originating hospital") to another hospital, inside or outside Ouachita Parish, so that the patient can receive a higher level of care or medical services that are not available at the originating hospital, and the physician ordering the ambulance transport or otherwise referring the patient to another hospital certifies that a delay in the transport is likely to have an unfavorable impact on the patient's outcome. 
    Non-emergency ambulance call means a call for ambulance service that is not an emergency ambulance call. Non-emergency transportation by ambulance is appropriate if either: the patient is bed-confined, and it is documented that the patient's condition is such that other methods of transportation are contraindicated; or, if the patient's medical condition, regardless of bed confinement, is such that transportation by ambulance is medically required. 
    Emergency mode means an ambulance or EMRV operating with emergency lights and warning siren (may use air horn in addition to siren) while engaged in an emergency ambulance call. Drivers of ambulances and EMRVs shall operate in the emergency mode with warning lights and siren at all times while engaged in an emergency ambulance call if they are operating the emergency vehicle in a manner to take exemption to the traffic laws and rules of the road which may be allowed by state law, so as to warn other drivers of non-emergency vehicles to yield the right-of-way of the authorized emergency vehicle. Ambulances and EMRVs may use emergency warning lights only, if they are engaged in an emergency ambulance call and they are stopped or parked or if they are moving and operating the vehicle in a manner so as to abide by all traffic laws and regulations stipulated in state law. No driver of any ambulance or EMRV shall assume any special privilege from traffic laws and regulations except when such emergency vehicle is operated in the emergency mode, with warning lights and siren, while engaged in an emergency ambulance call. 
    Emergency medical response vehicle (EMRV) means a marked emergency vehicle with fully visual and audible warning signals operated by the city/parish-licensed ambulance service, the primary purpose of which is to respond to the scene of a medical emergency to provide emergency medical stabilization or support, or command, control, and communications, but which is not an ambulance designed or intended for the purpose of transporting a victim from the scene to a medical facility regardless of its designation. Included are such vehicles referred to but not limited to the designation as "sprint car", "quick response vehicle", "special response vehicle", "triage trucks", "staff cars", "supervisor units", and other similar designations. Personnel operating EMRVs must be certified as either EMT, advanced EMT or paramedic. 
    Emergency facilities are those facilities that include as part of their mission providing for the treatment of patients with life- or limb-threatening conditions. They meet or exceed the Emergency Care Guidelines of the American College of Emergency Physicians and they receive ambulance patients with emergency medical conditions. 
    Emergency medical services driver (EMSD) means an individual who is authorized to drive an ambulance in the parish. At a minimum, they must trained and certified as an emergency medical responder and have successfully completed an emergency ambulance driving course with current certification as approved by the ambulance committee. EMT, advanced EMT, and paramedics may also function as EMSD if they successfully complete an emergency ambulance driving course with current certification as approved by the ambulance advisory committee. 
    Ambulatory care facilities provides primary medical care services and may be accessible without prior doctor-patient relationship or without an appointment. 
    Call response measurements. The following definitions shall be used as time measurements for the ambulance provider licensed pursuant to this chapter. All times shall be recorded in hours, minutes and seconds. These measurements shall be utilized by the ambulanced advisory committee to determine licensed ambulance provider's compliance with performance criteria. All of the below listed times shall be based on transporting units only. 
(a)  Fractile response time means the percentile of a specific category of requests for ambulance service that are appropriately answered within a stated response time goal or standard. A fractile response time requirement can be expressed as follows: Every calendar month, the contractor will have an ALS ambulance staffed as required, on the scene of at least X per cent of all (enter level of call here, such as "presumed life threatening") emergency calls in (a specific jurisdiction) in Y minutes or less. An example of this wording follows: "Every calendar month, the contractor will have an ALS ambulance staffed as required, on the scene of at least eighty (80) per cent of all presumed life threatening presumed life-threatening emergency calls inside the cities of Monroe and West Monroe in eight (8) minutes zero (0) seconds or less." 
(b)  Call received time . This time is when the EMS telecommunicator has answered a call for service or when the call has been transferred from the Monroe, Ouachita Parish 911 call center. 
(c)  En route time. This time is when the assigned unit is notified of assignment to a specific call by the communications center and declares itself to be en route. 
(d)  On-scene time. This stage begins when the ambulance unit declares itself on-scene, (the unit is fully stopped at the location where the ambulance shall be parked while the crew exits to approach the patient or when it arrives at a staging area because of hazardous materials, violent crime scenes, etc.) and ends when the ambulance unit declares itself to be en route to a destination. 
(e)  Response time. Elapsed time measurement that begins at the call received time and ends when an assigned ambulance unit capable of ALS transport declares itself on-scene at the assigned location or staging area. 
    Emergency medical services ("EMS") means the following pre-hospital and inter-hospital services: 
(a)  Access and coordination. The answering and processing of telephone requests for ambulance or emergency medical responder services, including EMS dispatching, emergency and non-emergency; the providing of medical pre-arrival instructions to callers by telephone; but excluding the process of 911 complaint-taking when the caller is immediately transferred to the EMS control center; 
(b)  Reserved. 
(c)  Medical transportation. Transportation and services by either a permitted ambulance (ALS or BLS) or non-ambulance medical transportation service vehicle. 
(d)  On-line medical direction. On-line medical direction is the medical direction provided directly to prehospital providers by the medical director or designee either on-scene or by direct voice communication. Ultimate authority and responsibility for concurrent medical direction rests with the medical director. On line medical direction in the Parish shall be sanctioned and coordinated by the licensed ambulance provider. 
(e)  Off-line medical direction. Off-line medical direction is the administrative promulgation and enforcement of accepted standards of prehospital care. Off-line medical direction can be accomplished through both prospective and retrospective methods. Prospective methods include, but are not limited to, training, testing, and certification of providers; protocol development; operational policy and procedures development; and legislative activities. Retrospective activities include, but are not limited to, medical audit and review of care, direction of remedial education, and limitation of patient care functions, if needed. Various aspects of prospective and retrospective medical direction can be handled by committees functioning under the medical director with representation from appropriate medical and EMS personnel. The off-line medical director is appointed by the licensed ambulance provider, and shall be a physician licensed to practice emergency medicine who is familiar with the pre-hospital emergency response system in Monroe, Ouachita Parish. 
    EMS control center. EMS control center is the communications facility operated by the licensed ambulance provider which serves as the central EMS communications center for the parish. 
    Licensed ambulance provider. The licensed ambulance provider is the licensed provider for emergency ambulance services in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. The licensed ambulance provider is authorized to enter into mutual aid agreements with other EMS, public safety and ancillary support agencies. 
    Medical necessity for ambulance service. Medical necessity is established when the patient's condition is such that use of any other method of transportation other than ambulance is contraindicated. In any case, in which some means of transportation other than an ambulance could be utilized without endangering the individual's health, whether or not such other transportation is actually available. 
    Non-ambulance medical transportation service (NAMTS) or medical wheelchair van service means any person, firm, association, or government entity owning, controlling, or operating any business or service which furnishes, operates, conducts, maintains, advertises, engages in, proposes to engage in, or professes to engage in the business or service of transporting individuals in a vehicle other than an ambulance, with the following stipulations: 
(a)  Passengers do not require medical care, attention, or monitoring during transport; and 
(b)  Passengers do not require the assistance of an attendant during transport; and 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Reserved. 
(e)  Passengers do not meet medical necessity requirements as defined in this chapter. 
(f)  Drivers must possess a valid driver's license and be state certified as a EMR, EMT, AEMT or paramedic. 
    Operations contract means a contract between an ambulance provider and the parish to provide ambulance service to the parish in response to emergency ambulance calls and non-emergency ambulance calls within Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
    Operations contractor means the entity providing emergency and non-emergency ambulance service to Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana pursuant to the operations contract. 
    Patient means an individual who is ill, sick, injured, wounded, or incapacitated (physically or mentally), and who is in need, or is at risk of needing, medical care or assessment at the scene of a call and during transportation to or from a health care facility. Only licensed ambulance services may transport patients as defined herein, and they must be transported in ambulance vehicles permitted by the State of Louisiana. 
    License-Ambulance service license. Every ambulance service provider as defined in this section responding to emergency ambulance calls and non-emergency ambulance calls originating in the parish shall be required to obtain an ambulance service license pursuant to this chapter. This ambulance service license authorizes the provider to respond to emergency and non-emergency ambulance calls. 
    System standard of care means the federal, state and local laws, and policies, rules, regulations and protocols that establish standards governing all clinical and operational aspects of the EMS system in Monroe, Ouachita Parish. Minimum requirements shall include, but not be limited to, the most current standards recommended by the Commission on Accreditation of Ambulance Services. The OCOG ambulance committee may establish additional minimum standards of care. The licensed ambulance provider shall maintain accreditation with the Commission on Accreditation of Ambulance Services during the term of the contract. If the licensed ambulance provider does not hold such accreditation at the commencement of the contract, it must make application for such accreditation within one (1) year from the commencement date of the contract and must be accredited within two (2) years. 
    Telecommunicator shall hold the certification from either the National Academy of Emergency Medical Dispatch (NAEMD) or the Association of Public Safety Communication Officials EMD (APCO EMD). Only qualified telecommunicators shall be permitted to work in the EMS control center as call takers or dispatchers. 
    System status plan means the plan and protocols for staffing, deployment, and redeployment of ambulances which is developed and utilized by an ambulance service provider, and which specifies how many ambulances will be staffed and available within the parish each hour of the day, each day of the week, including the locations of available ambulances (not assigned to calls) within the parish, specified separately for each hour of the day, for each day of the week and the remaining number of ambulances then available in the system, and including protocols for event-driven redeployment of those remaining ambulances. The operations contractor is responsible for development and implementation of the system status plan. The system status plan shall require enough units to meet emergency and nonemergency response times. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-7. - Prohibited acts. 
    Subject to the "exemptions" set forth in section 5-8, it shall be unlawful and an offense for any person or any ambulance service provider to commit any of the following acts: 
(a)  To perform duties as an EMS driver, attendant, (EMR, EMT, advanced EMT, paramedic or pre-hospital RN or licensed physician), without a current valid certification issued by the Louisiana Bureau of EMS. 
(b)  To allow any person to work as an ambulance driver or attendant, without current valid certification issued by the Louisiana Bureau of EMS. 
(c)  To use, or cause to be used, an ambulance service other than the ambulance service provider holding a valid ambulance service license pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  For any person, firm or organization except public safety agencies in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana to respond to emergency or non-emergency ambulance calls that originate within Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana other than the ambulance service provider that is the holder of a valid ambulance service license issued pursuant to this chapter or without the express authorization of the operations contractor. 
(e)  To knowingly give false information to induce the dispatch of an ambulance or emergency medical responder. 
(f)  To operate an ambulance in the emergency mode when not responding to an emergency ambulance call in compliance with this chapter. 
(g)  For any person, firm or organization to cause the use of non-emergency ambulance service that violates the provisions of this chapter. 
(h)  For an ambulance service provider to bill a patient for services provided by firefighters, police officers, or other public employees acting as first responders. This provision shall not be applied to prevent an ambulance service provider from billing a patient for medications, medical supplies, and the like used by firefighters, police officers, or other public employees acting as first responders where those medications, medical supplies, and the like were provided to or for such first responders by the ambulance service provider. 
(i)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for the licensed ambulance provider, to fail to respond to an emergency ambulance call originating within the parish where there is a medical necessity for the service. 
(j)  To allow any person to work as a telecommunicator without NAEMD or APCO EMD certification. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-8. - Penalties. 
(a)  In this chapter, the term "violation of this chapter" means: 
Doing an act that is prohibited or declared unlawful, by this uniform ambulance service chapter or by rule or regulation authorized by said chapter; 
Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by this uniform ambulance service chapter or by rule or regulation authorized by said chapter; or 
(b)  In this chapter, the term "violation of this chapter" does not include the failure of a public employee or designee to perform an official duty unless this uniform ambulance service chapter specifically provides that failure to perform the duty is to be punishable as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  The imposition of a penalty as set forth herein does not prevent the subject violation of this chapter from being considered in connection with the revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise. 
(d)  Continuous or repeated violations of this chapter may be abated by injunctive or other relief, and the imposition of a penalty under this section or any other provision of law does not constitute an election of remedies and shall not prevent an award of injunctive or other relief. 
(e)  Each violations of this chapter shall be subject to punishment by a fine not to exceed the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), thirty (30) days imprisonment, one hundred (100) hours of community service, or any combination thereof. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-9. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding anything herein, it shall not be a violation of this chapter, and no ambulance service license shall be required, when a vehicle or ambulance is: 
(a)  Responding to an emergency or non-emergency ambulance call at the request of the licensed ambulance provider. 
(b)  A privately owned vehicle not ordinarily used in the business of transporting patients who are sick, injured, wounded, incapacitated or helpless. 
(c)  A vehicle rendering services as an ambulance in the event of a major catastrophe or emergency when ambulances with permits based in the locality of the catastrophe or emergency are incapacitated or insufficient in number to render the services needed as determined by the incident commander(s). 
(d)  (1)  An ambulance transporting a patient to a location within the parish where the transport originated from a point outside the parish; and 
(2)  An ambulance operated by the same ambulance service as above, which transports the same patient from the original destination within the parish back to the original point of origin within twenty-four (24) hours of the original transport and the patient (or a proper representative of the patient) has specifically requested transportation by said ambulance service. 
(e)  An ambulance operated by the same ambulance service provided by a governmental entity or political subdivision that transported a patient to a location within the parish, that transports the same patient from the original destination within the parish back to the patient's original point of origin outside the parish when the patient (or a proper representative of the patient) has specifically requested transportation by said ambulance service because the patient receives such ambulance service without cost, or at a reduced cost, by virtue of being a citizen or resident of the governmental entity or political subdivision operating that ambulance service. 
(f)  A vehicle engaged in the interstate transport of a patient that originates outside the parish. 
(g)  An ambulance service that responds with mutual aid and permission of the operations contractor, so long as the response is coordinated through the EMS control center and the licensed ambulance provider determines that the ambulance service meets or exceeds the needs of the specific patient(s). 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. I, 11-27-18) 
Secs. 5-10-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AMBULANCE SERVICE ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 5-21. - Name and purpose. 
    In order that the local governing bodies will have the benefit of relevant technical and professional expertise there is hereby created the "Ouachita Parish Ambulance Service Advisory Board" ("board") which shall assist and advise the local governing bodies with respect to the selection of a sole provider for ambulance service in Ouachita Parish and the regulation of such service as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-22. - Members and method of appointment. 
    The board shall consist of seven (7) members, appointed as follows for a term of two (2) years: 
(1)  One (1) member of the board shall be appointed by the president of the University of Louisiana at Monroe. 
(2)  The mayor of the City of Monroe, the mayor of the City of West Monroe and the president of the Ouachita Parish Police Jury shall each appoint one (1) member of the board. Each of these three (3) appointees shall be familiar with emergency medical services in Ouachita Parish. 
(3)  The chief executive officer (or person serving in the equivalent position) of each medical center operating a 24-hour emergency department in Ouachita Parish shall appoint one (1) member of the board. This provision calls for three (3) appointments, one (1) each from the chief executive of each of the following medical centers: St. Francis Medical Center; Glenwood Regional Medical Center; and, E. A. Conway Medical Center. 
No member of the board shall be affiliated with any ambulance service. There shall be no limit on the number of terms a member may serve on the board. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-23. - Notification of appointment. 
    The appointing authority shall provide written notice identifying its appointee to the contract administrator and the appointment shall become effective upon the contract administrator's receipt of that notice. The contract administrator shall communicate, in writing, to the local governing authorities the name of all appointees and the date of the appointment. All appointments will be publically reported at the next meeting of OCOG. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-24. - Meetings. 
    The board shall meet at any time on the call of the chairman, the contract administrator, or on the written request of any four (4) members. The board will meet at least quarterly. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public as provided by law. The board may make its own rules and regulations concerning the conduct of its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-25. - Attendance at meetings. 
    Members of the board shall be expected to attend all regular and called meetings. Should a member be absent from more than fifty (50) per cent of the board's meetings in a calendar year, the contract administrator shall notify the authority that appointed such member and request that the member be removed from the board and a new member be appointed. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-26. - Organization and quorum of the board. 
    The board shall elect, at its first meeting, and annually thereafter, a chairman, a vice chairman and a secretary from its membership. The term of each officer shall be for one (1) year with eligibility for reelection. Four (4) members of the board shall constitute a quorum for all purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-27. - Committees. 
    The board shall have the power to designate various committees with such powers and duties as the board may prescribe, provided that such powers and duties do not violate any law of the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-28. - Reports. 
    The board shall keep an accurate record of all of its meetings and shall, at least annually, give to OCOG a written report of the board's activities for the prior year. The board shall provide OCOG copies of the minutes of each of its meetings. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-29. - Legal representation. 
    The district attorney for Ouachita Parish or his/her designee, shall serve as the legal advisor to the board. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-30. - Duties and authority of board. 
    The board shall have the following duties and authority: 
(a)  As desired, the board may review and recommend to OCOG and the local governing authorities any changes to the ordinance(s) regulating ambulance services. 
(b)  As desired, the board may review and recommend to OCOG and the local governing authorities any changes in the standards and procedures with reference to the provision of emergency medical services. 
(c)  The board will respond to any complaint concerning quality of service provided under the sole provider license issued through OCOG by the local governing authorities pursuant to this chapter. 
(d)  The board will respond to any complaint concerning rates and charges by emergency medical service providers in Ouachita Parish and can make any recommendation concerning the same to OCOG and the local governing authorities. 
(e)  The board may review and recommend to OCOG and the local governing authorities any recommendations it has concerning the provision of any emergency medical service to the citizens of Ouachita Parish. 
(f)  The board may encourage the local governing authorities in Ouachita Parish to adopt such ordinances as are needed in order to provide quality ambulance service to all citizens living within Ouachita Parish. 
(g)  Monitor the licensed ambulance provider's compliance with applicable response times established by this chapter or by the operations contract. 
(h)  The board will hear any complaint of any person with reference to the provision of ambulance services in Ouachita Parish. In connection with such complaints the privacy rights of any patient will be protected in accordance with law. The hearing of complaints by the board will be conducted under the following procedure: 
(1)  All complaints must be in writing. All written complaints must be directed initially to the contract administrator. 
(2)  The contract administrator will notify the chairman of the board in writing of the receipt of any written complaint. 
(3)  The contract administrator will notify the emergency medical service provider in writing of the complaint, will furnish a copy of the written complaint to the provider and will allow fifteen (15) days for the provider to respond in writing to the complaint. 
(4)  The contract administrator will furnish a copy of the written response of the emergency medical service provider to the complaining party upon the receipt of same. 
(5)  The board will consider and attempt to mediate and resolve the complaint, if possible. If the complaint is resolved, notice of the resolution will be sent by the contract administrator to the complaining party and to the emergency medical service provider. 
(6)  If the complaint is not able to be resolved by the board, the contract administrator will refer the complaint, together with the response of the provider, and any recommendation that the board deems appropriate to the local governing authorities and/or appropriate law enforcement agencies. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. II, 11-27-18) 
Secs. 5-31-5-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF LICENSE FOR PROVISION OF AMBULANCE SERVICES 

Sec. 5-51. - Exclusive license. 
    Under the provisions of Louisiana law, including but not limited to La. R.S. 33:4791.1, the Monroe City Council is authorized to issue an exclusive license to a sole provider of ambulance services (both emergency and non-emergency) within the unincorporated areas of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. The Monroe City Council finds that the purpose and intent of this chapter as stated hereinabove are best served by the licensure of such a sole provider of ambulance service. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. III, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-52. - Term of exclusive license. 
    The initial term of any such exclusive license shall be for a period of five (5) years beginning with the commencement date set forth in the license issued by OCOG pursuant to this chapter. The license may thereafter be renewed by mutual agreement of OCOG and the licensee for additional terms of not more than four (4) years each. 
    It will be presumed that the parties intend for the license to be renewed for a term of one (1) year unless written notice of non-renewal is delivered to the other party not less than one hundred twenty (120) days prior to the end of the term of the license then in effect. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. III, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-53. - License fee. 
    The provider of ambulance services shall pay a license fee of thirty-five thousand and no/100 ($35,000.00) dollars each calendar year, or portion thereof, during the term of this exclusive license. This license fee shall be paid to OCOG to defray the costs of administering this chapter. The initial license fee shall be paid upon commencement of the initial term of the license with subsequent license fees being due thereafter on or before January 31 of each succeeding year during the initial or renewal term(s) of the license. 
    For the calendar year 2020 and thereafter during the initial and renewal term(s) of the license, OCOG may increase the license fee if shown necessary to cover the costs of administering this chapter, but no such increase shall be more than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per calendar year or portion thereof. Any such increase shall be adopted by OCOG at an open meeting held on or before October 31 of the prior year. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. III, 11-27-18) 
Sec. 5-54. - Conditions of license for provision of ambulance service. 
    Any sole provider of ambulance services for the incorporated areas of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana shall be selected only upon the ambulance service provider being able to furnish and actually furnishing to the Monroe City Council the following inter alia : 
(a)  The provision of a licensed emergency physician to serve as medical director of ambulance service. The medical director or his/her designee shall be responsible for all quality of care issues, and shall provide monthly reports to the contract administrator, regarding response times, responses to complaints made to the board, and any other quality of care issue. 
(b)  The ambulance contractor shall maintain mutual aid agreements with air and ground ambulance providers who can respond to Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana when called upon by the licensed ambulance provider in times of disaster or other extraordinary situations. 
(c)  Insurance required: Prior to commencement of any operations under the license with the Monroe City Council, the provider must file with the city and with the ambulance service advisory board all policies of general liability insurance, automobile liability insurance, workers compensation insurance and professional liability insurance which policies must be issued by an insurance company qualified to do business in the State of Louisiana having a rating of not less than B+ by A. M. Best or equivalent rating by a nationally recognized rating service and shall be eligible for redemption under any terms of default as defined by this chapter or any provision of the contract and which policies shall contain the conditions and stipulations set forth in the operations contract. 
(d)  Insurance cancellation: Cancellation or material alteration of any required insurance policy or coverage shall result in the automatic revocation of any ambulance service license issued hereunder, and the ambulance service provider shall thereupon cease and desist from further ambulance service operations in the City of Monroe. 
(e)  Performance bond requirements: Provider must furnish performance security in an amount of not less than seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000.00). Said security shall be furnished through the pledge of a certificate(s) of deposit to OCOG in said amount or through the posting of a performance bond in favor of OCOG in said amount issued by an insurer or surety having a rating of not less than B+ by A. M. Best or equivalent rating by a nationally recognized rating service. 
(f)  Inspection of ambulances: Before any operations can commence under any license, all ambulances used by provider in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana must have current motor vehicle inspection stickers issued by the Louisiana Department of Motor Vehicles and each ambulance must be equipped in compliance with the standards for ambulance equipment established by the State of Louisiana. Any ambulance operated by provider in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana must remain in compliance with said state standards at all times. 
(g)  Emergency medical technicians: With reference to emergency medical technicians, provider must agree as follows: 
(1)  No ambulance will transport a patient suffering an emergency medical condition, with the transport originating in or from Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, unless it is an advanced life support ambulance capable of providing advanced life support services and whose crew shall consist of at least one (1) nationally registered paramedic and one (1) nationally registered EMT. 
(2)  No person shall provide services in any capacity on an emergency medical response vehicle unless he is the holder of a certification by the department of health and hospitals; or a certification of an emergency medical technician issued by the National Registry of Emergency medical technicians; or a certificate of licensor as a registered nurse; or is a physician or surgeon licensed to practice medicine by the Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners. No person shall provide services in any capacity without holding a valid certification of cardiopulmonary resuscitation training issued by the American National Red Cross or the American Heart Association. 
(3)  Provider shall, at all times, under penalty of revocation, certify that all persons serving on said ambulance meet the following qualifications: 
a.  The caregiver is a person of at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
b.  The caregiver is an emergency medical technician who meets all state certification requirements and is in good standing with the Bureau of Emergency Medical Services of Louisiana as memorialized in R.S. 40:1231 et seq. 
c.  All employees of provider who shall operate an ambulance within Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana shall have been issued and be in possession of a valid driver's license for the operation of said vehicle as required by the State of Louisiana. Additionally, provider shall, at all times, certify, under the penalty of permit revocation, that all drivers of its ambulances meet the following criteria: 
(i)  The driver is a person of at least eighteen (18) years of age; and 
(ii)  The driver is a Louisiana emergency medical technician, advanced emergency medical technician, or paramedic. 
(h)  Standards for ambulance equipment: The provider must warrant that each ambulance will carry at all times, when the ambulance is in use, the minimum essential equipment required by state law. 
(i)  Ambulance performance standards: The provider must warrant as follows: 
That it shall not unreasonably refuse to respond to a request for ambulance service in Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
Provider warrants that it shall not refuse to respond to a request for ambulance service where there is a "medical necessity" for the service, on the grounds of the patient's inability to pay for such service. 
Provider warrants that it shall conform to all nationally accepted standards with respect to ground ambulance operations. Provider furthermore must agree to comply with the Ouachita Parish Office of Homeland Security and Emergency Preparedness "Emergency Operations Plan" in regards to its role and/or function within an incident management system. 
(j)  Review of rates, financial information, and performance information: As to the review of rates, charges and financial information, the provider must agree as follows: 
(1)  Provider shall submit a schedule of its rates for all services to the advisory board for review, at least once per year, and at such other times and in such format as may be designated by the advisory board. The advisory board shall have authority to review, and/or approve such rates which shall be comparable to similar Louisiana parish ALS EMS systems. In the event the advisory board rejects the provider's proposed rate schedule, the provider may appeal to OCOG for approval of the same. The provider will not exceed the charges for base rate, mileage rate per run, supplies, oxygen and any other services included in provider's schedule of rates except as may be pre-approved by the advisory board. The provider must acknowledge that it is responsible for billing and collecting for services rendered. All fees for services rendered shall remain the property of the provider. The provider will be allowed to add and/or modify items that represent new and/or changing technology, equipment, services and pharmaceuticals and to charge reasonable fees for said new items that are added. 
(2)  The schedule of rates to be submitted for review shall include the rates to be charged under any contracts the provider enters into with any hospital, long-term care facility, rehabilitation facility, or similar healthcare facility, to provide non-emergency ambulance service in Ouachita Parish to, or for, such facility. Rates for like services to like facilities shall be equal. 
(3)  The provider must permit the advisory board or its designated representatives, including but not limited to auditors, reasonable access to its financial records, books, documents, papers, files or other records that are pertinent during normal business hours upon reasonable notice. 
(4)  Provider shall present to the advisory board an annual audit of owner/operator's financial statements and activities. A copy of every such annual audit must be provided to the advisory board. The provider shall have the right to demand that all audited financial statements and any other proprietary information, as deemed proprietary by the provider, be reviewed and discussed in executive session of the advisory board and not be considered a public record, where allowed by Louisiana law. 
(5)  Provider shall submit to the advisory board such reports, records, recordings and other information as requested by the board in connection with the investigation of a complaint or as otherwise deemed necessary by the board in connection with the oversight of the provider's performance of the provider's obligations under this chapter and/or the operations contract. The provider shall have the right to demand that all patient records and proprietary information, as deemed proprietary by the provider, be reviewed and discussed in executive session of the advisory board and not be considered a public record, where allowed by Louisiana law. 
(6)  The provider shall not initiate any "membership drive" or similar sale to consumers of enrollments in any plan related to the provider's ambulance services without prior approval of such membership drive or sale of enrollments by the OCOG ambulance committee In connection with these matters the OCOG ambulance committee may seek the recommendation of the ambulance service advisory board and the provider shall make available to board and/or the OCOG ambulance committee written specification regarding the terms and conditions of the proposed membership drive or sale of enrollments as well as the provider's proposed marketing plan including the content of proposed advertisements and promotional efforts. 
(j)  Material changes in government regulations: In the event that federal laws, rules and regulations are adopted, amended, interpreted, or enforced, which have a material adverse effect on third party reimbursements for ambulance transports or requires reimbursements to be based on the clinical level of service actually performed or provided, then (a) the OCOG ambulance committee and the operations contractor will renegotiate, in good faith, the rates and fees which may be charged; and (b) the City of Monroe will modify any provisions of this chapter inconsistent with the terms of such federal authority. 
(k)  Mandatory centralized emergency ambulance call processing: With respect to the handling of calls for ambulance service the provider must agree as follows: 
(1)  911 Calls. All 911 telephone requests for ambulance services, both emergency and non-emergency, originating within Ouachita Parish shall terminate at the EMS control center, where the licensed ambulance provider shall establish the call's classification, determine the patient's location, and if appropriate, deliver pre-arrival instructions utilizing current APCO or EMD standards. The licensed ambulance provider shall also determine the need for EMS public safety provider services in accordance with established guidelines, alert the EMS public safety agency dispatch center and dispatch the appropriate ambulance. 
(2)  EMS deployment. The EMS control center of the licensed ambulance provider shall at all times have full authority to direct the deployment, positioning, movements, and run responses of all ambulances, and mutual aid ambulance service providers. However, at all times an emergency ambulance shall be positioned and staffed on each side (east/west) of the Ouachita River. The licensed ambulance provider's deployment of ambulances shall be adequate to meet required emergency and nonemergency response times. 
(3)  Patient destination. The licensed ambulance provider shall develop and implement patient transportation and destination policies and guidelines. 
(4)  Recording calls. All call requests processed by the EMS control center of the licensed ambulance provider shall be recorded to facilitate subsequent auditing of the licensed ambulance providers actions and decisions by the contract administrator, and all such recordings shall be safely stored and shall not be erased for a period of six (6) months. 
(5)  Other call processing. All other call requests for ambulance service, emergency or nonemergency, which may be received by parties other than the operations contractor, shall be transferred immediately to the EMS control center. 
(l)  Response reliability standards: With respect to emergency responses, the provider must agree as follows: 
(1)  To comply with a parish-wide response times zone map indicating acceptable response times for various zones throughout the parish and agree to pay such penalties or damages set forth in this chapter and/or stipulated in the operations contract for any failure to meet the response time thresholds shall be as set forth by this chapter or established as part of the operations contract. 
(2)-(6)  Reserved. 
(7)  Throughout the term of any license issued hereunder, it will be provider's responsibility to meet the response time thresholds established by this chapter or as part of the operations contract regardless of the number of ambulances required to meet said standards. Additionally, provider must acknowledge that at all times it will operate its service aiming always to provide better and increased service and decreased response times. Provider must acknowledge that the above described response times are minimum standards and provider must acknowledge that it will always strive to achieve decreased response times. 
(8)  With respect to nonemergency responses originating at a hospital or other healthcare facility, the provider must agree as follows: a two (2) hour response time with a ninety (90) per cent rate of compliance. 
(9)  With respect to emergent ambulance calls from a hospital the provider must agree as follows: a thirty (30) minute response time with a ninety (90) per cent rate of compliance. 
(m)  Response time reports: Response times on emergency and non-emergency responses will be calculated using response time as defined herein. Response time reports will be submitted to the contract administrator each calendar month by provider. The monthly response time report shall include an itemized summary of each call that identifies the jurisdiction, priority and response zone for each call. The itemized summary of each call shall include all available information regarding the call received time, en route time, on-scene time and response time for that call. 
The monthly response time reports shall also identify all calls excluded from the response time calculation and the applicable exclusion. All information and back-up documentation supporting such exclusion must be provided to the contract administrator upon request. The monthly response time report must be delivered to the contract administrator within ten (10) days of the end of the month. 
(n)  Provider must agree that the advisory board will be allowed to monitor response times. 
(o)  Excluded responses: Provider will have the responsibility to document the nature of the circumstances surrounding any excluded response and the emergency and non-emergency responses affected thereby. It shall be provider's responsibility to prove said response should be excluded in default of which it will be included. 
There shall be no "excluded responses" with respect to non-emergency responses. With respect to emergency responses, "excluded responses" for purposes of response time calculation, are as follows: 
(1)  Responses that occur during periods of abnormally severe weather for which a "warning" has been issued by the National Weather Service where such weather could reasonably be expected to substantially impair response time performance. 
(2)  Delayed response due to potentially hazardous scenes or in which access is restricted by public safety personnel. This exclusion shall not apply if law enforcement or fire personnel have established a staging area at the scene. In such circumstances, response time shall be determined upon the ambulance's arrival at the staging area. 
(3)  Those responses presented by provider for consideration by the ambulance service advisory board and which such authority finds that the response has merit to be deemed excluded due to extraordinary circumstances. An example of such a response would be a request for response during provider's servicing of a mass casualty situation where the majority of the units in the parish/city have been directed to attend to the mass casualty incident (i.e., mass shooting/active shooter at a school with multiple victims.) 
Except in cases of force majeure, provider agrees that it shall at all times have a responsibility to respond as soon as safely practicable even in the face of an excluded response. It is agreed that any such exceptions and/or exclusions from response will extend the required response times by only the amount of time by which the otherwise applicable response is interfered with or inhibited by the exception. 
(p)  Response time penalty: If the provider fails to meet the response time thresholds set forth by this chapter or established as part of the operations contract on emergency or non-emergency calls during any quarter, the provider may be assessed such penalties as set forth by this chapter or established as part of the operations contract. 
Response time will be measured for calculation and assessment of penalties on a quarterly basis. Should provider fail to any response time threshold, prior to any penalty being assessed, provider shall be afforded an opportunity to be heard before the advisory board to show good cause as to why said penalties should not be imposed. For good cause shown, the board may recommend that OCOG waive and/or reduce any response time penalties otherwise due under this chapter or the operations contract. 
If provider fails to adhere to the applicable response time standards for either emergency or non-emergency responses in three (3) quarters within any twelve (12) month period, that failure shall constitute grounds for the termination of the license with provider. 
If provider fails to adhere to the applicable response time standards for either emergency or non-emergency responses in two (2) consecutive quarters or two (2) quarters in any twelve (12) month period, the provider shall within fifteen (15) day notice of such failure provide the ambulance advisory committee with provider's written plan to achieve adherence to the applicable response time standards in the ensuing quarter. If the provider fails to timely submit such plan, provider shall by such failure be deemed to have authorized the executive director to request another ambulance service to provide non-emergency responses on the providers behalf pursuant to section 8.1(a) of this chapter for a period of not less than thirty (30) days or until such time as the provider has submitted the plan called for above if provider has not submitted that plan within said thirty (30) day period. 
(q)  Corporate citizenship: The provider must agree, when available, to provide ambulance stand-by at no charge for high school and college football games within Monroe, Ouachita Parish when requested. Provider must also agree, when available, to provide such other stand-by service as is requested by a local, emergency response agency for emergency events such as haz-mat calls, structure fires, rescue calls, bomb threats, drug raids, etc., at no charge to the requesting public service agency. 
(r)  Maintenance of vehicles: All ambulances shall at all times be adequately maintained, serviced and mechanically sound. Provider shall maintain maintenance records that may be inspected by the advisory board as requested. Ambulances shall be less than ten (10) years old and shall have not more than four hundred thousand (400,000) miles of total service. 
(s)  Vehicle locating system: Each ambulance provided must be equipped with real time automatic vehicle locator (AVL) systems compatible with and able to communicate with the CAD system of the Ouachita Parish Communications District and provider must maintain all necessary licenses, permits, etc., necessary pursuant to any state, federal, and local laws and regulations to enable provider to operate said system. 
(t)  City of Monroe, for purposes of any license with a sole provider for emergency medical services, will agree as follows: 
City of Monroe will instruct and inform all interested parties (such as but not limited to 911 director, hospitals located in Ouachita Parish, etc.) that provider will be the exclusive ambulance service for all emergency (911 and other) and non-emergency ambulance transportation within the unincorporated areas of Ouachita Parish. 
City of Monroe shall take all steps reasonable and necessary (including the filing of a criminal or the institution of a civil action) to prevent any operation of ambulance service within Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana in a manner that violates this chapter during the term of any license. 
City of Monroe will enforce all laws, rules, regulations and ordinances governing unauthorized ambulance operation within its jurisdiction. 
City of Monroe will acknowledge that any unauthorized operation (by other than the sole provider of ambulance service under license with City of Monroe) will cause financial harm to provider such that provider may seek any appropriate relief against such other person/entity, including injunctive relief. 
(u)  Termination by City of Monroe: Each of the following acts, omissions or occurrences shall constitute an "event of default" entitling the City of Monroe to terminate any such sole provider license issued pursuant to this chapter: 
Provider shall violate, in any material way, any provision of this chapter, the operations contract contemplated by this chapter, or of any state or federal law or regulation governing any aspect of ambulance service; 
Provider shall cease doing business as a going concern; 
Provider shall attempt to transfer the license issued pursuant to the chapter or the operations contract entered into hereunder to another ambulance provider without the prior written approval of OCOG. 
Provider's financial reports to the advisory board demonstrate financial instability or insolvency; 
Provider shall commence a voluntary case or other proceeding in bankruptcy or seek liquidation, reorganization, arrangement, readjustment of its debts or for any other relief under the federal bankruptcy laws, as now existing or as may be amended from time to time, or under any other insolvency act or law, state or federal, now or hereinafter existing, or shall take any other action indicating its consent to, approval, or acquiescence in any such case or proceeding; provider shall apply for, or consent to or acquiesce in, the appointment of a receiver, liquidator, custodian, sequestration, or a trustee for all or a substantial part of its property; provider shall make an assignment of a substantial portion of its assets for the benefit of its creditors; provider shall fail, or shall admit in writing its failure to pay its debts generally as such debts become due; or 
There shall be filed against provider an involuntary petition in bankruptcy or seeking liquidation, reorganization, arrangement, readjustment of its debts or any other relief under the federal bankruptcy laws, as now existing or as may be amended from time to time, or under any other insolvency act or law, state or federal, now or hereafter existing, or a receiver, liquidator, custodian, sequestration, or trustee of provider for all or a substantial part of its property shall be appointed without the consent or approval of provider or a warrant of attachment, execution or similar process against any substantial part of the property of provider is issued; and the continuance of any such event or events for thirty (30) days undismissed or undischarged or within such thirty (30) days, the entering of an order for relief under the United States Bankruptcy Code. 
In the event the license issued to a sole provider of ambulance services pursuant to this chapter is terminated due to an "event of default" as set forth above, the City of Monroe shall have a claim against the performance bond (or other acceptable security) posted by the provider for all damages suffered by the City of Monroe as a result of such event of default and termination, including but not limited to the costs of obtaining or providing the ambulance services to have been provided by the provider during the term of the exclusive license. 
(v)  Termination by provider: Provider will be entitled to terminate any license hereunder concerning the provision of ambulance services upon the occurrence of an "event of default" as hereinafter set forth: 
Failure of the City of Monroe to have the requisite authority to enter into the license, or to enact the necessary ordinances to authorize the license for ambulance services; 
Failure by the City of Monroe, by its own fault, to observe or perform any covenant, warranty, term or provision of this chapter related to the license; 
The intentional allowance of any additional ambulance service to operate in violation of this chapter within the incorporated area of the City of Monroe during any term of the license, provided that the provider shall first give the City of Monroe written notice of the operation of any such additional ambulance service and the City of Monroe shall have a period of fifteen (15) working days after receipt of such notice to initiate action to enforce this chapter with respect to such additional ambulance operation(s). 
(w)  Mutual termination: Provider and City of Monroe may mutually agree to terminate any such license without cause by either party giving the other one hundred eighty (180) days prior written notice. 
(x)  Right to cure: The failure to comply with the terms of this chapter shall render the license voidable at the discretion of the non-violating party, provided, however, that the other party is given ninety (90) days advanced notice of the intent to terminate the license and is given sixty (60) days to remedy any default. 
(y)  Indemnification: Provider will indemnify, hold harmless and defend the City of Monroe, the advisory board, OCOG and their representatives, officers, agents, servants and employees, from and against any and all liability, suits, actions, legal proceedings, claims, demand, damages, costs, expenses and attorney's fees arising out of or in any way concerning or incident to any work done by provider in the performance of ambulance service under the license or arising out of any willful or negligent act or omission of provider, its officers, agents, servants and employees (including any such individual acting contrary to the conditions of the license). 
(z)  Agreement, modification and governing law: 
(1)  Governing law: Any license issued hereunder shall be governed by and construed in accordance with the laws of the State of Louisiana. 
(2)  Partial enforceability: If any provision of this chapter, or the application of any provision to any entity or circumstance shall be held invalid, the remainder of this chapter, or the application of that provision to entities or circumstances other than those with respect to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. III, 11-27-18) 
Secs. 5-55-5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 

Sec. 5-71. - Applicability of chapter. 
    It is the intent of this chapter to regulate ambulance service within Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana and to provide for a sole and exclusive private provider of ambulance service for Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. This chapter is not intended to preclude any public safety department in Monroe, Ouachita Parish (fire, police, etc.) from operating or providing emergency ambulance services except under the exclusions set forth herein. However, this chapter shall not be interpreted to prohibit, preclude, impede or discourage the emergency medical services provided by the public safety departments within Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11,897, Art. IV( 3), 11-27-18) 
Chapter 6 - ANIMAL CONTROL AND WELFARE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,410, adopted Aug. 27, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 6 and enacted a new Ch. 6 as set out herein. The former chapter was entitled "Animals and Fowl" and derived from Code 1958; Ord. No. 7369, 4-13-82; Ord. No. 10,408, 6-8-04. 
Cross reference- Cruelty to animals,  12-129; health and sanitation, Ch. 18; nuisances, Ch. 24. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS/FOWL, HORSES, HOGS 

Sec. 6-1. - Bird sanctuary-City designated. 
    The entire area within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-2. - Same-Birds not to be harmed, exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, if starlings or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or a menace to health or property in the opinion of the mayor, he shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of such clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three (3) days' actual notice of the time and place of such meeting to the representatives of such clubs. If as a result of such meeting no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by such mayor under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-3. - Hogs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or pen any hogs within the limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-4. - Permit to keep horse, mule or cow. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to keep any horse, mule, or cow within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The provisions of (a) shall not apply to a specific horse, mule or cow for which a valid permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter pursuant to the following provisions, said permit to contain the following: 
(1)  That a suitable stable be provided. 
(2)  That wholesome and abundant water be provided. 
(3)  That the premises shall be properly drained. 
(4)  That the stable shall be cleaned, and all manure removed once daily, and that said stable shall be sprinkled with lime, oil or creosote dip or other disinfectant, immediately after cleaning. 
(5)  That all manure removed from the stable shall be deposited in a bin, fitted with a tight cover or wire screen, packed in suitable boxes or barrels, also fitted with tight covers or screens. 
(6)  That all manure so collected shall be removed from the premises at least once a week in summer, and once a month in winter, or more often, if in the opinion of the mayor it should become necessary. The term summer months, as used herein, shall mean from the first day of May to the first day of October. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-5. - Running at large. 
(a)  The running at large of animals at any time on the public streets and sidewalks and other public places, or the tying, picketing or tethering of animals so as to go across the sidewalks, streets and other public places within the corporate limits of the city is prohibited and is hereby declared a public and common nuisance. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the police force of the city to impound and turn over to the humane society all animals found running at large or lariated, tied, picketed or tethered so as to go across the sidewalks, streets and other public places within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to dogs. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
State Law reference- For authority to prohibit, see R.S. 3:2531. 
Secs. 6-6-6-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LEASH LAW/DOGS/CATS 

Sec. 6-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide regulations within the area of the City of Monroe, Louisiana to control animal conduct. Nothing in this article shall be intended nor construed to create any liability on the part of the city, its officers, employees, agents or contractors. It is not the purpose or intent of this article to create on the part of city employees any special duties to or relationships with specific individuals. This article has been enacted for the welfare of the public as a whole. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-22. - Definitions. 
    [For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:] 
    Adult dog means any dog, male or female, seven (7) months of age or older. When used throughout this chapter the term "dog" shall include a "cat." 
    Allow means to permit by neglecting to restrain or prevent. 
    Animal shall have its customary common meaning and shall include dogs and cats where applicable. 
    Animal control authority/department means any employee of the animal control department that is deputized by the Monroe Police Department or the Ouachita Parish Sheriff's Office for the purpose of enforcing this title and laws of the state as they pertain to animal control and welfare. 
    Animal shelter means a facility used to care for the homeless, stray or unwanted animals by a governmental entity or authorized animal welfare society, and may include more than one location. 
    At large means to be off the premises of the owner and not under the control of either the owner or a person authorized by the owner. 
    Cat means any member of the feline family, male or female and may be used simultaneously herein with the word "dog." 
    Dangerous animal means any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other domestic animals by virtue of a known propensity to endanger life by an unprovoked assault or bite so as to cause serious bodily harm. Also, this term shall include an animal trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primarily or in part, of animal fighting. 
    Exceptions. An animal shall not be deemed dangerous when the following instances occur: 
(1)  It bites, attacks or menaces: 
a.  Anyone assaulting the owner; or 
b.  A trespasser on the property of the owner; or 
c.  Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it; or 
(2)  It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; or 
(3)  It is protecting or defending its young or another animal. 
    Dangerous dog/cat means either animal dog or cat that according to the records of the appropriate authority: 
(1)  Has inflicted severe injury on a human being, without provocation, on public or private property, except that of the owner; or 
(2)  Has killed a domestic animal without provocation while off the owner's property; or 
(3)  Has been previously found to be potentially dangerous, the owner having received notice of such and the animal subsequently aggressively bites, attacks, or endangers the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
    Director means the head administrative official of the animal control authority or department that has been authorized by the Monroe City Council. 
    Dog means any member male or female, of the canine family or any cat that is kept as a domestic pet. 
    Harboring means the actions of any occupant of any premises on which an animal remains or to which customarily returns daily for food and care for a period of fourteen (14) days. Such occupant shall be presumed to be harboring or keeping the animal within the means of this article. 
    Kennel means any individual or business with five (5) or more dogs/cats where such animals are capable of breeding. 
    Leash shall mean a chain, rope, leather strap or cord or sufficient tether that will humanely bond the animal directly to the owner or keeper and prevent such animal from moving free of the owner's or keeper's immediate control. 
    Livestock means horses, cattle, sheep, goats, swine, donkeys and mules. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation, organization or department possessing, harboring, keeping, having any interest in, or having control or custody of an animal. 
    Pet shop is any establishment or premises maintained for the purchase, sale or exchange of pets of any type. 
    Potentially dangerous dog/cat means either animal that when unprovoked: 
(1)  Inflicts bites on a human other than its owner or on a domestic animal either on public or private property; or 
(2)  Chases or approaches a person upon the streets, sidewalks, or any public grounds in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or either animal with a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury, or to cause injury or otherwise to threaten the safety of humans or domestic animals. 
    Exceptions. An animal shall not be deemed dangerous when the following instances occur: 
(1)  It bites, attacks, or menaces: 
a.  Anyone assaulting the owner; or 
b.  Anyone trespassing on the property of the owner; or 
c.  Any person or other animal who has tormented or abused it; 
(2)  It is otherwise acting in defense of an attack from a person or other animal upon the owner or other person; or 
(3)  It is protecting or defending its young or another animal. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery to a human being or another animal. 
    Stray animal means any unidentified dog, cat or other animal, whose owner is unknown or who has no owner, which is declared by the animal control authority to be a nuisance. For the purpose of this section stray dog or stray animal means any dog, cat or other animal appearing or remaining in a neighborhood or any public place without an apparent home and/or without a proper vaccination tag attached to a collar being worn by the animal. 
    Tethering means the tying or chaining of an animal for the purpose of keeping the animal secured to a device to prevent escape. 
    Under control means that the owner or keeper by means of a leash restrains the dog to the owner or keeper's immediate proximity, preventing the dog from trespassing upon property or annoying or chasing other persons, animals, or vehicles of any sort. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-23. - Animal control zone established. 
(a)  [Generally.] All of the incorporated areas of the City of Monroe are hereby declared to be an animal control zone. For purposes of this article II, any reference to "dog" shall include a "cat." 
(b)  Dogs off premises to be under control. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to cause, permit or allow his/her dog to run, stray or otherwise be away from the premises of the owner or keeper within a dog control zone and to be on public property or the private property of another without his permission unless such dog be under control by means of a leash. 
(c)  Exceptions. The under control section shall not apply to dogs while engaged in one of the following activities directly supervised by the owner or keeper so as to keep it from being a nuisance or danger to people or domestic animals: 
(1)  Sanctioned search and rescue missions operated by or through authority of a law enforcement agency. 
(2)  Lawful herding of farm animals. 
(3)  Lawful animal competition sanctioned by a nationally recognized organization or a local chapter thereof. 
(4)  Lawful hunting activities. 
(5)  Lawful training in preparation for such herding, or competition activities. 
(6)  Dog obedience training with the owner or keeper in attendance. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-24. - Dog identification. 
    It shall be unlawful to keep or harbor a dog over six (6) months of age anywhere in the incorporated areas of the City of Monroe unless a rabies license has been procured for the animal from a licensed veterinarian. Such animal must be identified by a rabies tag, or a tag or metal plate bearing the owner's correct name and address on its collar. Dogs at large anywhere in the incorporated areas of the City of Monroe without a rabies tag or an identification name plate shall be deemed nuisances and shall be impounded. Any person harboring, keeping or allowing an unidentifiable dog to be at large when such dog should be identifiable is guilty of a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-25. - Nuisances; infractions. 
    Violations of any of the sections contained herein constitute a nuisance and any infraction of any of the following requirements or standards constitute a nuisance and shall be a violation: 
(1)  The owner or keeper of any dog shall not allow it to be at large and not under control. 
(2)  All female dogs, while in season, shall be confined in a clean, dry place not accessible to male dogs and kept there during the entire period, except for the purpose of planned breeding and with knowledge of the owner of the male dog. 
(3)  No owner or keeper of any dog shall allow it to bark in such a manner as would foreseeably disturb or alarm the public. 
(4)  No person other than the owner, keeper or other authorized person is permitted to release the animal from confinement. 
(5)  Any person violating any provision of this article shall be imprisoned for a term of not more than thirty (30) days or punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by performance of community service of not more than forty (40) hours if directed by the court, or any combination of same if directed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-26. - Crimes; misdemeanors. 
    The following are misdemeanors: 
(1)  Refusal to quarantine. It shall be a misdemeanor for an owner or keeper to refuse to quarantine or permit the quarantine of any animal when and as required by state law and this article. 
(2)  Interfering with impounding and other animal control duties and enforcement. It is a misdemeanor for any person to prevent, obstruct, or hinder the impoundment of an animal or other enforcement duties of officers pursuant to this article. 
(3)  Damage. It is a misdemeanor for the owner or keeper of any domesticated animal to allow it to enter upon private or public property, so as to damage or destroy any real or personal property, including livestock or other animals. 
(4)  Cruelty to animals. The following acts and omissions constitute cruel treatment to animals; therefore, it shall be a misdemeanor for any person, firm, or corporation to: 
a.  Willfully or cruelly kill, injure, poison, torture, torment, tease, bait or in any way molest any animal by any means causing it fright or pain; or 
b.  Lay out or expose any kind of poison or leave exposed any poisoned food or drink for animal or fowl, or any substance or fluid whatever, whereon or wherein there is or shall be deposited or mingled any kind of poisonous or deadly substance or fluid whatever, or any premises, or abet any person in so doing unless in accordance with the lawful work of an exterminator; or 
c.  Neglect or fail to provide minimum care to any animal within his care, custody, or control. For the purpose of this section, "minimum care" means that in each period of twenty-four (24) hours, food and water of sufficient quantity and quality will be provided to allow for the maintenance of body weight and normal growth of an immature animal, and to otherwise preserve the health and well-being of the animal. "Minimum care" also includes at least a three-sided shelter, suited to the size and number of animals and providing each animal within the enclosure with proper protection from the elements including cold, heat, sun, wind and rain; or 
d.  Tether, confine, or restrain any animal in such a way as to permit said animal to become entangled in such tether or render said animal incapable of consuming food and water or from obtaining shelter from the elements or prevent the animal from moving comfortably because of the weight and/or length of the tether or chain. No animal weighing fifteen (15) pounds or under shall be confined by a chain which is greater gauge of one-eighth ( 1/8 ) inch, an animal fifteen (15) to thirty (30) pounds by a chain of greater gauge than three-sixteenths ( 3/16 ) gauge and for any animal larger than thirty (30) pounds by any chain or rope greater than one-quarter (1/4) inch gauge. 
e.  Abandon or leave any animal on a street, road or highway or in a public place or on private property; or 
f.  Confine and leave unattended an animal within or on a motor vehicle or other closure or structure under conditions that endanger the health and well-being of the animal. Such conditions include, but are not limited to dangerous temperatures and lack of food and water; or 
g.  Intentionally run down or otherwise abuse any animal with a bicycle or motor vehicle, including motorcycles or motorbikes; or 
h.  Intentionally trap any domestic animal with a device other than a humane live animal trap. Any practice of good animal husbandry as defined in section 3-42 is not a violation of this section. 
(5)  Penalty. Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a term of not more than thirty (30) days or by the performance of community service of not more than forty (40) hours if directed by the court or any combination of same if directed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-27. - Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs; declaration. 
(a)  The animal control authority may find and declare a dog dangerous or potentially dangerous if there is probable cause to believe that the animal falls within the definition set forth in section 3-42. The finding will be based on: 
(1)  The written complaint of a citizen who is willing to testify that the animal has acted in a manner which causes it to fall within the definition of a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog under section 3-42; or 
(2)  Dog bite reports filed with the animal control officer required by city ordinance; or 
(3)  Actions of the dog witnessed by any animal control officer or other law enforcement officer; or 
(4)  Other substantial evidence which may include the previous history of the dog. 
(b)  The declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog shall be in writing, and shall be served by the animal control authority on the owner by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Certified mail to the owner or keeper's last known address; or 
(2)  Personal service; 
(3)  If the owner or keeper cannot be located by one of the first two (2) methods after reasonable attempts, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the incident. 
(c)  The declaration shall state at least the following information: 
(1)  A description of the animal. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(3)  The last known whereabouts of the animal if it [is] not in the custody of the owner or keeper. 
(4)  The facts upon which the declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog is based. 
(5)  Notice of the owner's or keeper's right to a hearing to contest the declaration, if the request is made within five (5) days. 
(6)  The restrictions placed on the animal as a result of the declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a term of not more than thirty (30) days or by the performance of community service of not more than forty (40) hours if directed by the court, or any combination of same if directed by the court. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-28. - Dangerous or potentially dangerous dog declaration; appeal. 
    Following service of a declaration of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog, the owner or keeper may, within five (5) business days of receipt of the declaration, or within five (5) days of the publication of the declaration pursuant to section 3-47 requested in writing a hearing before a three-member panel appointed by the mayor of the City of Monroe. 
(1)  Such request shall contain: 
a.  A brief statement that protests the action and stating reasons it should be reversed or modified; and 
b.  The names, phone numbers and addresses of any witnesses who will appear on the dog owner's behalf; and 
c.  Current day phone number where owner, keeper, or his representative can be contacted. 
(2)  A time and place will be named for the hearing within seven (7) days of the receipt of the appeal, with effort to reasonably accommodate all parties involved. All witnesses will be notified by phone or by letters of the hearing date. If appellant or appellant's representative fails to appear for the hearing, excepting verifiable emergency, the original determination stands. The hearing will take place within thirty (30) days of the director receiving the request for hearing, unless all parties agree to a continuance. 
(3)  At the hearing, the animal control officer will give a full report of the actions and reasons leading to the declaration. Any witnesses who were a part of the determination and declaration shall be present and asked for their testimony. The burden is on the animal control department to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the dog is dangerous or potentially dangerous as defined in section 3-42. The dog owner, keeper or his representative and any witnesses on behalf of the dog or its owner will then be asked for their testimony and be given an opportunity to present any other pertinent evidence. 
(4)  The appointed hearing officer or panel, having heard from both sides will render either an immediate decision or a decision within forty-eight (48) hours if new information is presented that may have a bearing on the decision. 
(5)  The decision will: 
a.  Uphold the original declaration and terms imposed; or 
b.  Reverse the entire decision; or 
c.  Uphold the original declaration but modify the terms and restrictions; or 
d.  Downgrade a declaration of dangerous to potentially dangerous with appropriate terms and restrictions. 
(6)  If the decision is reversed, written recommendations and/or warning concerning the dog's actions may be issued by the director or panel which will become a permanent part of the history of the case. 
(7)  Within seven (7) days of the hearing, the director or chairman of the panel shall prepare a final written decision including his/her findings and conclusions. A copy shall immediately be sent to all applicable parties. Upon receipt of said written decision, the owner may appeal to the proper court by filing notice thereof within thirty (30) days. Such appeals shall be governed by the provisions of the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-29. - Potentially dangerous dogs; requirements. 
(a)  Following a declaration of potentially dangerous dog, it is unlawful for an owner or keeper: 
(1)  To permit it to be other than securely confined inside a locked building, kennel, and pen, or other structure having secure sides, bottom, and top while on the premises of the owner or keeper; and 
(2)  To permit it to be away from the premises of the owner or keeper unless the dog is securely leashed, and under control of a person at least fifteen (15) years of age and physically able to restrain and control the animal; or 
(3)  To fail to comply with any court ordered restrictions on keeping said potentially dangerous dog; or 
(4)  To fail to notify the agency of change of ownership, custody, or residence of the dog within ten (10) days of such change. 
Pending a hearing under section 3-28 or pending any appeals to a court of competent jurisdiction, the animal or animals may be seized and impounded at the cost of the owner or keeper as provided by this article. 
(5)  Following the hearing, the court may rule that: 
a.  There is insufficient evidence of the violation whereupon the animal may be released to its owner subject to any restrictions imposed upon it previously; or 
b.  The animal may be placed in custody of the animal control authority for possible placement with a new owner; or 
c.  The animal may be promptly disposed of by the animal control officer; or 
d.  Under special circumstances, the owner or keeper may be allowed to permanently remove the animal from the parish; provided that adequate security or assurance against its return is given, and the court is convinced that the animal will be kept in such a manner that it is no longer a danger to persons, property, or other animals. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-30. - Control of rabid or potentially rabid animals. 
(a)  A domestic animal of a species which may transmit disease through its bite, which bites and breaks the skin of any person shall be quarantined for a ten-day period to determine if the animal is infected with a disease. The place of quarantine shall be established by the animal control authority, and the animal control authority may, in its discretion, allow the owner and/or keeper of the animal to maintain the quarantine. 
    Quarantine procedure: 
(1)  Any animal that has bitten a human and has broken the skin, regardless of provocation or previous inoculation for diseases shall be confined for a period of not less than ten (10) days in such a manner that it is segregated from any other animals so as to prevent contact with other animals and humans except for the caretaker. 
(2)  If the owner and/or keeper is unable or unwilling to confine the animal, or if the animal control authority determines from the prior history of the animal that confinement is not likely, the animal may be quarantined at the animal control shelter or a veterinarian and/or boarding kennel of the owner's choice, provided that the costs to board the animal shall be borne by the owner, if in a location other than the owner's residence. 
(3)  Should any animal during the observation period manifest any unusual behavior or develop symptoms of illness or die, the owner or veterinarian shall immediately notify the animal control authority and the health department of that condition. 
(b)  In all cases where any animal which has bitten a person or caused an abrasion or puncture of the skin, is slain by any person or dies by other means, and a period of ten (10) days has not elapsed since the day of the bite, it shall be the duty of any person slaying such animal or the owner to forthwith deliver intact the head of such animal to the parish health officer. The animal control authority shall be notified in such case. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of medical doctor, hospital, or other applicable health official to report all dog bites that break the skin, regardless of provocation factors or previous inoculations record of the animal. Such report shall be made to the animal control authority, as promptly as possible so that quarantine procedures can be instituted in a timely fashion. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
State Law reference- Rabies Control Law, R.S. 40:1275 et seq. 
Sec. 6-31. - Impound, redemption and disposition of animals. 
(a)  Animals may be impounded and taken into the care and custody of the animal control authority in the following situations: 
(1)  When the dog is off premises of its owner or keeper and not under the control of its owner, keeper or other authorized person. 
(2)  If the animal is over six (6) months of age and has no current rabies tag or identification tag or plate. 
(3)  When an animal is brought to the animal shelter by a private citizen who has found the animal. 
(4)  When a dog has been declared potentially dangerous or dangerous pursuant to this article and/or state law, and the dog has violated the restrictions placed upon it. 
(5)  When any animal has been subjected to cruel treatment as defined by the provisions of this chapter provided that removal is necessary for the immediate safety and well being of the animal. 
(6)  When the animal's owner or keeper is incapable or unable to continue to care for it because of incarceration, severe illness, death, house fire or other emergency circumstances and an agent for the owner cannot be readily located. These animals will be deemed impounded for safekeeping. 
(7)  When an animal has bitten a person, breaking or puncturing the skin, and the owner and/or keeper is unable, incapable or unwilling to provide the ten-day quarantine requirements. If such dog is found at large, the owner will be deemed unable to quarantine and it shall be impounded. 
(b)  Forthwith, following impoundment, the animal control authority shall notify the owner or keeper, if known, of its impoundment using whatever reasonable means possible. If the animal's owner is unknown or cannot be located, the information and description of the animal shall be available at the animal shelter during regular business hours. 
(c)  All owners or keepers claiming impoundment animals of any kind shall provide identification and shall sign a statement that verifies they are the owner, keeper, or authorized agent of the owner. Names, street or road addresses, city and phone numbers will be required. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-32. - Impounded animals; fees. 
    For every animal impounded pursuant to this article, there shall be paid to the animal control authority, by the owner, keeper, or their authorized representative claiming such animal, the total of the following fees before the animal is released from impoundment: 
(1)  For dogs: 
a.  For the first impoundment in any twelve-month period, twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
b.  For the second impoundment of the same dog in any twelve-month period, thirty-five dollars ($35.00); and 
c.  For the third and subsequent impoundments within any twelve-month period, fifty dollars ($50.00). 
d.  Exception. Fees for second, third and subsequent impoundment shall apply only to dogs in violation of subsection (1)a. and b. 
(2)  For animals other than dogs: 
a.  For any impoundment of cat or other small domestic pet, fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(3)  Impoundment fee can be waived or reduced at the discretion of the director of the animal control authority in case of animals impounded pursuant to subsection 3-53(a)(7), if it can be determined that the owner did not otherwise violate the terms of this article. 
(4)  A charge for the boarding and care for the animals after the first twenty-four (24) hours will be made which will be: 
a.  For dogs, cats, other small domestic pets and small livestock, five dollars ($5.00) per day. 
(5)  In addition, any necessary additional expenses incurred by the animal control authority to care for the pet shall be assessed. These may include but are not limited to necessary veterinary care. Actual copies of these special bills will be made available to the owner. 
(6)  Charges for boarding and care can be reduced at the discretion of the director if special circumstances exist or in the case of several animals belonging to the same owner, such as a litter of pups or kittens. Such reduction will be allowed the same owner only once in any twelve-month period. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-33. - Disposition and disposal of animals. 
(a)  Any unlicensed or unidentified domestic animal impounded pursuant to this article shall be held for at least one hundred twenty (120) hours, not including Sundays or legal holidays. 
(b)  For any identified domestic animal, the holding period shall be one hundred twenty (120) hours, not including Sundays or legal holidays, during which time reasonable attempts will be made to locate and notify the owner or keeper. 
(c)  Should any impounded animal be suffering from serious injury, illness or disease that would endanger the other sheltered pets or cause the animal to endure unnecessary pain and suffering if left untreated or if any impounded animal is feral or wild and thereby humane care and confinement is not possible or poses a threat to caretakers, the animal may be destroyed before the expiration of the required holding. Such action shall be approved by either a licensed veterinarian or by the director. 
(d)  Any animal not redeemed by its owner during the prescribed period, may be humanely destroyed by lethal injection, or placed for adoption to a new owner, provided that the new owner agrees in writing to surgically sterilize any dog or cat within one month or upon maturity and to provide proper identification in the case of a dog. 
(e)  The director of the animal control authority shall have the right to deny adoption to any person of any unredeemed animal if it can be determined that placement would not be in the best interest of the animal or the community. 
(f)  No live animal shall be used, sold, or donated for experimental purposes. 
(g)  Any deceased animal shall be disposed of by the owner of such animal within twenty-four (24) hours of the death of the animal unless the owner is unaware of the death of the animal, but no later than twelve (12) hours after notification of the death of the animal. No animal shall be cremated(burned) within the City of Monroe for the purposes of disposal of a deceased animal. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-34. - Trapping destructive of nuisance animals. 
(a)  Upon written complaint of any party that any cat or other animal, is trespassing upon the premises or property of the complaining party and thereon doing substantial damage to property, trees, shrubs, lawns, or gardens, or creating a substantial nuisance that disturbs the repose of any person and upon the animal control officer finding probable cause exists that the complaint is valid, the animal control officer may humanely trap such cat or animal or allow the owner of the property to humanely trap such cat or other animal. 
(b)  Such trapped animals shall be impounded by the animal control authority and disposed of in accordance with this chapter or in accordance with state law if a game animal; provided that the state wildlife and fisheries department will be notified before wild animals are trapped. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-35. - Law enforcement dogs; exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to any dog kept by a law enforcement agency for law enforcement purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-36. - Kennel license. 
(a)  Any owner or keeper of five (5) or more dogs shall procure a kennel license yearly and shall pay a kennel license fee. Use of the dog is irrelevant to obtaining the license. 
    The license can be obtained from the office of code enforcement in the City of Monroe. The cost per dog over five (5) shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
    A licensed veterinarian or a veterinary clinic shall be exempt from this provision in the conduct of their regular business. 
    Any person applying for a kennel license shall be subject to inspections upon notification from the governing authority which inspection shall include: 
(1)  The general living area of the dogs with emphasis on size of enclosure or facility in relation to the number of animals harbored in the home; 
(2)  All places where animals are kept shall be kept clean and wholesome by removal of all ordure, urine and other offensive matters and by suitable cleansing as often as may be necessary; 
(3)  Inspection of equipment used to manage, train or breed such animals; 
(4)  The location of the enclosure or facility in relation to the location of adjoining property. Said enclosure or facility should not infringe upon the right of the adjacent owner to use and enjoy his property without the threat of undue noise, odor or threat for safety. 
(b)  Declaration of non-compliance. Upon notification to a kennel owner that a kennel license is needed or, in event the inspection has found specific violations, the owner/operator of the kennel shall be served by the animal control authority on the owner in writing by one of the following methods: 
(1)  Certified mail to the owner or keeper's last known address or at the address for which the license has been sought; or 
(2)  Personal service; 
(3)  If the owner or keeper cannot be located by one of the first two (2) methods after reasonable attempts, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the area of the incident. 
(c)  The declaration shall state at least the following information: 
(1)  A description of the license sought, animals involved. 
(2)  The name and address of the owner or keeper of the animal. 
(3)  The last known whereabouts of the animals if it [is] not in the custody of the owner or keeper. 
(4)  The facts upon which the declaration of non-compliance [is] based. 
(5)  Notice of the owner's or keeper's right to a hearing to contest the declaration, if the request is made within five (5) days. 
(6)  The restrictions placed on the owner and/or facility as a result of the declaration of non-compliance. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a term of not more than thirty (30) days or by the performance of community service of not more than forty (40) hours if directed by the court, or any combination of same if directed by the court and any license sought shall be revoked. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-37. - Declaration of non-compliance; appeal. 
    Following service of a declaration of non-compliance, the owner or keeper may, within five (5) business days of receipt of the declaration, or within five (5) days of the publication of the declaration pursuant to section 3-47 requested in writing a hearing before a hearing officer appointed by the mayor of the City of Monroe. 
(1)  Such request shall contain: 
a.  A brief statement that protests the action and stating reasons it should be reversed or modified; and 
b.  The names, phone numbers and addresses of any witnesses who will appear on the part of the requestor; and 
c.  Current day phone number where owner, keeper, or his representative can be contacted. 
(2)  A time and place will be named for the hearing within seven (7) days of the receipt of the appeal, with effort to reasonably accommodate all parties involved. All witnesses will be notified by phone or by letters of the hearing date. If appellant or appellant's representative fails to appear for the hearing, excepting verifiable emergency, the original determination stands. The hearing will take place within thirty (30) days of the director receiving the request for hearing, unless all parties agree to a continuance. 
(3)  At the hearing, the animal control officer will give a full report of the actions and reasons leading to the declaration. Any witnesses who were a part of the determination and declaration shall be present and asked for their testimony. The burden is on the animal control department to show by a preponderance of the evidence that the kennel license is required and/or the kennel conditions are dangerous or potentially dangerous to the lives of the animals or the kennel conditions are deterious to the adjacent property owners. The dog owner, keeper or his representative and any witnesses on behalf of the dog or its owner will then be asked for their testimony and be given an opportunity to present any other pertinent evidence. 
(4)  The appointed hearing officer or panel, having heard from both sides will render either an immediate decision or a decision within forty-eight (48) hours if new information is presented that may have a bearing on the decision. 
(5)  The decision will: 
a.  Uphold the original declaration and terms imposed; or 
b.  Reverse the entire decision; or 
c.  Uphold the original declaration but modify the terms and restrictions. 
(6)  If the decision is reversed, written recommendations and/or warning concerning the kennel requestor's actions may be issued by the hearing officer or panel which will become a permanent part of the history of the case. 
(7)  Within seven (7) days of the hearing, the hearing officer shall prepare a final written decision including his/her findings and conclusions. A copy shall immediately be sent to all applicable parties. Upon receipt of said written decision. The owner may appeal to the proper court by filing notice thereof within thirty (30) days. Such appeals shall be governed by the provisions of the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Secs. 6-38-6-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FEROCIOUS, WILD OR EXOTIC ANIMALS 

Sec. 6-46. - Definitions. 
    Keeper and/or custodian: Any person other than the owner harboring or having in his possession any dog. 
    Owner: Any person owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, maintaining, or having or assuming the care, custody or control of an animal or fowl or permits same on his property. 
    Wild or exotic animals: Any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous or constricting snake or tarantula which can normally be found in the wild state or any member of crocodilian, including, but not limited to, alligators, crocodiles, caimans and gavials. Ferrets, nonpoisonous snakes, rabbits, laboratory rats and skunks which have been bred and raised in captivity and which have never known the wild shall be excluded from this definition. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-47. - Wild or exotic animals as pets prohibited. 
    No person shall keep or permit to be kept any wild, exotic or vicious animal as a pet. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-48. - Display of notice where wild or exotic animals are sold. 
    Any person who offers for sale a wild or exotic animal shall post conspicuously at the place of sale or display the following notice: 
No person may lawfully keep or permit to be kept in the City of Monroe any live monkey (nonhuman primate), raccoon, skunk, wolf, squirrel, fox, leopard, panther, tiger, lion, lynx or any other warm-blooded animal, poisonous or constricting snake, tarantula, crocodile or alligator which can normally be found in the wild. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-49. - Keeping ferocious animals in the city. 
    No wild or exotic animal shall be kept within the city limits of the city on the premises of individuals or in menageries. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-50. - Vicious or ferocious animals may be destroyed. 
    The city, through its agents, shall destroy any wild or exotic animal which cannot be safely taken up or impounded, but it shall not be lawful for any other person to willfully kill any animal unless in protection of life or limb. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-51. - Feeding or annoying animals in zoo, park, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to feed any beast, fowl, bird, reptile or animal of any kind whatsoever confined in a cage or enclosure in any zoo, park or other public place or to annoy any animal by throwing or putting any object into any such cage or enclosure. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-52. - Places for animals kept clean. 
    All places where animals are kept shall be kept clean and wholesome by removal of all ordure, urine and other offensive matters and by suitable cleansing as often as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-53. - Soiling of public and private property by animals. 
(a)  If any public or private property is soiled or contaminated by an animal, whether such nuisance shall take place in the presence of the owner or keeper or not, the owner or keeper of the animal, or if the owner or keeper is a minor, the parents or guardian thereof, shall be deemed guilty of violating this section. 
(b)  Any person who is in violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and no less than three (3) seven-hour days of trash cleanup duties. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-54. - Animals to be confined; exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided hereinbelow, all animals are to be confined within an enclosure or secured by a chain at all times, unless accompanied by a driver or keeper. 
(b)  Animals, except dogs, which are accompanied by a driver or keeper are restricted to those public areas legally utilized by motor vehicles or specifically designated for animal usage and are not permitted to trespass upon any other public or private property. 
(c)  Dogs which are properly licensed and vaccinated as stipulated in this chapter may be allowed outside of an enclosure if under a secure leash and accompanied by its owner or keeper but are not to be allowed to trespass upon any public property, if so prohibited by another ordinance, or upon private property. 
(d)  Cats which are privately owned, have been spayed or neutered, and are properly licensed, vaccinated, and tagged with an identification tag clearly indicating the owner's name, current address and telephone number, may be allowed outside of an enclosure, but are not to be allowed to trespass upon any public property, if so prohibited by another ordinance, or upon private property other than that belonging to the cat owner. Any cat collected under the provisions of this section shall not be returned to its owner until such time as said owner shall have the cat spayed or neutered. 
(e)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section allowing otherwise, no dogs other than dogs in parades in which dogs are the main attraction or sole participants, dogs confined on the property of their owners, dogs assigned to law enforcement canine units, seeing-eye dogs and/or dogs assisting physically challenged individuals, are allowed within two hundred (200) yards of any parade route one hour before, during, or one hour after a scheduled parade. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-55. - Sale of rabbits and other animals. 
(a)  The sale or donation of rabbits younger than eight (8) weeks of age in quantities of less than four (4) to an individual is hereby prohibited. 
(b)  The auctioning, raffling or giving away as a prize or premium or advertising device of any animal for the purpose of inducing trade or business or competition at public or private events is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-56. - Sale, etc., of artificially colored or dyed animals. 
    No animal that has been dyed or otherwise colored artificially may be sold or offered for sale, raffled, offered or given as a prize, premium or advertising device; or displayed in any store, carnival or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-57. - Animal fighting, facilities for same; prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hold, operate, attend, sponsor or in any way further a contest that pits animals against each other and for anyone to maintain facilities for training and/or for view of this purpose. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-58. - Civil, criminal adjudication; misdemeanors. 
(a)  Violations of this chapter shall be deemed to be violations of a public health and environmental ordinance; and shall be subject to civil administrative adjudication or criminal adjudication through any court of proper jurisdiction. 
(b)  Any person who commits any act prohibited or omits the doing of any act required by this chapter for which a lesser penalty is not specifically prescribed herein, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof in the city court shall be liable for a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or for a term of imprisonment not to exceed six (6) months, or for community service or to community service, and/or fine and/or imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 6-59. - Responsibility of association members, partners and corporate officers. 
    When an association of individuals is charged with violation of any provision of this chapter, each individual of such association or, if it is a foreign association, the local agent or person locally in charge thereof shall be deemed to represent such association of individuals for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and shall be held responsible and punishable for each violation thereof. 
    When a firm is charged with such violation, each member thereof or, if it is a foreign firm, the local agent or person locally in charge of such firm shall be deemed to represent such firm for the purpose of enforcing this chapter, and shall be held responsible and punishable for each violation thereof. 
    When a corporation is charged with such violation, all or any officers of such corporation may be held responsible and punishable for each violation of this chapter or if it is a foreign corporation, the local agent or person locally in charge thereof shall be deemed to represent such corporation for the purpose of enforcing this chapter and shall be held responsible and punishable for each violation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 11,410, 8-27-13) 
Chapter 7 - AVIATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public works department,  4-06. 
Cross reference- Obstruction of airport runway,  12-151. 
State Law reference- Aeronautics, R.S. 2:1 etseq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words will be defined as set forth herein, unless otherwise defined in this chapter: 
    Gasoline shall be construed to mean all fuels commonly referred to as gasoline or gasohol and shall include all types of fuel used in aviation whether identified as gasoline, gasohol, aviation fuel, aviation gasoline, AVGAS, kerosene, jet fuel, and any derivatives or distillates thereof. 
(Ord. No. 7626, 12-27-83) 
Secs. 7-2-7-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF AIRCRAFT 

Sec. 7-21. - Definitions. 
    Acrobatic flying as used in this article means any intentional aircraft maneuver or stunt not necessary to air navigation, or operation of aircraft in such manner as to endanger human life or safety by the performance of unusual or dangerous maneuvers. 
    Aircraft as used in this article means any aeroplane, airplane, gas bag, flying machine, balloon, any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designed for navigation of or flight in the air, except a parachute or other contrivance used primarily as safety equipment. 
(Code 1958,  3-1) 
State Law reference- For pertinent definitions, see R.S. 2:1. 
Sec. 7-22. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to public aircraft of the federal government, or of a state, or territory, or of a political subdivision of a state or territory, or to aircraft licensed by a foreign country with which the United States has a reciprocal agreement covering operation of such aircraft. 
(Code 1958,  3-2) 
Sec. 7-23. - Minimum flying altitude. 
    Except while taking off or landing at an established landing field or airport, no person shall fly or permit any aircraft to be flown within the corporate limits of the city except at an altitude sufficient to permit of a reasonably safe emergency landing, which in no case shall be less than one thousand (1,000) feet; provided, the provisions of this section may be deviated from when special circumstances render a departure necessary to avoid immediate danger or when such departure is required because of stress of weather conditions or other unavoidable cause. 
(Code 1958,  3-3) 
Sec. 7-24. - Pilot's license and airworthiness certificate. 
    No person shall operate any aircraft within or over the corporate limits of the city unless such person has first been issued a pilot's license by the federal government and unless such aircraft shall have first received a certificate of airworthiness from the federal government. 
(Code 1958,  3-4) 
Sec. 7-25. - Air traffic rules govern. 
    No person shall operate any aircraft over or within the city in violation of any valid air traffic or other rule or regulation established by the federal government. 
(Code 1958,  3-5) 
Sec. 7-26. - Acrobatic flying, prohibited. 
    Acrobatic flying by any person flying over any portion of the city is hereby prohibited. 
(Code 1958,  3-6) 
Sec. 7-27. - Landing at other than established airport prohibited. 
    Except in cases of emergency, no person shall land any aircraft within the corporate limits of the city except upon a regularly established airport field or landing place. 
    A medical evacuation heliport approved and permitted under sections 37-98, 37-99, 37-100, 37-101 and 37-102 of this Code shall be deemed a regularly established landing place for purposes of this section. 
(Code 1958,  3-7; Ord. No. 9312, 7-14-92) 
Sec. 7-28. - Night operation, lights and equipment. 
    All aircraft when flying within or over the corporate limits of the city at night shall have lights and other equipment required for such flying by the rules, regulations or orders of the federal government. 
(Code 1958,  3-8) 
Sec. 7-29. - Dropping objects from aircraft. 
    No person in any aircraft shall cause or permit to be thrown out, discharged or dropped within the corporate limits of the city any object or thing, except loose water or loose sand ballast when absolutely essential to the safety of the occupants of the aircraft and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Code 1958,  3-10) 
Sec. 7-30. - Permit for advertising by banners, loudspeakers, etc. 
(a)  No person shall make exhibition flights by carrying banners on, distribute circulars from, or operate a loudspeaking device from, any aircraft flying within or over the corporate limits of the city without first obtaining a permit to do so from the mayor, and payment of a permit fee of five dollars ($5.00) for each flight. 
(b)  The mayor may issue such permit if the person who will operate the aircraft, in carrying out any of the objects named in this section, is duly licensed by the federal government, the aircraft to be used is licensed by the federal government, and the safety or lives of the inhabitants of the city will not be endangered by the proposed flight. 
(c)  The permits provided for in this section may be issued by the city for periods of not longer than six (6) months, rather than for individual flights, if the safety or lives of the inhabitants of the city will not be endangered by such permit and a permit fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is paid; such a six months' permit shall be revoked by the city upon violation of any provision of this article. 
(Code 1958,  3-11) 
Sec. 7-31. - Operating aircraft under influence of alcoholic beverages. 
    No person shall operate any aircraft while under the influence of any alcoholic liquor or beverage, or any other matter or substance of any kind or description containing alcohol, irrespective of the alcoholic content thereof. When the physical or mental faculties of any aircraft operator have been affected sufficiently to make the driving or operation of an aircraft in any degree less safe, such operator shall be "under the influence" within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1958,  3-11.1) 
Sec. 7-32. - Operating aircraft under influence of drugs. 
    No person shall operate an aircraft while under the influence of any drug, medicine, narcotic, sedative, potion, opiate, soporific, anesthetic, inhalant, hypodermic, stupefacient, anodyne or other material, commodity or substance of any kind or description. When the physical or mental faculties of any aircraft operator have been affected sufficiently to make the driving or operation of an aircraft in any degree less safe, such operator shall be "under the influence" within the meaning of this section. 
(Code 1958,  3-11.2) 
Sec. 7-33. - Removal of wrecked or damaged aircraft. 
    Any wrecked or damaged aircraft shall be promptly removed from the landing area by the owner or pilot thereof under the supervision and direction of the airport manager. 
(Code 1958,  3-11.3) 
Secs. 7-34-7-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MONROE REGIONAL AIRPORT[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Rates for airport taxicabs,  35-301(5). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 7-46. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this article shall apply only to the Monroe Regional Airport. 
Sec. 7-47. - Compliance with rules and regulations required. 
    Every person enjoying privileges at the Monroe Regional Airport, whether or not such privileges be in connection with the use of buildings, concessions, or landing rights, shall at all times strictly obey and abide by all of the rules and regulations of the federal government as well as such rules and regulations as may be made by the city governing the use of such airport. 
(Code 1958,  3-17; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 7-48. - Vehicles on landing area. 
(a)  No person shall enter the airport landing area with a truck, automobile, motor scooter, motorcycle, bicycle, or other vehicles except aircraft, provided that this section shall not apply to airport maintenance vehicles, Federal Aviation Agency vehicles, gasoline trucks engaged in servicing aircraft, or emergency or police vehicles. 
(b)  No vehicle shall park in any area that is not designated a parking area. Parking fees are amended and established as follows: 
Short Term Parking Rates Day 1 Amount Day 2+ Amount 0-1 hour $0.00 0-1 hour $2.00 1-2 hours 3.00 1-2 hours 3.00 2-3 hours 4.00 2-3 hours 4.00 3-4 hours 5.00 3-4 hours 5.00 4-5 hours 7.00 4-5 hours 7.00 5-24 hours 9.00 5-24 hours 9.00  
Long Term Parking Rates Day 1 Amount Day 2+ Amount 0-1 hour $2.00 0-1 hour $2.00 1-2 hours 3.00 1-2 hours 3.00 2-3 hours 4.00 2-3 hours 4.00 3-4 hours 5.00 3-4 hours 5.00 4-5 hours 6.00 4-5 hours 6.00 5-24 hours 7.00 5-24 hours 7.00  
(c)  Any disabled veteran, his conveyance and his passengers shall be allowed to park for free at the Monroe Regional Airport for a period not exceeding ten (10) days provided the disabled veteran provides proof of his disability in the form of a military honor license plate as provided in R.S. 47:490.4 and 47:490.31 or a disabled veteran identification card issued by the United States Department of Veterans Affairs. Such proof shall be required and presented at the time the disabled veteran requests such parking privilege upon leaving the parking areas at the Monroe Regional Airport. 
(Code 1958,  3-11.4; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78; Ord. No. 11,234, 10-25-11; Ord. No. 11,700, 7-26-16; Ord. No. 11,800, 9-26-17) 
Sec. 7-49. - Commercial activities. 
    No person shall use the airport for the purpose of any commercial activity, for the carrying for hire of passengers, freight, express or mail, for the instruction in aviation in any of its branches, for the sale of fuels, for the sale of refreshments, or for the conduct of any phase of aviation activity, unless approved by the mayor or his duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1958,  3-17.1; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 7-50. - Sale and storage of gasoline. 
    No gasoline or other fuel shall be sold and/or stored at or within the Monroe Regional Airport other than under and in compliance with the standards and conditions set forth herein: 
(1)  No gasoline or other fuel shall be stored at the Monroe Regional Airport except in an approved and permitted fuel tank/fuel farm installation. 
(2)  No fuel tank/fuel farm facility shall be approved and permitted unless said fuel tank/fuel farm facility is in conjunction with a land lease at the Monroe Regional Airport with the City of Monroe. Said leasehold must include a building of at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, either existing at the time of the fuel tank/fuel farm permit application or to be constructed prior to the use of the fuel tank/fuel farm, with the plans and specifications for the building to be approved by the city or its agent prior to application for fuel permit. 
(3)  No fuel tank/fuel farm facility, in whole or in part, shall be sublet or assigned without the written approval of the City of Monroe. 
(4)  All fuel tank/fuel farm facilities shall carry liability insurance, property damage insurance, fire and extended insurance coverage, with the City of Monroe as a named insured, in the minimum amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) single-limit coverage. 
(5)  All fuel tanks must be installed underground. 
(6)  The minimum fuel tank size shall be ten thousand (10,000) gallons. 
(7)  All fuel tank/fuel farm facilities shall be provided with reasonable on-site identification and proper lighting according to the rules and regulations of the Monroe Regional Airport. 
(8)  All fuel tank/fuel farm facilities shall be equipped with sufficient locking devices to prevent unauthorized use and/or tampering while said facility is unattended by the owner, his agents and/or employees. 
(9)  All fuel tank/fuel farm facilities, both commercial and noncommercial, shall be equipped with authorized fire-fighting equipment as required by the applicant fire codes and commensurate with the individual type of operation. 
(10)  All mobile fuel tank vehicles, known as "fuel tenders," shall be equipped with adequate hand fire extinguishers. 
(11)  All fuel tank/fuel farm facilities shall have mobile fire extinguishers out and in position during all fueling operations. 
(12)  The airport director shall have the right to inspect all fire fighting equipment and fire extinguishers as often as he deems necessary. 
(13)  All private, noncommercial, and/or commercial fuel tanks/fuel farm facilities shall be equipped with fuel filters for commercial operation as per American Petroleum Institute Bulletin No. 1500, and any future supplements thereto, and said fuel filters must be approved by the Federal Aviation Administration. 
(14)  All federal, state and city regulations and codes governing the installation and operation of a fuel facility must be adhered to and complied with. 
(15)  All commercial fuel tanks and all fuel tanks belonging to fixed-based operations shall also comply with the "Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities of the Monroe Regional Airport," and any future amendments or supplements thereto. 
(16)  All fuel tanks/fuel farm facilities shall be inspected yearly by the state department of weights and measures for accuracy and fuel contamination. Said inspection shall be the responsibility of the owner. A copy of said inspection report shall be delivered to the airport director. The airport director shall have the authority and right to inspect any fuel tank/fuel farm facility at any time. 
(17)  Operators of commercial and/or private, noncommercial fuel tank/fuel farm may purchase fuel from any source or supplier authorized to sell fuel in the State of Louisiana and the City of Monroe; provided, however, that any such source or supplier must have executed a signed written agreement with the City of Monroe to forward a copy of all invoices of fuel sales and deliveries lessees at the Monroe Regional Airport to the airport director and to pay the fuel flowage on all such sales and/or deliveries within thirty (30) days after such delivery. 
(18)  No gasoline or other fuel shall be delivered to the Monroe Regional Airport except in the manner and in tank vehicles authorized by the Louisiana Department of Public Safety for the commercial transportation of such fuel on the public highways of the State of Louisiana. No fuel shall be delivered to the Monroe Regional Airport in cans, drums, tanks or other containers. 
(19)  All gasoline or other fuel delivered to the Monroe Regional Airport shall be subject to a fuel flowage fee of four cents ($0.04) per gallon, with a minimum fuel flowage fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) per year. 
(20)  Only commercial operators shall be permitted to maintain and operate mobile fuel tank vehicles, which vehicles known as "fuel tenders" must meet all Federal Aviation Administration standards and be approved by the airport director. Said mobile fuel tank vehicles shall be provided with applicable identification, filters and pumps as set forth for stationary tanks and shall meet all safety requirements. 
(21)  The airport director shall conduct an annual audit at the time of the airport's annual inspection, which will include inspections by the fire prevention bureau and may conduct additional audits at any time. 
(22)  Violations of the provisions of this section may result in fines and/or imprisonment imposed by the Monroe City Court as provided in section 1-11 of this Code, as well as the termination of the fuel tank/fuel farm permit granted herein by the city council. Termination of the permit shall not be dependent upon any decision by the Monroe City Court. 
(Ord. No. 7713-A, 8-28-84) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7713-A, adopted Aug. 28, 1984, which amended  7-50 and 7-51 has been treated as superseding the material in the aforementioned sections. Former  7-50 was concerned with the sale of gasoline to public and derived from Code 1958,  3-15, and Ord. No. 7010, adopted Mar. 14, 1978; and former  7-51 was concerned with wholesalers of gasoline and derived from Code 1958,  3-16; Ord. No. 7010, adopted Mar. 14, 1978; and Ord. No. 7-57, adopted Mar. 27, 1979. 
Sec. 7-51. - Sale of gasoline to public. 
(a)  Fuel sales shall be permitted at commercial operations only. 
(b)  Private and/or self-service fuel tank/fuel farm facilities shall not make fuel sales; and fuel at such facilities shall be dispensed only for the aircraft owner who holds the lease to said facility and only for that lessee's aircraft. 
(Ord. No. 7713-A, 8-28-84) 
Note- See editor's note to  7-50. 
Sec. 7-52. - Obedience to regulations for use of terminal building and airport facilities. 
    Uniform regulations promulgated by the airport manager which regulations shall govern the use of the airport terminal building and the airport facilities by the airlines. 
(Code 1958,  3-17.7) 
Sec. 7-53. - Certain standards and rules adopted by reference. 
(a)  The publication known as the "Minimum Standards for Commercial Aeronautical Activities of the Monroe Municipal Airport" is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. A copy of said publication is on file in the office of the clerk of the council. 
(b)  That publication known as the "Airport Rules and Regulations Governing Tenants, Users, Passengers and Visitors for the Monroe Municipal Airport" is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. A copy of said publication is on file in the office of the clerk of the council. 
(c)  All references to the Monroe Airport Authority in such publications are hereby amended to vest that authority in the council. 
(Code 1958,  3-31, 3-41, Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78; Ord. No. 10,891, 3-10-09) 
Sec. 7-54. - Special rules for operation of aircraft. 
    The following special rules shall be observed by all persons operating aircraft in, on or near the Monroe Regional Airport: 
(a)  No person shall taxi an aircraft until he has ascertained, through visual inspection, and when available, through information furnished by airport attendants, that there will be no danger of collision with any person or object in the vicinity or area. 
(b)  No person shall operate the engine of any aircraft at any time or at any location on the airport so as to cause damage to persons or property on the airport. 
(c)  All aircraft awaiting take off shall be parked at least one hundred (100) feet from the active runway, and in a position which will enable the pilot to have an unobstructed view of aircraft approaching the field for landing. 
(d)  Runway 17 is designated as the calm wind runway. 
(e)  Normal left-hand air traffic shall be flown in a rectangular pattern at an altitude of eight hundred (800) feet A.G.L., provided that aircraft having flight characteristics which make the above procedure impractical may be flown at an altitude of one thousand (1,000) feet A.G.L., but shall conform to the rectangular pattern unless otherwise directed by the air traffic control tower. 
(f)  The first turn of all aircraft departing Monroe Regional Airport shall be made after reaching the departure end of runway being used, unless otherwise directed by the air traffic control tower. 
(g)  All aircraft arriving at the Monroe Regional Airport shall enter traffic in the middle third or segment of the downward leg of the traffic pattern. 
(h)  No aircraft shall be flown in the traffic pattern in any maneuver other than that which may be necessary for safe operation. 
(i)  All aircraft shall expedite clearance of the runway and shall not come to a stop until after turning off on a taxi strip, and then not less than one hundred (100) feet from the active runway, unless otherwise directed by the air traffic control tower. 
(j)  Student aircraft engaged in touch and go landings, either dual or solo, shall be expedited as much as is practical. 
(k)  No aircraft, except those operated by commercial airlines, shall park in front of the terminal building in the area delineated by yellow lines painted on the ramp. 
(l)  No aircraft shall take off from a runway intersection without permission of the air traffic control tower. 
(m)  No aircraft shall take off from or land upon the ramp at any time. 
(Code 1958,  3-11.5; Ord. No. 7088, 9-11-79) 
Sec. 7-55. - Airport advertising and fees. 
    Advertising space. The city recognizes the need to further maximize the use of the facilities to allow for advertising by commercial or private vendors and, accordingly, management is hereby authorized to lease rental space by use of written signs, billboards or mechanical means for display at the Monroe Regional Airport. The extent of the number and use of advertising space in the airport shall be at the discretion of the director of public works and the fee shall be based on the following: 
Advertising Rates Type of Display Location Sign Size 1st Month 3 Months* 6 Months** 1 Year*** Backlit Boarding 42"H  62"W $800.00 5% 10% 15% Backlit Boarding 42"H  32"W $500.00 5% 10% 15% Digital 
Display All 
Buildings 46" $550.00 5% 10% 15% Vinyl Wrap All 
Buildings $550.00 5% 10% 15% Product Display Ticketing $900.00 5% 10% 15% Phone Board Baggage $250.00 5% 10% 15% FIDS - Banner (14) 
Arrival/ 
Departure 
Displays All 
Locations 46" $500.00-$900.00 5% 10% 15%  
* 5% Discount for three-month contract. 
** 10% Discount for six-month contract. 
*** 15% Discount for 12-month contract. 
(Ord. No. 11,230, 10-11-11) 
Secs. 7-56-7-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - AIRLINE RENTAL CHARGE 

Sec. 7-71. - Definitions. 
    As used in this division the following definitions shall apply: 
    Airline shall mean an airline company operating a regularly scheduled passenger service in and out of the Monroe Regional Airport on a commercial basis. 
    Gross on-line ticket sales shall mean the total price paid for tickets, exclusive of federal excise taxes, for passenger service originating in the city for travel on an airline operating at the Monroe Regional Airport. 
(Code 1958,  3-17.3; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 7-72. - Fixed. 
    An airline whose fees and charges for the use of the terminal building and airport facilities at Monroe Regional Airport are not fixed by written contract between such airline and the city shall pay to the city for the use of such terminal buildings and airport facilities: 
(1)  Three (3) per cent per annum of the first one million two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($1,250,000.00) of gross on-line ticket sales of such airline and one per cent per annum of the gross on-line ticket sales of such airline in excess of one million two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($1,250,000.00); or 
(2)  The sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per annum, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1958,  3-17.4; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 7-73. - Time and method of payment. 
    The fees and charges herein fixed shall be payable monthly on or before the tenth day of each month, based upon the gross on-line ticket sales of each airline for the preceding calendar month, provided that, in no event, shall any airline pay to the city in any one month a sum which is less than one-twelfth of the minimum annual charge for the applicable period. In January of each year payments for the entirety of the preceding year shall be adjusted between each airline and the city to equal the total amount due for such calendar year based on the fees and charges which are fixed herein. 
(Code 1958,  3-17.5) 
Sec. 7-74. - Daily reports and audit required. 
    Daily reports shall be submitted by each airline to the airport manager showing the gross on-line ticket sales for the preceding day. Such reports shall be subject to audit by the auditor for the city from time to time as may be necessary in order to reconcile the gross on-line ticket sales with the monthly rental being paid by each airline. 
(Code 1958,  3-17.6) 
Sec. 7-75. - Exemption. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to any airline whose charges and fees are now or may hereafter be fixed by written contract between the city and such airline. 
(Code 1958,  3-17.8) 
Secs. 7-76-7-90. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AIRPORT ZONING[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Zoning ordinance, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- For authority and regulations relative to airport zoning, see R.S. 2:381 et seq. 

Sec. 7-91. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and shall be cited as "The Monroe Regional Airport Zoning Ordinance". 
(Code 1958,  3-18; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 7-92. - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of natural growth and otherwise regulate the use of property in the vicinity of the Monroe Regional Airport by: 
(1)  Creating the appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof; 
(2)  Providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; 
(3)  Defining certain terms used herein; 
(4)  Referring to and establishing zoning maps to be incorporated and made a part of this article; 
(5)  Providing for enforcement; 
(6)  Establishing a board of adjustment; and 
(7)  Imposing penalties and repealing all ordinances in conflict herewith. 
(Code 1958,  3-18.1; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 7-93. - Authority. 
(a)  This article is adopted pursuant to the authority conferred by The Airport and Airway Development Act of 1970. It is hereby found that an airport hazard endangers the lives and property of users of Monroe Regional Airport, Monroe, Louisiana, and property owners or occupants of land in its vicinity, and also, if the obstruction type, in effect, reduces the size of the area available for landing, takeoff and maneuvering of aircraft, it tends to destroy or impair the utility of Monroe Regional Airport, Monroe, Louisiana, and the public investment therein. Accordingly, it is declared: 
(1)  That the creation or establishment of an airport hazard is a public nuisance and an injury to the region served by Monroe Regional Airport, Monroe, Louisiana; 
(2)  That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety and general welfare (the Airport and Airway Development Act of 1970) to prevent the creation or establishment of airport hazards; and 
(3)  That the prevention of these hazards should be accomplished, to the extent legally possible, by the exercise of the police power without compensation. 
(b)  It is further declared that both the prevention of the creation or establishment of airport hazards and the elimination, removal, alteration, mitigation, or marking and lighting of existing airport hazards are public purposes for which a political subdivision may raise and expend public funds and acquire land or interests in land. 
(Code 1958,  3-18.2; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78) 
Sec. 7-94. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, unless the context otherwise requires: 
    Airport means Monroe Regional Airport. 
    Airport elevation means the established elevation of the highest point on the usable landing area. 
    Airport hazard means any structure, tree or use of land which obstructs the airspace required for or is otherwise hazardous to the flight of aircraft in landing or taking off at the airport. 
    Airport reference point means the point established as the approximate geographic center of the airport landing area and so designated. 
    Approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical zones : These zones apply to the area under the approach, transitional, horizontal, and conical surfaces defined in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR). 
    Board of adjustment means the board of adjustment appointed by the City of Monroe in accordance with Chapter 37 of this Code. 
    Height : For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set forth in the article and shown on the zoning map, the datum shall be mean see level elevation unless otherwise specified. 
    Nonprecision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type navigation equipment, for which a straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved or planned, and for which no precision approach facilities are planned or indicated on an FAA planning document or military service's military airport planning document. 
    Person means an individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association or governmental entity. The term includes a trustee, receiver, assignee or similar representative of any of them. 
    Precision instrument runway means a runway having an existing instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument land system (ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan; a military service's approved military airport layout plan; any other FAA planning document, or military service's military airport planning document. 
    Primary surface means a surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends two hundred (200) feet beyond each end of that runway; but when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of the runway. The width of the primary surface of a runway will be that width prescribed in Part 77 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FAR) for the most precise approach existing or planned for either end of that runway. The elevation of any point on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline. 
    Runway shall mean a defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its length. 
    Structure means an object constructed or installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers, smokestacks, earth foundations and overhead transmission lines. 
    Tree means any object of natural growth. 
    Utility runway means a runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller driven aircraft of twelve thousand five hundred (12,500) pounds maximum gross weight and less. 
    Visual runway means a runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual approach procedures with no straight-in instrument approach procedure and no instrument designation indicated on an FAA approved airport layout plan, a military service's approved military airport layout plan, or by any planning document submitted to the FAA by competent authority. 
(Code 1958,  3-19) 
Sec. 7-95. - Zones. 
    In order to carry out the provisions of this article, there are hereby created and established certain zones which include all of the land lying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones as they apply to a particular airport. Such zones are shown on the Monroe Regional Airport Zoning Map consisting of one sheet, prepared by Jenkins and Madden Engineering Company, and dated September 4, 1974, which is on file in the office of the clerk of the council and made a part hereof. An area located in more than one of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and defined as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is two hundred fifty (250) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand two hundred fifty (1,250) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of two thousand (2,000) feet at a horizontal distance five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of one thousand five hundred (1,500) feet at a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-quarter-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of four thousand (4,000) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-quarter-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of four thousand (4,000) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: The inner edge of this approach zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is one thousand (1,000) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of sixteen thousand (16,000) feet at a horizontal distance of fifty thousand (50,000) feet from the primary surface, its centerline being the continuation of the centerline of the runway. 
(7)  Transitional zones: These zones are hereby established as the area beneath the transitional surfaces. These surfaces extend outward and upward at ninety-degree angles to the runway centerline and the runway centerline extends at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional zones for those portions of the precision approach zones which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach zones and at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(8)  Horizontal zone: The horizontal zone is hereby established by swinging arcs of five thousand (5,000) feet radii for all runways designated as utility or visual and ten thousand (10,000) feet radii for all other runways from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway, and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal zone does not include the approach and transitional zones. 
(9)  Conical zone: The conical zone is hereby established as the area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones and the transitional zones. 
(Code 1958,  3-20) 
Sec. 7-96. - Height limitations. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in any zone created by this article to a height in excess of the height limit herein established for such zone. Such height limitations are hereby established for each of the zones in question as follows: 
(1)  Utility runway visual approach zone: Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically, beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(2)  Utility runway nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(3)  Runway larger than utility visual approach zone: Slopes upward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(4)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum greater than three-quarter-mile nonprecision instrument approach zone: Slopes upward thirty-four (34) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(5)  Runway larger than utility with a visibility minimum as low as three-quarter-mile nonprecious instrument approach zone: Slopes upward thirty-four (34) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(6)  Precision instrument runway approach zone: Slopes upward fifty (50) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline; thence slopes upward forty (40) feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional horizontal distance of forty thousand (40,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
(7)  Transitional zones: Slopes upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach zones, and extending to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation which is seventy-nine (79) feet above mean sea level. In addition to the foregoing, there are established height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach zones, and extending to where they intersect the conical surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach zone projects beyond the conical zone, height limits sloping upward and outward seven (7) feet horizontally for each foot vertically shall be maintained beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as precision instrument runway approach surface, and extending to a horizontal distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured at ninety-degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
(8)  Horizontal zone: One hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation or a height of two hundred twenty-nine (229) feet above mean sea level. 
(9)  Conical zone: Slopes upward and outward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred and fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
(10)  Excepted height limitations: Nothing in this article shall be construed as prohibiting the growth, construction, or maintenance of any tree or structure to a height up to forty-five (45) feet above the surface of the land. 
    Where an area is covered by more than one height limitation, the more restrictive limitation shall prevail. 
(Code 1958,  3-21) 
Sec. 7-97. - Use restrictions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article no use that involves a high concentration of population (such as schools, hospitals and high density multifamily developments) or poses a potential safety hazard (such as oil storage facilities, manufacturers of chemicals, or explosives, etc.) will be allowed in the 50:1 slope approach for instrument runways, and the 40:1 slope approach for noninstrument runways. 
(Code 1958,  3-22) 
Sec. 7-98. - Nonconforming uses. 
(a)  The regulations prescribed by this article shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations as of April 2, 1976, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use. Nothing herein contained shall require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to April 2, 1976, and is diligently prosecuted. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this section, the owner of any nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of such airport hazards. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city. 
(Code 1958,  3-23) 
Sec. 7-99. - Permits for nonconforming uses. 
(a)  Except as specifically provided in paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) hereunder, no material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit shall be granted. 
(1)  In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and the conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when because of terrain, land contour or topographic features such tree or structure would extend above the height limits prescribed for such zone. 
(2)  In the areas lying within the limits of the instrument and noninstrument approach zones but at a horizontal distance of not less than four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runways, no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or structure would extend above the height limit prescribed for such instrument or noninstrument approach zone. 
(3)  In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zone no permit shall be required for any tree or structure less than seventy-five (75) feet of vertical height above the ground except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic features would extend above the height limit prescribed for such transition zones. 
    Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction, alteration or growth of any structure or tree in excess of any of the height limits established by this article except as set forth in section 7-96 of this Code. 
(b)  No permit shall be granted that would allow the establishment or creation of an airport hazard or permit a nonconforming use, structure, or tree to be made or become higher, or become a greater hazard to air navigation, than it was on April 2, 1976 or the date of any amendments to this article or than it is when the application for a permit is made. 
(c)  Whenever the planning and urban development director determines that a nonconforming structure or tree has been abandoned or more than eighty (80) per cent torn down, physically deteriorated, or decayed, no permit shall be granted that would allow such structure or tree to exceed the applicable height limit or otherwise deviate from the zoning regulations. 
(d)  Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property, not in accordance with the regulations prescribed in this article, may apply to the board of adjustment for a variance from such regulations. Such variances shall be allowed where it is duly found that a literal application or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not be contrary to the public interest but will do substantial justice and be in accordance with the spirit of this article. 
(e)  Any permit or variance granted may, if such action is deemed advisable to effectuate the purpose of this article and be reasonable in the circumstances, be so conditioned as to require the owner of the structure or tree in question to permit the city at its own expense to install, operate, and maintain thereon such markers and lights as may be necessary to indicate to flyers the presence of an airport hazard. 
(Code 1958,  3-24) 
State Law reference- Variances, R.S. 2:385(B); permits, R.S. 2:385(A). 
Sec. 7-100. - Enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the planning and urban development director to administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. 
    Applications for permits and variances shall be made to the planning and urban development director upon a form furnished by him. Applications required by this article to be submitted to the planning and urban development director shall be promptly considered and granted or denied by him. Applications for action by the board of adjustment shall be forthwith transmitted by the planning and urban development director. 
(Code 1958,  3-25) 
Sec. 7-101. - Board of adjustment; duties; meetings; reports. 
(a)  The board of adjustment shall have and exercise the following powers in connection with the administration of this article: 
(1)  To hear and decide appeals from any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the planning and urban development director in the enforcement of this article; 
(2)  To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms of this article upon which such board of adjustment under such regulations may be required to pass; 
(3)  To hear and decide specific variances. 
(b)  The board of adjustment shall adopt rules for its governance and procedure in harmony with the provisions of this article. Meetings of the board of adjustment shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board of adjustment may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses. All hearings of the board of adjustment shall be public. The board of adjustment shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon each question, or, if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall immediately be filed in the office of the planning and urban development director and shall be a public record. 
(c)  The board of adjustment shall make written findings of fact and conclusions of law giving the facts upon which it acted and its legal conclusions from such facts in reversing, affirming, or modifying any order, requirement, decision, or determination which comes before it under the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The concurring vote of a majority of the members of the board of adjustment shall be sufficient to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of the planning and urban development director or to decide in favor of the applicant on any matter upon which it is required to pass under this article, or to effect any variation in this article. 
(Code 1958,  3-26) 
Cross reference- Board of adjustment generally,  37-41 et seq. 
Sec. 7-102. - Appeals. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved, or any taxpayer affected by any decision of the planning and urban development director made in his administration of this article, if of the opinion that a decision of the planning and urban development director is an improper application of these regulations, may appeal to the board of adjustment. 
(b)  All appeals hereunder must be taken within a reasonable time as provided by the rules of the board of adjustment, by filing with the planning and urban development director a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. The planning and urban development director shall forthwith transmit to the board of adjustment all the papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
(c)  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the planning and urban development director certifies to the board of adjustment, after the notice of appeal has been filed with it, that by reason of the facts stated in the certificate a stay would, in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed except by order of the board of adjustment on notice to the agency from which the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(d)  The board of adjustment shall fix a reasonable time for hearing appeals, give public notice and due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney. 
(e)  The board of adjustment may, in conformity with the provisions of this article, reverse or affirm, in whole or in part, or modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision, or determination, as may be appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Code 1958,  3-27) 
Sec. 7-103. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved, or any taxpaper affected, by any decision of the board of adjustment, may appeal to the District Court for Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, as provided in R.S. 2:387. 
(Code 1958,  3-28) 
Sec. 7-104. - Penalties. 
    Each violation of this article or any regulation, order or ruling promulgated hereunder, shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days or both; and each day a violation continues to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1958,  3-29) 
State Law reference- Penalty for violation of airport zoning ordinance, R.S. 2:388. 
Sec. 7-105. - Conflicting regulations. 
    Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations prescribed in this article and any other regulations applicable to the same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures or trees, the use of land, or any other matter, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail. 
(Code 1958,  3-30) 
Chapter 8 - BICYCLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 33. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 8-1. - Obliterated serial numbers. 
    Any person operating a bicycle with an obliterated serial number shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five dollars ($5.00) together with court costs and expenses. 
(Code 1958,  5A-8) 
Secs. 8-2-8-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - REGISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority of city to license and register bicycles, R.S. 32:41(A)(7). 

Sec. 8-21. - Short title. 
    The provisions of this article shall be known as "the Bicycle Registration Ordinance of the City of Monroe." 
(Code 1958,  5A-1) 
Sec. 8-22. - Definitions. 
    In the construction of this article the following words shall have the meanings indicated: 
    Bicycle shall mean every device propelled by human power upon which any person may ride, having two (2) tandem wheels either of which is more than twenty (20) inches in diameter. 
    Owner shall mean any person holding legal title to a bicycle kept within the city, and, if such person is a minor, the father, tutor or other person charged with legal responsibility for such minor, provided that this word shall not include a manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer with respect to any bicycle held by him for sale at wholesale or retail. 
(Code 1958,  5A-2) 
Sec. 8-23. - Registration authorized. 
    The police department is hereby authorized to accept registration of bicycles as hereinafter provided. The owner of any bicycle kept within the city may have such bicycle registered at police department headquarters. 
(Code 1958,  5A-3) 
Sec. 8-24. - Time for registration. 
(a)  Each bicycle owner may register his bicycle with the city, through its police department as soon after its initial acquirement as practicable. It is recommended by the city that all bicycles be registered within ten (10) days after being acquired. The initial registration of the bicycle shall suffice for the entire period of ownership by its original owner. 
(b)  If the bicycle was acquired from a merchant outside the city or from any other person except a merchant within the city, the owner shall be responsible for its registration. If the bicycle is already registered with the city, it shall be reregistered in the name of the new owner upon his application without cost to him. 
(Code 1958,  5A-4) 
Sec. 8-25. - Procedure. 
(a)  At the time a bicycle is registered, the owner shall provide his correct name, address and telephone number, and a description of the bicycle including its manufacturer, color, serial number and such other identifying information as the police department may require, which information shall be entered on the registration certificate. The owner shall be furnished a copy of such certificate and a copy shall be retained by the police department. 
(b)  In the event any bicycle does not have a serial number, the police department shall assign a serial number to it and affix such number to the bicycle. 
(Code 1958,  5A-5) 
Sec. 8-26. - Registration number. 
    When a bicycle is registered, the police department shall issue a numbered sticker, which shall be securely attached to the bicycle on the front lower frame tubing behind the fork housing. All stickers are good as long as they are legible. 
    In the event any owner's tag becomes illegible it shall be his responsibility to have the bicycle reregistered. 
(Code 1958,  5A-6; Ord. No. 7787, 4-9-85) 
Sec. 8-27. - Fees. 
    The following fees shall be collected by the police department: 
(1)  For registration and issuance of registration sticker, one dollar and fifty cents ($1.50). 
(2)  For issuance of duplicate license tag, seventy-five cents ($0.75). 
(Code 1958,  5A-7; Ord. No. 7787, 4-9-85) 
Chapter 9 - BUILDINGS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08. 
Cross reference- Advertising and signs, Ch. 3; airport zoning,  7-91 et seq.; flood hazard areas,  13-21 et seq.; electricity, Ch. 14; fire prevention code,  15-16 et seq.; gas, Ch. 17; housing code,  19-16 et seq.; construction in Monroe Industrial Park,  22-20; planning and development, Ch. 26; plumbing code, Ch. 27; gates opening on sidewalks,  31-2; subdivisions, Ch. 32; zoning, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Building codes, R.S. 33:4771 et seq.; state uniform construction code, R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Fire district. 
    The following parts or portions of the city embraced within the described limits, are hereby established as "fire districts": 
FIRE DISTRICT NO. 1 
    Commencing at a point on the center line of the Ouachita River where it intersects the center line of Interstate 20; thence, travel in an easterly direction to the center line of Interstate 20 and the center line of South Grand Street for a point of beginning; thence, travel in an easterly direction along the center line of Interstate 20 to the center line of Civic Center Boulevard; thence, northerly along the center line of Civic Center Boulevard to the center line of DeSiard Street; thence, easterly along the center line of DeSiard Street to the center line of Tenth Street; thence, northerly along the center line of Tenth Street to the center line of Adams Street; thence, westerly along the center line of Adams Street to the center line of Seventh Street; thence, northerly along the center line of Seventh Street 130 feet more or less to an alley; thence, westerly a ninety-degree angle to the left along the center line of said alley to the center line of Sixth Street; thence, northerly along the center line of Sixth Street to the center line of Arkansas Avenue; thence, easterly along the center line of Arkansas Avenue to the center line of North 18th Street; thence, southerly along the center line of North 18th Street to the center line of Pine Street; thence, easterly along the center line of Pine Street to the center line of Orel Street; thence, southeasterly along the center line of Orel Street to the center line of McClendon Street; thence, northerly along the center line of McClendon Street to the center line of Edwards Street; thence, southeasterly along the center line of Edwards Street to the center line of Twenty-Fourth Street; thence, northerly along the center line of Twenty-Fourth Street to the center line of Rose Street; thence, easterly along the center line of Rose Street to the center line of Twenty-Fifth Street; thence, northerly along the center line of Twenty-Fifth Street to the center line of Newcombe Street; thence, easterly along the center line of Newcombe Street and its easterly projection to the center line of Main drainage canal; thence, northwesterly along the center line of Main drainage canal to the center line of Oliver Road; thence, southerly along the center line of Oliver Road to the easterly projection to the center line of Hudson Avenue; thence, westerly along the center line of Hudson Avenue to the center line of North 9th Street; thence, southerly along the center line of North 9th Street to the center line of Bres Avenue; thence, westerly along the center line of Bres Avenue to the center line of the Ouachita River; thence, southerly along the center line of the Ouachita River to a point in the river which is in line with the center line of Grammont Street; thence, in an easterly direction along the center line of the projection of Grammont Street to the center line of South Grand Street; thence, in a southerly direction along the center line of South Grand Street to the point of beginning. (Code 1958,  6-10) 
FIRE DISTRICT NO. 2 
    Beginning at the intersection of the center line of DeSiard Street and Standley Street; thence, easterly along the center line of DeSiard Street to the intersection with the center line of Sterlington Road; thence, northerly along the center line of Sterlington Road to the intersection with the center line of Concordia Avenue; thence, westerly along the center line of Concordia Avenue to the intersection with the center line of Breard Street; thence, southwesterly along the center line of Breard Street to the intersection with the center line of formerly Fairmont Avenue as dedicated and now revoked; thence, southerly along the center line of formerly Fairmont Avenue now revoked, to the intersection of the center line of St. Charles Street; thence, northeasterly along the center line of St. Charles Street to the intersection with the center line of Standley Street; thence, southeasterly along the center line of Standley Street to the center line of DeSiard Street, the point of beginning. 
FIRE DISTRICT NO. 3 
    Beginning at the southwest corner of Lot 3, Block 4 of Morningside Extension; thence, southerly to the southwest corner of Lot 17, Block 4 of Morningside Extension; thence, easterly to the southwest corner of Lot 17, Block 3 of Morningside Extension; thence, northerly to the northwest corner of Lot 17, Block 3 of Morningside Extension; thence, easterly along the northerly property line of Lot 17, Block 3 of Morningside Extension to the center line of Masonic Avenue; thence along the center line of Masonic Avenue in a northerly direction 50 feet; thence at an angle of 90 to the left travel in an easterly direction to the southwest corner of Lot 3, Block 2 of Morningside Extension; thence, southerly to the southwest corner of Lot 18, Block 2 of Morningside Extension; thence, easterly to the center line of Hill Street; thence, southerly to the southwest corner of Lot 6, Block 8 of Sherrouse Park, Unit #1; thence, northeasterly to a point which is the northwest corner of Lot 8, Block 8 of Sherrouse Park Addition, Unit #1; thence, southeasterly along the north property line of Lot 8, Block 8 Sherrouse Park Addition, Unit #1 to the center line of Columbia Avenue; thence, northerly along the center line of Columbia Avenue to a point which is 30' west of the center line of Block #1, Sherrouse Park Addition, Unit #1; thence at an angle of 90 to the right easterly to the southwest corner of Lot 5, Block 19, Unit #2 of Sherrouse Park Addition; thence, northerly to the center line of DeSiard Street; thence, southwesterly along the center line of DeSiard Street to its intersection with the center line of University Avenue; thence, northerly along the center line of University Avenue to the intersection with the center line of east and west alley between DeSiard Street and Concordia Avenue; thence, southwesterly along the center line of east and west alley to the east right-of-way, U.S. 165 By-Pass; thence, southerly to the point of beginning. 
(Code 1958,  6-10) 
Secs. 9-2-9-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING CODES 

Sec. 9-21. - Adoption. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the City of Monroe, Louisiana, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings, structures, swimming pools and equipment within the City of Monroe, Louisiana, the following standard codes prepared by the International Code Council: 
(1)  Standard Amusement Device Code-1997 Edition. 
(2)  International Building Code-2006 Edition; not including Chapter 27 "Electrical" and Chapter 29 "Plumbing Systems." 
(3)  International Existing Building Code-2003 Edition. 
(4)  International Residential Code-2006 Edition; Not including Part I "Administrative," Part V "Mechanical," Part VII "Plumbing" and Part VIII "Electrical" but including Appendix J "Existing Buildings and Structures." 
(5)  International Mechanical Code-2006 Edition. 
(6)  International Property Maintenance Code-2003 Edition. 
(7)  International Fuel Gas Code-2006 Edition. 
(b)  These codes are adopted and incorporated by reference as fully as if set out at length herein, except such portions as may be in conflict with federal, state, or local law, or which may be specifically deleted, and shall be controlling for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of buildings, structures, swimming pools and equipment within the City of Monroe, Louisiana. Copies of such codes shall be on file in the office of the clerk of the city council of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(Code 1958,  6-7; Ord. No. 7664, 4-10-84; Ord. No. 9256, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 9502, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 9807, 5-26-98; Ord. No. 10,556, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 10,557, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 10,560, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 10,561, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 10,690, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 10,691, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 10,692, 4-10-07; Ord. No. 10,693, 4-10-07) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference,  2-15. 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt a building code by reference, R.S. 33:1368 et seq. 
Sec. 9-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the building code adopted by reference herein, it shall be held to mean the City of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
(b)  Wherever the term "corporation counsel" is used in the building code adopted by reference herein, it shall be held to mean the city attorney of the city. 
(Code 1958,  6-8) 
Sec. 9-23. - Additional information to accompany building permit applications. 
    All applications for permits, as provided in the building code, shall be accompanied by written evidence of approval by the Louisiana Fire Marshal, or the Louisiana State Board of Health, on all buildings which come under the jurisdiction of same. A permit may be withheld until evidence of the approval by such officials has been submitted in writing. 
(Code 1958,  6-3(b)) 
Sec. 9-24. - Permit fees. 
    On buildings, structures, additions, alterations or remodels requiring a permit, a fee for each permit shall be paid as required, in accordance with the schedule as established by the applicable governing authority. A permit shall be required regardless of whether the city inspectors or third-party inspectors conduct plan reviews and inspections. 
(a)  For the issuance of a permit, for the new construction of a building or structure a fee shall be charged according to the following schedule: 
(1)  [Inspection fees:] 
Convenience re-inspection fee ..... $ 20.00 
Inspections after normal business hours ..... 100.00 
Inspections on weekends/holidays ..... 200.00 
Re-inspection fee for initial inspection failure: 
First re-inspection ..... $ 35.00 
Second re-inspection ..... 50.00 
Third and subsequent re-inspections ..... 75.00 
per re-inspection until 
inspection is passed 
Fees are to be assessed and collected prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy. No final certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a project with outstanding fees. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction and additions: 
Plan review fee ..... $ 300.00 
Administrative fee for third party plan review and inspections ..... 200.00 
Building Permit fee ..... 250.00 
The first 5,000 square feet ..... 36 per 
square foot 
The next 5,000 square feet ..... 24 per 
square foot 
All over 10,000 square feet ..... 18 per 
square foot 
(3)  Residential construction: 
Plan Review Fee ..... $ 250.00 
Administrative fee for third party plan review and inspections ..... 200.00 
Permit fee ..... 75.00 
[plus] 24 per 
square foot 
(b)  For the purpose of calculating the square foot area in residential construction all non-heated areas shall be included in the calculation. 
(c)  For the issuance of a permit for alteration or remodeling of a building or structure, the following fees shall be charged: 
(1)  Cost of alteration or remodeling: 
Permit fee: Residential ..... $ 75.00 
   Non-residential ..... 250.00 
$ 0.00 to $ 2,000.00 ..... 25.00 
2,001.00 to 5,000.00 ..... 50.00 
5,001.00 to 10,000.00 ..... 75.00 
10,001.00 to 15,000.00 ..... 100.00 
15,001.00 to 25,000.00 ..... 150.00 
25,001.00 to 50,000.00 ..... 240.00 
50,001.00 to 100,000.00 ..... 360.00 
For each additional $100,000.00 ..... 120.00 
(2)  Roofing replacements will be charged as follows: 
Permit fee ..... $ 75.00 
Up to the first ten squares ..... 12.00 
plus $6.00 for each additional 
1,000 per roofing square 
(3)  For the issuance of a permit for the installation or removal of swimming pools the following fees shall be charged: 
Permit fee ..... $ 75.00 
plus 12 per 
square foot 
(d)  For the issuance of a permit for the installation or removal of underground gasoline storage tanks, pumps and other dispensing equipment, the following fees shall be charged: 
Underground storage tanks ..... $ 50.00 
Pumps and dispensing equipment ..... 50.00 
per pump 
(e)  For the issuance of a permit for the removal of a building or structure from one (1) lot to another, the fee shall be ninety dollars ($90.00). 
(f)  For the issuance of a permit for the demolition of a building or structure shall be as follows: 
The fee shall be at the rate of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) up to one thousand (1,000) square feet and five dollars ($5.00) for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet residential and ($10.00) for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet commercial. A selective interior demolition fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for residential, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for non-residential work shall be applied to all demolition of interior spaces with no changes to the structure of the building. This shall include wall coverings, framings, openings, mechanical systems, electrical and others. An inspection shall be made prior to and after demolition by the inspections office. 
(g)  For the issuance of a permit, for the installation of or alterations to heat producing appliances, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, blower and exhaust systems, a fee shall be charged according to the following schedule: 
(1)  For new installation of, or alterations (other than the addition of heating to existing air-systems) to air conditioning-cooling only, air conditioning-cooling and heating combined, mechanical refrigeration, ventilation or exhaust systems fees shall be based on compressor horsepower, or tons capacity in lieu of horsepower where refrigeration is accomplished by absorption, vacuum, or internal combustion engine. Fees for ventilation or exhaust systems shall be based on motor horsepower. Such fees shall be as follows: 
Permit fee ..... $ 75.00 
From 0 through 5 tons ..... 15.00 
From 6 through 10 tons ..... 30.00 
From 11 through 100 tons ..... 60.00 
From 101 through 500 tons ..... 105.00 
From 501 through 900 tons ..... 150.00 
Over 900 tons ..... 175.00 
(2)  For new installations of, or alterations to heating systems only, or for the addition of heating to an existing air-conditioning system. Fees are based on Btu input as follows: 
Up through 100 M Btu ..... $ 15.00 
From 101 M Btu through 200 M Btu ..... 22.00 
From 201 M Btu through 500 M Btu ..... 30.00 
Over 500 M Btu ..... 45.00 
K.W. ..... 1.25 
A/C duct ..... 25.00 
(h)  Fines and/or penalties of a demolition not in accordance to the post inspection shall be charged as follows: 
Property owner and/or agent shall be fined according to the penalties written within this chapter. (Refer to section 9-25.) 
(i)  No mobile home and/or trailer house shall be placed or located for habitation or occupancy within the city unless a permit shall have first been obtained from the office of the building inspector approving such placement or location. Upon application for such permit, a fee in the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be paid by the applicant to the building inspector. 
(j)  The plan review fees, demolition permit fees, administrative fee applied to third party inspectors listed in section 9-24(a)(3) and (4) shall be collected and retained by the inspections division without exception up to the amount of fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00). These funds shall be used for equipment, books, travel, education, and other expenses incurred in the operations of the inspections division. If any remaining funds are unspent at the end of the fiscal year, they shall remain in the possession of the inspections division and not be transferred. 
(Code 1958,  6-6; Ord. No. 7252, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 10,197, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 10,470, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 11,610, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 11,853, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 9-24.1. - Permit time limits. 
(a)  All permits which are required by the building codes shall be dated with the date of issuance, provided however that if any work is commenced prior to the issuance of a required permit that fact shall be noted on the permit and the date on which the work commenced shall be noted on the permit. 
(b)  All works for which permits are required by the building codes shall be completed within the following time limitations: 
(1)  New construction of a building or other structure not specifically listed herein-One year. 
(2)  Erection of billboards-Sixty (60) days. 
(3)  Alteration, rehabilitation or remodeling of a building or structure-Six (6) months. 
(4)  Installation of or alteration to heat producing appliance, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, blower and exhaust systems-Six (6) months. 
(5)  Installation or removal of swimming pools or underground sprinkler systems-Sixty (60) days. 
(6)  Removal of a building or structure from one lot to another-Six (6) months. 
(7)  Demolition of a building or structure-Six (6) months. 
(8)  Placement and/or installation of a mobile home and/or trailer house-Thirty (30) days. 
(c)  The time limitations set forth herein shall commence on the date the permit was issued or the date upon which work commenced, whichever is earlier. 
(d)  The city building inspector may grant one extension to any of the above established time limitations for a period of thirty (30) days. 
(e)  The permittee (one who receives a permit) may request additional extensions from the Monroe City Council. 
(f)  This section shall become effective on immediately, and shall apply to all permits issued after said date. 
(Ord. No. 9852, 10-13-98; Ord. No. 11,610, 9-8-15) 
Sec. 9-24.2. - Driveway and drainage project permits. 
    There shall be, in addition to any other fee charged pursuant to this chapter, a driveway and drainage project fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) payable to the engineering department, City of Monroe. Any application for said permit shall be made to the engineering department on such forms as may be supplied by the engineering department. 
(Ord. No. 10,482, 4-26-05) 
Sec. 9-25. - Penalties. 
    Anyone who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions of the Standard Building Code as adopted herein, shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. 
First offense ..... $ 75.00 
Second offense ..... 250.00 
Third offense ..... 500.00 
and suspension of Monroe 
occupational license for one year 
    Fees to be collected per section 9-24(a)(2). 
(Ord. No. 7552, 7-12-83; Ord. No. 11,853, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 9-26. - Appeal of unsafe building report. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, either herein or in the Standard Building Code adopted herein, specifically Section 112.1(b) of said Standard Building Code, whenever a building or structure is reported to be unsafe or dangerous in the opinion of the building inspector, the property owner or his agent may appeal such report and determination within fifteen (15) days of the date the notice was mailed to the property owner or his agent. Such appeal shall be made to the city council by written demand directed to the clerk of the city council. A hearing on the appeal shall be held by the city council not less than thirty (30) days after receipt of the demand for appeal by the clerk. Both the building inspector and the property owner or his agent shall be given ten (10) days' notice of the date and time of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 9085, 8-26-89) 
Chapter 9.5 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Consumer Choice For Television Act, R.S. 45:1361 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - CABLE TELEVISION ORDINANCE;[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,882, adopted Jan. 27, 2009, enacted provisions which have been codified as Ch. 9.5, Art. II. To facilitate indexing,  9.5-1-9.5-13 have been designated as Ch. 9.5, Art. I. 

Sec. 9.5-1. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Cable Television Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-2. - Definitions. 
    Unless the particular provision of the context requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning and application of the words and phrases used in this article. The definition of each word or phrase shall constitute, to the extent applicable, the definition of each word or phrase which is derivative from it or from which it is a derivative, as the case may be. 
    Available means that trunk lines, amplifiers, and related equipment are installed and capable of providing basic service to every block containing five (5) or more separate occupancies, as defined in the building code, upon payment of the fees and charges for such service. 
    Basic service means the simultaneous delivery by the grantee to the television, radio or other appropriate communications receiver of a subscriber of all signals of over-the-air broadcasters required by the Federal Communications Commission or by this article to be carried by the CATV system of the grantee, together with such additional public, educational, governmental, leased or other access channels or signals as may be likewise required by law, but not including pay or subscription television as defined by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Block means all property fronting on both sides of a street between intersecting or intercepting streets or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of a cul-de-sac, or city boundary. 
    CATV or cable television system means a system employing antenna, microwave, wires, wave-guides, coaxial cables, or other conductors, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or used for the purpose of: 
(1)  Collecting and amplifying local or distance broadcast television or radio signals and distributing and transmitting the same; 
(2)  Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television or radio broadcast signals; and 
(3)  Transmitting television pictures, film and video-tape programs, not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception only by selected receivers; provided, however, that any of the services permitted hereunder to be performed, as described above, shall be those performed by the grantee for subscribers, as herein defined, in the operation of the cable television or CATV system franchised by the city and not otherwise. 
    City means the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    City attorney or office of the city attorney means the city attorney of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, or his designee. 
    City council or council means the city council of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    Clerk of the council or city clerk means the clerk of the city council of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    Director of administration means the director of the department of administration of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, or his designee. 
    Franchise means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate or maintain a cable television system within all or a specified area of the city. 
    Franchise area means the territory within the city, throughout which grantee shall be authorized hereunder to construct, operate or maintain its system and shall include any enlargements thereof and additions thereto. 
    Grantee means any person, firm, or corporation receiving the grant of any franchise hereunder and shall include any lawful successor to the interest of such person, firm or corporation. 
    Mayor means the mayor of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, or his designee. 
    Program means any sign, signal, picture, image, or sound of any kind, or any combination thereof. 
    Subscriber or user means any person or entity receiving for any purpose any service of grantee's CATV or cable television system including, but not limited to, the conventional cable television system of retransmission of television broadcasts, radio signals, grantee's original cablecasting, and local government, educational and public access channels; and other services, such as leasing of channels, data and facsimile transmission, pay television, and police, fire and similar public service communication. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-3. - Nonexclusive franchise required. 
(a)  No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall install, construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or a specific portion of the city without first obtaining a nonexclusive franchise from the city as set forth herein. 
(b)  A nonexclusive franchise to install, construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or a specific portion of the city may be granted by the council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, who offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this article. 
(c)  When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder uses its cable television system distribution channels furnished the grantee by a telephone company pursuant to tariff or contract on file with a regulatory body having jurisdiction and said grantee makes no use of the streets or public rights-of-way independent of such telephone company-furnished facilities, said grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a "licensee" and in such event whenever the term "grantee" is used herein it shall be deemed to mean and include "licensee." 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-4. - Authority granted by franchise. 
(a)  Subject to any rules, regulations, and/or restrictions of the United States (or any of its agencies), the State of Louisiana (or any of its agencies), and/or contained elsewhere in this article, any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall authorize and permit the grantee to do the following: 
(1)  Erect, install, construct repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain, and retain in, on, over, under, across, and along any public street or public right-of-way such poles, wire, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the CATV system; and in addition, to use, operate, and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to, any public utility or other grantee of any franchise of this city. 
(2)  Maintain and operate facilities and properties for the collection, transmission, retransmission, conduction, amplification, conversion, and distribution of programs and other services by use of electricity, radiation, or other energy source. 
(3)  Solicit, sell, distribute, and make a charge to subscribers with the city for connection to the CATV system of grantee. 
(4)  Perform tree trimming as necessary to protect the safety of grantee's equipment. 
(b)  A franchise granted solely to traverse any portion of the city in order to provide service outside of the city, shall not authorize nor permit the grantee to solicit, sell, distribute, or make any charge to subscribers within the city, nor to render any service or connect any subscribers within the city to the CATV system of the grantee. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-5. - Application for franchise. 
    All applications to construct, operate, or maintain any CATV system in this city or to traverse any portion of the city for the transmitting or conveying of such service elsewhere, shall be filed with the director of administration of the City of Monroe, and each such application shall set forth, contain or be accompanied by the following: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(b)  A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The names, residence addresses, and business addresses of all officers, directors, and partners or business associates of the applicant. 
(2)  The names, residence addresses, and business address of all persons and entities having controlling, or being entitled to have control of five (5) per cent or more of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity. 
(3)  The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant and of any other business entity owning or controlling in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including, but not limited to, all CATV or similar systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent or subsidiary and the areas served thereby. 
(4)  A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing CATV service or related or similar services. 
(5)  A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by a certified public accountant, for the fiscal year next preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a responsible lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the city, setting forth the basis for a study performed by the lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system in the city, or a statement from a certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed system in this city. 
(6)  A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiaries, or any of the applicant's partners or participants with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such system; and the amount of applicant's and its parent's, subsidiaries', partners', and participants' resources committed to the completion thereof; the dates on which any previously awarded franchise were sold (if any) and the status of construction of the system at the time of sale. 
(c)  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant in this city, which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the area to be served. 
(2)  A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of any said classifications, including installation charges, service charges, and special, extraordinary or other charges. The purchase price, terms, and nature of any optional or required equipment, device, or other thing to be offered for sale to any subscriber shall be described and explained in detail. 
(3)  A detailed statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant. 
(d)  A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking, or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber. 
(e)  A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements, understandings, whether formal or informal, written, oral, or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which shall in any manner, directly or indirectly, relate or pertain to or depend upon the application or proposed franchise. 
(f)  A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, in whole or in part, existing or anticipated between the applicant and any public utility providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including, but not limited to, poles, lines, or conduits. 
(g)  A detailed statement setting forth the number of channels that grantee proposes to make available for public, educational and governmental access; the manner in which such access may be exercised; and the technical facilities, equipment and expertise that the grantee will provide for the utilization of said public, educational and governmental access channels. 
(h)  Any other information pertinent to the subject matter of such application and required by the mayor or his designee. 
(i)  Any application fee in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00), which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier's check, or money order, payable to the City of Monroe, Louisiana, to pay for the costs of studying, investigating, and otherwise processing such application, including the cost of advertising any notices and/or hearings concerning said application, which shall not be refundable, in whole or in part, except to the extent that such fee exceeds the actual costs incurred by the city in studying, investigating and otherwise processing the application. Such application fee shall not be required for any subsequent application for renewal of a franchise by an existing grantee or licensee. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-6. - Franchise procedure. 
(a)  The city may, by advertisement or other means, solicit and call for applications for CATV franchises, and may determine and fix the time for filing such applications. 
(b)  Upon receipt of any application for a franchise or the renewal of an existing franchise, in the manner, time, and form as herein or otherwise provided, the director of administration shall cause such application to be investigated, shall prepare his report of such application, shall make his recommendations respecting such application and shall cause said application, his report and recommendation to be delivered to the mayor. 
(c)  After reviewing the application and the report and recommendation of the director of administration, the mayor shall attach thereto his own recommendation and shall cause the office of the city attorney to prepare the proper ordinance therefor; and shall forward the application and ordinance, along with the report and recommendations to the clerk of the council to be placed upon the agenda of a regular or special session of the council. 
(d)  The clerk of the council shall place the application and ordinance, along with the report and recommendations upon the agenda of a regular or special session of the council for introduction; shall cause a copy of the report and recommendations and the date it will be presented to the council for introduction to be mailed to or otherwise delivered to the applicant and all current cable television franchisees; and shall cause notice of such meeting to be published at least once in the official journal of the city, stating the hour, the date and place of such meeting. After the introduction of the application and ordinance, the clerk shall cause to be published in the official journal of the city the hour, date and place of the meeting at which the application and ordinance will be finally considered by the council and stating that a public hearing will be held on said hour, date and place where any person having any interest or objection to the granting of a franchise may appear before the council and be heard prior to the council's action on the matter. Said publication to be published ten (10) days prior to the date of said meeting and public hearing. 
(e)  At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the council shall proceed to hear all comments of any party addressing the application and ordinance. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the council shall consider the application and ordinance, together with the reports, recommendations and comments of the public, and shall make a determination whether to approve the application by the adoption of the ordinance, which ordinance shall be subject to mayoral veto, all in accordance with the process for ordinances established in the Home Rule Charter of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(f)  Each ordinance granting a franchise shall state the number of years the franchise shall be in effect. 
(g)  After the final adoption, the ordinance shall be published in the matter set forth in the applicable provisions of the Home Rule Charter of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-7. - Franchise acceptance. 
(a)  No franchise hereunder shall become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the clerk of the council; and such written acceptance shall be in the form and substance as shall be prescribed by the office of the city attorney. 
(b)  Such written acceptance shall operate as an acceptance of each and every term, condition, restriction and limitation contained in this article, including any amendments hereto, and in said franchise. 
(c)  Such written acceptance shall be filed by grantee not less than ten (10) days following the effective date of the chapter granting said franchise; and in default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein required, grantee shall be deemed to have rejected the same. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-8. - Franchise requirements. 
    In addition to any other franchise requirements hereunder, or made or adopted as herein provided, the following requirements shall apply to any franchise granted or renewed by the council hereunder: 
(a)  In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise to use the streets and public rights-of-way of the franchise area for the purpose of operating a cable television system for the use and benefit of subscribers therein, the grantee shall pay to the city during the entire life of the franchise, at such times and in such manner as specified in the ordinance granting the franchise, a franchise fee in an amount equal to the maximum per centage allowed under 47 USC 542 of the gross revenues derived from the operation of the franchisee's cable system in the City of Monroe. 
(b)  In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise or permit to use the streets and public rights-of-way of the franchise area solely for the purpose of providing cable television service to subscribers outside of such franchise area, the grantee shall pay to the city during the entire life of the franchise, at such times and in such manner and amounts as specified in the ordinance granting such franchise, a franchise fee separate and distinct from that specified in subsection (a) above. Such fee shall not be applicable to any franchisee providing cable service throughout the City of Monroe. 
(c)  Any franchise payments to the city by grantee shall not be in lieu of any occupation, income, license, or property tax or similar levy, assessment, fee, or charge which would otherwise apply to and be payable by the grantee. 
(d)  The franchise ordinance shall specify that upon acceptance of such franchise, grantee shall file with the city and shall thereafter during the entire term of such franchise maintain in full force and effect a corporation surety bond or other adequate security agreement in the amount and kind specified in the franchise ordinance and conditioned that in the event grantee fails to comply with one or more of the provisions of such franchise or of this article, then there shall be recoverable jointly and severally from the principal and surety and damages or costs suffered or incurred by the city or by any subscriber as a result thereof, including, but not limited to, attorney's fees and costs of any action or proceeding, and including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, cost of removal of any property or other costs which may be incurred up to the full principal amount of such bond; and said condition shall be a continuing obligation during the entire term of such franchise and thereafter until grantee shall have satisfied in full any and all obligations to the city and any subscriber which arise out of or pertain to said franchise. Neither the provisions of this section, nor any bond accepted by the city pursuant hereto, nor any damages recovered by the city thereunder shall be construed to excuse faithful performance by the grantee, or limit the liability of grantee under any franchise issued pursuant to this article. 
(e)  Upon acceptance of the franchise, grantee shall file with the city and shall thereafter during the entire term of the franchise maintain in full force and effect a comprehensive liability policy of insurance with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) each occurrence and five million dollars ($5,000,000.00) aggregate, or such higher amounts as the council may fix in the ordinance granting the franchise or any amendment thereto, and such insuring institutions and the form and substance of such policy shall be approved by the office of the city attorney, and which shall assure grantee and which shall provide primary coverage for the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death, and property damage or whatever kind occasioned by any activity or operation of grantee under such franchise. 
(f)  Grantee shall indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, boards, commission, agents and employees against any and all claims, demands, cause of actions, actions, suits, proceedings, damages (including but not limited to damages to city property and damages arising out of copyright infringements, and damages arising out of any failure by grantee to secure consents from the owners, authorized distributors, or licensees of programs to be delivered by grantee's cable television system), costs or liabilities (including costs or liabilities of the city with respect to its employees) of every kind and nature whatsoever, including, but not limited to damages for injury or death or damage to person or property, and regardless of the merit of any of the same, against and from all liability to others, and against any loss, cost and expense resulting out of or arising out of any of the same including any attorney's fees, accountant fees, expert witness fees, consultant fees, court costs, other defense costs, per diem expense, traveling and transportation expense, or other costs or expense arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of any franchise hereunder by grantee or the granting thereof by the city. 
(g)  Grantee shall at the sole risk and expense of grantee, upon demand of the city, made by and through the office of the city attorney, appear in and defend any and all suits, actions, or other proceedings, whether judicial, quasi-judicial, administrative, legislative, or otherwise, brought or instituted against or had by third persons or duly constituted authorities against or affecting the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees, and arising out of or pertaining to the exercise or the enjoyment of such franchise, or the granting thereof by the city, grantee shall not be required to appear in and/or to defend any suits arising solely from grantor's acts. 
    Grantee shall pay and satisfy and shall cause to be paid and satisfied any judgement, decree, order, directive, or demand rendered, made or issued against grantee, the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents or employees in any of these premises; and such indemnity shall exist and continue without reference to or limitation by the amount of any bond, policy of insurance, deposit, undertaking or other assurance required hereunder, or otherwise; provided that neither grantee nor city shall make or enter into any compromise or settlement of any claim, demand, cause of action, action, suit, or other proceeding without first obtaining the written consent of the other. Grantee shall have no liability for acts arising solely from grantor's actions. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-9. - Construction and use of facilities. 
(a)  Within thirty (30) days after acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business, including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachments, agreements, microwave carrier licenses, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of cable television systems or associated microwave transmission facilities. In connection therewith, copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the federal communications commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting grantee's cable television operations, shall also be submitted to the city upon request. 
(b)  Within ninety (90) days after obtaining all necessary permits, licenses and authorizations, including right to access to poles and conduits, grantee shall commence construction and installation of the cable television system. 
(c)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the commencement of construction and installation of the system, grantee shall complete construction of the facilities needed to permit the reception of broadcast signals and the origination of programming within the franchise area, in accordance with the schedule submitted with the franchise application. Thereafter the grantee shall maintain construction and/or installation in accordance with the schedule submitted with the franchise application. 
    Provided, however, that the council may approve exceptions to this standard and to the schedule of construction and installation upon a showing by grantee of undue hardship or expense. 
(d)  Prior to commencement of construction of the distribution system or any portion thereof or of any extension thereto, grantee shall submit to the city a construction schedule and map showing in detail the geographic location of each portion of the franchise area to be constructed or installed during such construction period, and shall construct the distribution system in accordance with such schedule. 
(e)  Failure on the part of the grantee to commence or to diligently pursue each of the foregoing requirements and to complete each of the matters set forth herein, shall be grounds for the termination of the franchise at the option of the city. 
(f)  The acceptance of the franchise shall contain provisions that the grantee agrees that failure to comply with any time requirements referred to in subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of this section shall result in damage to the city and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay; and that grantee therefore agrees that, in addition to any other damage suffered by city, he will pay to the city the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day for each and every day's delay beyond the time prescribed for the completion of any of the acts required to be done by this section. 
(g)  Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits or other facilities without first securing the written approval of the mayor, provided that the privilege of grantee to construct, install, or replace any poles, conduits, or other facilities in, on, under or over any street or public right-of-way shall at all times be subject to the right of the city, in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to the terms hereof, upon reasonable notice to grantee, to require any such poles, conduits, or other facilities of grantee to be constructed, installed, placed, or replaced beneath the surface of the streets or other public rights-of-way; and any such construction, installation, placement, replacement or changes which may be so required shall be made at the expense of grantee. 
(h)  The city shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use, for public or municipal purpose, of any poles, conduits, or other facilities erected, controlled, or maintained exclusively by or for grantee in any street, public right-of-way or other public way, or public place, provided such use by city does not interfere with the use by grantee. 
(i)  Grantee shall at the expense of grantee, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, temporarily relocate, remove or permanently relocate any property of grantee when, in the opinion of the city engineer or the director of public works, the same is required by reason of freeway or street construction or repair; bridge construction or repair; the alteration, change or establishment of the grade of any street, alley or other public ways; the construction, installation or repair of sewers, drains, waterlines, powerlines, signal lines, buildings or other structures; or, the movement of buildings. Grantee shall be permitted to recover costs associated with the relocation of private structures. 
(j)  In the event the use of any part of the system of grantee is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of thirty (30) days, without prior written notice to and approval by the mayor, or in the event any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area without complying with the requirements hereof, or in the event any franchise shall be terminated, cancelled, or shall expire, grantee shall, at the option of the city, promptly remove from any street or other area all property of the grantee, and grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to such condition as the city engineer and the director of public works shall approve; provided the city council may, upon written application therefor by grantee, approve the abandonment of any such property in place by grantee and under such terms and conditions as the city council may prescribe; and upon abandonment of any such property in place, grantee shall cause instruments as the office of the city attorney shall prescribe and approve, conveying the ownership of such property to the city. 
(k)  Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of grantee to cause any work or other act required by law, by the terms of the franchise ordinance, the franchise agreement, or by this ordinance to be completed in, on, over, or under any street or public right-of-way or other area within any time prescribed therefor, or upon notice given, where notice is prescribed, the mayor may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof, and grantee shall within thirty (30) days after receipt of such statement, pay unto the city the entire amount thereof. 
(l)  The running of any time period as may be necessary in relation to subsections (g), (i), and (k) of this section, shall be automatically tolled whenever and so long as the certificate of compliance issued by the Federal Communications Commission to grantee is the subject of a petition for stay, petition for review, or appeal filed with any United States Court. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-10. - Standards. 
(a)  Upon receiving a franchise or within the time limitations set forth in section 9.5-9, the grantee shall: 
(1)  Be capable of relaying to subscriber terminals television and/or radio broadcast signals; 
(2)  Distribute color televisions signals which it receives; 
(3)  Provide at least one channel, without charge, for the exclusive use of the city; 
(4)  Provide time on at least one channel, without charge, for educational, public, civic or nonprofit organization access; 
(5)  Have a minimum capacity of ten (10) channels. 
(b)  No residential unit, including residential units within multiple-dwelling units, within the available service area of grantee, and where trunklines are in place, shall be refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable fee or service charges. Grantee shall not be required to provide service to an area where the density of homes is less than twenty (20) homes per cable mile. 
(c)  With respect to the local government channel, the grantee shall provide at the request of the mayor, and upon the city's reimbursement of grantee's actual cost, use of the grantee's studio, equipment and technical services for the production of live and/or video-tape municipal programs, subject to scheduling requirements of grantee. 
(d)  Planned interruptions of service, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers twenty-four (24) hours in advance and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system. 
(e)  Grantee shall maintain an office within the local calling area of the city, which shall be open during all usual business hours, with its telephone number listed in the directories of the telephone company serving the city, which office shall be so operated that the complaints and requests for repairs and/or adjustments may be received at any time, day or night, seven (7) days a week, and provide notice of such office and the grantee's general complaints procedure to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the system. In the event grantee's office, telephone number of general complaint procedure is changed, grantee shall notify all subscribers in writing, such notice may be included in the next monthly billing sent to subscribers. 
(f)  Grantee shall maintain a written record or "log" listing the date of customer complaints, identifying the subscriber and describing the nature of the complaint, and when and what action was taken by grantee in response thereto. Said record shall be kept at grantee's local office for a period of two (2) years and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours, without further notice or demand, by the mayor or his designee. 
(g)  Grantor shall exercise authority in the area of quality control, rate-setting and other related matters only in accordance with the provisions of the United States Cable Communications Act and the rules of the Federal Communications Commission, as currently in force or as the same may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-11. - Limitations. 
    In addition to any other franchise limitations hereunder or as herein provided, the following limitations shall apply to any franchise granted or renewed by the city council under this article: 
(a)  Such franchise shall be nonexclusive and neither the granting thereof nor any of the provisions contained herein or in such franchise shall limit, abridge, diminish, alter, or affect the right, privilege, power, or authority of the city council; provided, however, that no franchise shall be awarded to any grantee on more favorable terms or conditions than for other grantees except as provided in subsection 9.5-8(b) of this article. 
(b)  The grant of any privilege by franchise hereunder shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of any public street or public right-of-way or other public property or the grant of any privilege under any other franchise of prior date, insofar as there shall be any conflict. 
(c)  Any franchise granted hereunder shall be a privilege held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, merger, or consolidation or otherwise, without the prior consent of the city council and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, such as a bill of sale or similar document, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty (30) days of such transfer or assignment. The said consent of the city council may not be unreasonably refused; provided, however, the proposed transferee or assignee must show technical and financial responsibility in the same manner as set forth in subsections 9.5-5 (a) and (b) and must agree to comply with all of the provisions of the franchise and of this article; and provided further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness, except that when such indebtedness shall exceed fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the property used by the franchise in the conduct of the cable television system, prior consent of the city council shall be required for such a transfer, but such consent may not be unreasonably withheld. Sale of the system shall not be permitted within two (2) years of the awarding of the initial franchise. 
(d)  In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the city council, expressed by resolution, shall be required where there is an actual change in control or where ownership of more than fifty (50) per cent of the voting stock of the grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own fifty (50) per cent or more of the voting stock, singly or collectively. 
(e)  No franchise granted or renewed under this article shall be for a term less than five (5) years, unless terminated prior to its expiration date as herein provided, nor shall any such franchise be granted or renewed for a term longer than fifteen (15) years. Any franchise renewal shall be subject to the approval of the city council as set forth in section 9.5-6 herein. 
(f)  Grantee shall have no recourse or remedy whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of or with respect to any franchise hereunder, this article or the enforcement thereof, except as provided in subsection 9.5-10(c). 
(g)  Grantee shall be subject to all ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications of the city heretofore or hereafter established or amended, including but not limited to those pertaining to works or activities in, on, over, under or about public streets, public rights-of-way, or other public places or property. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-12. - Inspection of books and records. 
    Any grantee awarded a franchise under this article shall allow the director of administration of the City of Monroe or his authorized representative to inspect and audit all data and records of grantee relating to its performance under the provisions of this article or the franchise. Such inspection shall be made during normal business hours. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
Sec. 9.5-13. - Penalties. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to violate or fail to comply with the provisions of this article, and unless otherwise provided for in this article, the violation of or the failure to comply with any provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each day any violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 9245, 9-10-91) 
ARTICLE II. - CABLE AND VIDEO SERVICES FRANCHISE FEE ORDINANCE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,882,  1-8, adopted Jan. 27, 2009, did not specify manner of inclusion. In order to facilitate indexing said provisions have been codified as Art. II,  9.5-31-9.5-38. 

Sec. 9.5-31. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Cable and Video Services Franchise Fee Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  1, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 9.5-32. - Adoption of state laws. 
    The provisions of La. R.S. tit 45, ch. 10-A, known as the Consumer Choice for Television Act are hereby adopted by reference as if written herein in extenso. 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  2, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 9.5-33. - Monthly franchise fee. 
(1)  The amount of the quarterly franchise fee shall be three (3) per cent of the gross revenues as defined by La. R.S. 45:1363(8) as fixed, levied and collectible in accordance with the provisions of La. R.S. tit 45, ch. 10-A, and such other amounts as are authorized by law. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall restrict the right of the City of Monroe to impose on any cable and/or video service ad valorem taxes, service fees, sales and use taxes or other taxes and fees lawfully imposed on other businesses which may be lawfully imposed upon cable and/or video service providers. 
(3)  The franchise fee set further herein shall be in lieu of any permit fee, encroachment fee, degradation fee, inspection fee, or other fees assessed by the city on cable and/or video service providers for occupation of, or work within, the public rights-of-way. 
(4)  Nothing herein shall except any cable and/or video service provider from any ordinance regulating the occupation of or work within the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  3, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 9.5-34. - Late fees. 
    All franchise fees levied herein shall be due and payable within forty-five (45) days after the end of the quarter. All unpaid fees shall become delinquent on the forty-sixth day after the end of the quarter for which the fees are due and payable. 
(1)  If any cable and/or video service provider fails to pay the fee set forth in this article, or any portion thereof, on or before the forty-sixth day following the quarter, interest at the rate of one and one-quarter (11/4) per cent per month shall be added to the amount of fee due and such interest shall be computed from the due date until the fee is paid. 
(2)  In addition to the interest charged on delinquent taxes there shall be imposed a penalty of five (5) per cent of the total fee due if the failure or delinquency is for not more than thirty (30) days, with an additional five (5) per cent for each additional thirty (30) days or fraction thereof. 
(3)  The City of Monroe maintains its rights under La. R.S. 45:1367 to audit the business records of any cable and/or video service providers to the extent necessary to ensure payment of the franchise fee in accordance with this article and payment of any applicable service fees, sales and use taxes or other taxes and fees lawfully imposed on other businesses which may be lawfully imposed upon cable and/or video service providers. 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  4, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 9.5-35. - Applicability. 
    The franchise fee herein shall be applicable to any provider of cable and/or video service as defined in La. R.S. 45:1363. 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  5, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 9.5-36. - Registration. 
    Any entity which desires to provide cable and/or video service within the City of Monroe shall register and provide to the permit office for the city a copy of the certificate of franchise issued by the Louisiana Secretary of State pursuant to La. R.S. 45:1364 and proof of insurance as required by La. R.S. 45:1364(B)(4) within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this article or prior to offering cable and/or video services within the City of Monroe, whichever is later. All registering entities are hereby requested to provide capacity for public, educational and governmental access programming streams and channels in accordance with La. R.S. 45:1369. 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  6, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 9.5-37. - Conflicts. 
    Any and all previously adopted ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision of this article be in conflict with any provision of state or federal law, the same shall not affect the validity of this article as a whole, or parts thereof, other than the part declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be in conflict. 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  7, 1-27-09) 
Sec. 9.5-38. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or provision of this article is held invalid for any reason, the remainder of this article shall not be affected thereby and shall remain in force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 10,882,  8, 1-27-09) 
Chapter 10 - CEMETERIES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public works department,  4-06. 
Cross reference- Desecration of graves,  12-130; speed in cemeteries,  33-31. 
State Law reference- For authority to establish and maintain, see R.S. 8:101. 

Sec. 10-1. - Maintenance. 
    The following cemeteries belonging to the city shall be maintained out of the general fund of the city; Monroe City Cemetery, Riverview Burial Park, Magnolia Cemetery. 
(Code 1958,  7-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Burial permit. 
    It shall be unlawful to inter or bury any dead person within the city limits without first obtaining a burial-transit permit as required by chapter 24 of the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana. 
(Code 1958,  7-4) 
Sec. 10-3. - Disinterment of human bodies. 
    No dead human body shall be disinterred, disentombed or otherwise removed from a grave, tomb or vault without the prior approval of the parish health officer. 
(Code 1958,  7-5) 
Sec. 10-4. - Special plots at Riverview Burial Park. 
    There shall be set aside in the Riverview Burial Park three special plots for the following: 
(a)  Plot for the burial of Veterans of World War I and the Spanish-American War. 
(b)  Plot for the burial of members of the Veterans of Foreign Wars. 
(c)  Plot for the burial of paupers. 
(Code 1958,  7-7) 
Sec. 10-5. - Sale of lots. 
    The mayor or his designee is authorized and empowered to pass notarial acts of sale, in the name of the mayor and city council, at the expense of the purchasers, of all lots or parts of lots in the cemeteries, which have not heretofore been sold and paid for. Persons desiring lots or plots in city-owned or city-maintained cemeteries shall pay to the city such fees as are established by ordinance. 
(Code 1958,  7-8, 7-9; Ord. No. 7071, 7-10-79; Ord. No. 7095, 10-23-79) 
Sec. 10-6. - Charges for opening or closing graves-Generally. 
    Charges shall be made for opening or closing graves in city cemeteries as established by ordinance. 
(Code 1958,  7-3; Ord. No. 7071, 7-10-79; Ord. No. 7095, 10-23-79) 
Sec. 10-6.1. - Same-Listed; lot costs. 
    [The cost for lots and for opening or closing graves in city-owned cemeteries are established as follows:] 
(1)  Magnolia Cemetery. Lot cost with opening/closing fee included: 
Adult (weekday) ..... $225.00 
Adult (Saturday, Sunday, holidays) ..... 250.00 
Infant (weekday) ..... 75.00 
Infant (Saturday, Sunday, holidays) ..... 75.00 
(2)  Riverview Cemetery: 
a.  Lot cost: 
Close to road ..... $300.00 
Away from road ..... 250.00 
b.  Opening/closing costs: 
Adult (weekday) ..... 150.00 
Adult (Saturday, Sunday, holidays) ..... 150.00 
Infant (weekday) ..... 150.00 
Infant (Saturday, Sunday, holidays) ..... 150.00 
(Ord. No. 7950, 9-23-86) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7750, adopted Sept. 23, 1986, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of the substantive provisions of the ordinance as  10-6.1 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 10-7. - Illegal burial, removal of corpse. 
    In the event that any corpse shall be buried in any lot or part of a lot in the cemetery, which shall not have been sold by the city, it shall be the duty of the public works director to cause the immediate removal of such corpse and its burial in any part of the cemeteries not divided into lots, at the expense of the city, and to cause suit for such expense to be instituted immediately against the person responsible for the illegal burial thereof, in addition to the punishment prescribed for violations of this Code. 
(Code 1958,  7-11) 
Sec. 10-8. - Prohibited burials in and sales of lots, repurchase of lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bury, or cause to be buried in any lot purchased from the city any corpse unless the deceased is the owner of said lot or unless the deceased is a relative by blood, marriage or adoption of the owner of said lot. No lot purchased from the city may be sold to anyone other than the city by said purchaser. The city shall repurchase any lot sold by it and in which no body has been interred, for the price for which said lot was sold by the city. 
(Code 1958,  7-12) 
Sec. 10-9. - Destruction of property; erection of fences. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously cut, mutilate, bruise or injure in any manner the flowers, shrubbery or ornamental trees within any of the cemeteries in the corporate limits of the city, or to maliciously deface or injure any tombstone in any one of such cemeteries. It shall be unlawful to erect private fences within the enclosures of any city cemetery. 
(Code 1958,  7-13) 
Chapter 10.5 - CHARITABLE RAFFLES, BINGO AND ELECTRONIC VIDEO BINGO[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7881, adopted Feb. 11, 1986, amended the Code by adding a new Chapter 15A. In order to maintain Code format and follow the alpha-numeric sequence, Chapter 15A has been redesignated as Chapter 10.5. Additionally, Ord. No. 10,711, adopted June 12, 2007, changed the title of chapter 10.5 from "Charitable Raffles, Bingo and Keno" to "Charitable Raffles, Bingo and Electronic Video Bingo." 
State Law reference- Charitable Raffles, Bingo And Keno Licensing Law, R.S. 4:701 et seq.; powers of local authorities, R.S. 4:706. 

Sec. 10.5-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Charitable Raffles, Bingo, and Electronic Video Bingo Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86; Ord. No. 10,711, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 10.5-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  Charitable organization shall mean a nonprofit veterans, eleemosynary, benevolent, educational, religious, fraternal or civic and service association or corporation domiciled in this state. Any such organization or corporation shall have qualified with the United States Internal Revenue Service for an exemption from federal income tax under Section 501(c)(3), (4), (8), or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(2)  Pull-tabs shall mean single or banded tickets or cards each with its face covered to conceal one or more numbers or symbols, where one or more cards or tickets in each set have been designated in advance as a winner. 
(3)  Senior citizen recreation club shall mean an organization, which is sanctioned by the local council on aging, composed of a group of persons sixty (60) years of age or older whose only function is to provide amusement and diversion for its members. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-3. - Permitted. 
(a)  Bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious, or fraternal organizations, civic and service clubs may conduct charitable raffles, bingo, keno, and/or pull-tab games, as set forth in section 10.5-4, and may sell shares, tickets or rights to participate in such game or games of chance under such conditions and regulations for the supervision and conduct thereof as may be prescribed from time to time by the city, provided: (1) That said organizations, associations, corporations and/or clubs possess the appropriate nonprofit designation as provided for in section 10.5-2(a); (2) that the entire net proceeds of such game or games of chance are to be devoted to educational, charitable, patriotic, religious, or public spirited uses; (3) that said game or games are held, operated, and conducted exclusively by the active members pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; and (4) that said organizations obtain the appropriate license required by section 10.5-4. 
(b)  It shall be lawful for any person or persons to participate in and play such game or games of chance conducted under any such license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-4. - License required. 
    Every bona fide veterans, charitable, educational, religious, or fraternal organization, civic and service club, which possesses the appropriate nonprofit designation issued by the United States Internal Revenue Service is hereby required to obtain from the city for each year an appropriate license to hold and operate the specific kind of game or games of chance commonly known: (1) As raffle or raffles played by drawing for prizes or the allotment of prizes by chance, by the selling of shares or tickets or rights to participate in such game or games and by conducting the game or games accordingly; (2) bingo or keno played for prizes with cards bearing numbers or other designations, five (5) or more in one line, the holder covering numbers, as objects similarly numbered, are drawn from a receptacle and the game being won by the person who first covers a previously designated arrangement of numbers on such card, by the selling of shares or tickets or rights to participate in such game or games and by conducting the game or games accordingly; and (3) pull-tabs played for prizes with cards or tickets and as defined in Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.2, by selling shares or tickets or rights to participate in such games and by conducting the game or games accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-5. - Application for license. 
    Each applicant for such a license shall file with the city a written application therefor on a form prescribed by the city, duly executed and verified, stating the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Sufficient facts relating to its incorporation and/or organization to enable the city to determine whether or not it is a bona fide organization or association, including evidence of the nonprofit designation issued by the United States Internal Revenue Service; 
(3)  The names and addresses of its officers; 
(4)  The name and address of the active member or members of the applicant under whom the game or games of chance described in the application are to be held, operated and conducted; 
(5)  A statement shall be executed and attached to the application, by the applicant and the members so designated, that he or they will be responsible for the holding, operating and conducting of such game or games of chance in accordance with the terms of the license, the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.1 et seq. and the provisions of this chapter, as well as in accordance with any rules and regulations that may hereafter be prescribed by the city; 
(6)  The specific kind of game or games of chance intended to be held, operated and conducted by the applicant; 
(7)  The place or places where such game or games of chance are intended to be conducted by the applicant; 
(8)  The date or dates when such game or games of chance are intended to be conducted by the applicant; 
(9)  All items of expense intended, anticipated and/or expected to be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating and conducting of such game or games of chance and the names and addresses of the persons to whom, and the purposes for which they are to be paid; 
(10)  The specific purposes to which the entire net proceeds of such game or games of chance are to be devoted and in what manner they are to be so devoted; 
(11)  That no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense will be paid to any person or persons for holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operating or conducting of such game or games of chance; 
(12)  A description of all prizes to be offered or given in such game or games of chance to be held, operated or conducted under such license; 
(13)  Any such other information as may be prescribed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-6. - Investigation of qualifications. 
    The city shall make an investigation of the qualifications of the applicant and it shall determine whether the applicant is duly qualified to hold, operate and conduct games of chance under this chapter and under the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.1 et seq.; whether the member or members designated in the application to hold, operate and conduct or assist in the holding, operating or conducting of the game or games of chance for which the license is requested are bona fide active members of the applicant and persons of good moral character and have never been convicted of a crime; whether the game or games of chance are to be held, operated and conducted in accordance with the terms of the license, the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.1 et seq. and the provisions of this chapter, as well as the provisions of any rules and regulations previously promulgated by the city; whether the proceeds thereof are to be disposed of as provided by Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.1 et seq. and this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-7. - Issuance of license. 
    If the city council is satisfied that the applicant meets all of the qualifications set forth in Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.1 et seq. and the provisions of this chapter, and that no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatsoever will be given or paid to any person holding, operating or conducting or assisting in the holding, operating or conducting of any such game or games of chance, it shall issue a license to the applicant for the holding, operating and conducting of the specific kind, or one or more of the specific kinds, of game or games of chance applied for accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-8. - Duration of license. 
    An annual license for the holding, operating and/or conducting of any game or games of chance issued under this chapter shall be effective for a period of one year, commencing on May 1 and terminating on April 30 of the following year. 
    A monthly license for the holding, operating and/or conducting, of any game or games of chance issued under this chapter shall be effective for a period of one calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-9. - License fee. 
    There is hereby levied a license fee for the holding, operating and/or conducting of any game or games of chance authorized herein as follows: 
Annual license, sixty dollars ($60.00). 
Monthly license, ten dollars ($10.00). 
A full license fee shall be collected regardless of the date of issuance of the license. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-10. - Additional fees. 
    In the event that the state assesses any administrative charge connected with the issuance of any license hereunder, the applicant shall be responsible for said charges. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-11. - Hearing. 
    No application for the issuance of a license under this chapter shall be refused until after a hearing is held on due notice to the applicant and at which the applicant shall be entitled to be heard upon the qualifications of the applicant and/or its members and upon the merits of the application. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-12. - Amendment of license. 
    Any license issued under the provisions herein may be amended, upon application to the city, provided the subject matter of the proposed amendment could lawfully and properly have been included in the original license, or has become lawful and proper due to subsequent amendments to this chapter. Said application for amendment shall be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the event. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-13. - Display of license. 
    Each license issued for the conduct of any game or games of chance shall be conspicuously displayed at the place where any such game or games of chance is to be conducted at all times during the conduct thereof. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-14. - Control and supervision over games. 
(a)  The City of Monroe, through its police department, shall have and exercise control and supervision over all games of chance held, operated or conducted under any license issued hereunder to the end that the same are fairly held, operated or conducted in accordance with the provisions of such license, the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.1 et seq., the provisions of this chapter, and any rules and/or regulations subsequently adopted hereunder. 
(b)  The city shall, by its officers and agents, have the right of entry at all times into any premises where any such game or games of chance is or are being held, operated and/or conducted or where it is intended that any such game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted, or where any equipment being used or intended to be used in conduct thereof is found, for the purpose of inspecting the same. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-15. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The city council shall have the authority and power to suspend and/or revoke any license issued hereunder, after a hearing upon due notice to the licensee, for: (1) Any violation of the terms of the license; (2) any violation of the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.1 et seq.; (3) any violation of the provisions of this chapter; (4) any violation of the provisions of any rules or regulations subsequently adopted hereunder; or, (5) any violation of any applicable law of the State of Louisiana or of the United States government. 
(b)  Further the city council may in the exercise of its police power, whenever deemed advisable for the general welfare, for good cause, suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, after hearing upon due notice to the licensee. 
(c)  Any hearing under this section shall be held upon at least ten-days' notice to the licensee; said notice to contain the purpose and reason for said hearing; the possible consequences of said hearing; and the date, time and place of said hearing. All such hearings shall be open to the public and the licensee shall be given the opportunity to be heard and present evidence directed toward the subject matter of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-16. - Number of games per month. 
    No game or games of chance shall be held, operated or conducted under any license issued hereunder on more than fifteen (15) days in any one calendar month. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86; Ord. No. 10,711, 6-12-07) 
Sec. 10.5-17. - Persons entitled to hold games; equipment; expenses; commissions or salaries. 
    No person shall hold, operate or conduct or assist in holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of chance under any license issued under this chapter except an active member of the organization or association to which the license is issued; and no such game or games of chance shall be conducted with any equipment except such as shall be owned absolutely or used without payment of any compensation therefor by the licensee; and no item of expense shall be incurred or paid in connection with the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of chance held, operated or conducted pursuant to any license issued under this chapter, except such as are bona fide items of reasonable amount of goods, wares and merchandise furnished or services rendered, which are reasonably necessary to be purchased or furnished for the holding, operating or conducting thereof, under any circumstances whatever; and no commission, salary, compensation, reward or recompense whatever shall be paid or given, directly or indirectly, to any person holding, operating or conducting, or assisting in the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of chance so held, operated or conducted. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-18. - Statement of receipts; expenditures; books and records. 
(a)  Not later than ten (10) days after the end of the month in which the game or games of chance were held, operated or conducted, the organization or association which held, operated or conducted the game or games of chance and its member or members who were in charge thereof shall furnish to the city the following: 
(1)  A verified statement showing the amount of gross receipts derived from each such game of chance, that shall include receipts from the sale of shares, tickets or rights in any manner connected with the participation in said game or the right to participate therein; 
(2)  Each item of expense incurred, or paid, and each item of expenditure made or to be made in connection therewith; 
(3)  The name and address of each person to whom each such item has been, or is to be paid, with a detailed description of the merchandise purchased or the services rendered therefor; 
(4)  The net profit derived from each game of chance, and the uses to which such net profit has been or is to be applied; 
(5)  A list of prizes offered or given, with the respective values thereof; and 
(6)  The name and address of each person who assisted in the holding, operating and conducting of each game. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to maintain and keep such books and records as may be necessary to substantiate the particulars of each such report. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-19. - Examination of books and records and personnel. 
    The city, through its officers or agents, shall have the power to examine or cause to be examined the books or records of any organization or association to which such license is issued so far as they may relate to any transaction or transactions connected with the holding and conducting of any game or games of chance thereunder and to examine any manager, officer, director, agent, member or employee thereof under oath in relation to the conduct of any such game or games of chance under any such license but any such information so received shall not be disclosed except in so far as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-20. - Violations. 
    Any person, organization, association or corporation who or which shall make any false statement in any application for a license hereunder or report required hereunder, or shall fail to keep such books and records as shall fully and truly record all transactions connected with the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of chance under any such license or shall falsify or make any false statement or entry in any books, records or reports required hereunder so far as they relate to any transaction connected with the holding, operating or conducting of any game or games of chance under any such license or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, forfeit any license issued to him or it under this chapter and shall be ineligible to apply for a license under this chapter for one year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-21. - Immunity. 
    In accordance with the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes 33:4861.15., no person, association or corporation: (1) Possessing, selling or in any manner disposing of any shares, tickets or rights to participate in any game or games of chance conducted or to be conducted, under any license lawfully issued pursuant to this chapter, (2) lawfully conducting or participating in the conduct of any such game or games of chance, or (3) permitting the conduct of any such game or games of chance upon premises owned by him or it, under any license lawfully issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, shall be liable to prosecution or conviction for violation of any provision of Louisiana Revised Statutes 14:90 or of any provision of this Code relating to gambling, provided however, that his immunity shall not extend to any person, association or corporation knowingly conducting or participating in the conduct of any game or games of chance under any license obtained by any false pretense or statement made in any application for such license or otherwise, or possessing, selling or disposing of shares, tickets or rights to participate in, or permitting the conduct upon any premises owned by him or it of any game or games of chance conducted under any license known to him or it to have been obtained by any such false or fraudulent pretense or statement. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-22. - Exemption. 
    A bona fide senior citizens' recreation club, as defined in section 10.5-2(3) herein, upon application shall be exempt from the licensing and reporting procedure set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 7881, 2-11-86) 
Sec. 10.5-23. - Electronic video bingo machines. 
(a)  Permitted at licensed locations. It shall be lawful for any bona fide nonprofit board, association, corporation or other organization domiciled in this state and qualified with the United States Internal Revenue Service for an exemption from federal income tax under section 501(c) (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (10) or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended) or organizations authorized under LSA-R.S. 4:703, possessing a current, valid city and state bingo permit, to use electronic video bingo machine or machines authorized pursuant to LSA-R.S. 4:701 et seq. at licensed locations for electronic video bingo; and the leasing or placement of such machines from state approved (as defined below) distributors/suppliers shall also be lawful. Any state approved distributor/supplier of such equipment for use in the conduct of any games of chance authorized under this chapter and under the provisions of LSA- R.S. 4:726 shall submit a permit application to the office of the city clerk. "State approved" as used in this chapter shall mean a person or entity specifically licensed or otherwise approved by the state in accordance with LSA-R.S. 4:701 et seq. 
(b)  Application for license. 
(1)  Each state approved manufacturer or distributor, each organization or private contractor qualified to conduct games as authorized under this chapter, and each commercial lessor leasing a premise to a licensee for conducting such bingo, within the city shall apply for and obtain, on an annual basis, an electronic video bingo license (EVBL) from the city. 
(2)  Every bona fide veteran's, charitable, educational, religious, or fraternal organization, civic, service club and carnival organization seeking an EVBL that desires to sponsor or conduct fund raising events using an electronic video bingo machine or machines shall apply for and obtain an EVBL from the city. Such application, shall be in the form prescribed by the office of city clerk, duly executed and verified, shall state the name and address of the applicant, together with such information required by LSA-R.S. 4:708, including but not limited to the place or places, the date or dates, and time or times when such electronic video bingo machine or machines are intended to be used by the applicant or operated by the EVBL, under the license applied for. The majority of the organization's charity work shall be done within the city. 
(c)  Term of license or permit. EVBL's issued by the city shall be effective each year from the period of January 1 through December 31 of the same year. Fees for a partial calendar year shall not be prorated. 
(d)  License processing fee. 
(1)  An annual nonrefundable fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid to the city to defray the costs of reviewing and processing an application for licensing a manufacturer, distributor, operator or commercial lessor. 
(2)  EVBLs that seek a charitable organization permit shall pay a nonrefundable fee of ten dollars ($10.00). This fee shall be in addition to occupational license fees that may be owed the city. 
(e)  Machine permit fee. An annual permit fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each machine to be permitted shall be paid to the city and be included with the application or renewal application. 
(f)  Quarterly statement. Not later than twenty (20) days after January 1, April 1, July 1, and October 1, of each year, each EVBL operator shall furnish the city sworn (notarized) and verified statement indicating total payment, cash or coins in, credits played, credits won and credits paid. 
(g)  Maximum number of machines permitted. No one site used by a EVBL under this chapter shall have more than thirty-five (35) electronic video bingo machines in such licensed location. 
(h)  Locations. The operation of electronic video bingo machines as authorized by this chapter shall not be allowed on any property zoned residential or in any location other than those specifically prescribed by the city zoning ordinances. Unless otherwise specified by the mayor and city council, the operation of any electronic video bingo machines by EVBL operators shall only occur on premises by licensed approved commercial lessors. Any commercial lessor who does not have video bingo machines in operation as of May 1, 2008 shall not be allowed to open within a one mile radius of the location of any commercial lessor who has operating machines. 
(i)  Commercial lessors. It shall be unlawful to have more than eight (8) licensed locations utilized by commercial lessors within the city. The site of the bingo hall currently operating at 3000 DeSiard Street, Monroe, Louisiana will be entitled to one commercial lessor license and WhiteCo Gaming LLC, having presented their letter of intent to apply for a commercial lessor license to the clerk of council of the city, will be entitled to two (2) commercial lessor licenses if an EVBL is sought by each lessor within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this section. Notwithstanding the initial limitation of eight (8) commercial lessor sites, the council, upon recommendation of the mayor, may allow additional locations if determined feasible from information submitted by the division of administration of the city. 
(j)  Sessions. A session represents electronic video bingo games played within a time limit not to exceed six (6) hours within a minimum of twelve (12) hours between sessions. Sessions are limited to not more than one session per day per EVBL. No EVBL shall be permitted to operate electronic video bingo games for more than fifteen (15) days in any calendar month. Notwithstanding any provisions contained in any resolution to the contrary, all types of bingo sessions may be allowed to the extent and at the times allowed for electronic video bingo. 
(k)  Net proceeds. For purpose of this chapter, the term "net win" shall mean the sum obtained by subtracting total coins in minus the total amount paid out on ticket vouchers tendered for cash money. Twenty (20) per cent of the net win from each electronic video bingo machine shall be paid as an assessment or tax owed the city. The tax or assessment owed to the city shall be determined on a monthly basis owed and becomes due on the first day of the month that follows the previous month of operations. Taxes or assessments that are not paid to the city by the fifth day of the month in which they become due shall incur a penalty of two (2) per cent per month until paid in. 
(l)  General. Except as specifically provided with respect to electronic video bingo, other requirements and penalties relating to bingo, keno, and raffles shall apply to the operation of electronic video bingo machines. To the extent that any of this section is in conflict with any other section(s) of this chapter, the provisions of the section shall control. 
(m)  Louisiana statutory provisions. Where any provisions hereof conflict with the provisions of LSA-R.S. 4:701 et seq., the applicable provisions of such state law (including provisions contained in the Louisiana Administrative Code promulgated pursuant thereto) shall govern. Each EVBL shall meet all requirements of state law regarding the state licensure of such EVBL, the operation of electronic bingo games and the use of electronic video bingo machines. 
(Ord. No. 10,711, 6-12-07) 
Chapter 11 - CITY COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Demonstrations near court buildings occupied by judge, jury, etc.,  12-186. 
State Law reference- Monroe city court, R.S. 13:1952 

Sec. 11-1. - Fines and costs; responsibility for collection. 
    All fines, forfeitures, penalties and costs assessed by the city court for violations of this Code or other city ordinances shall be collected by the clerk of the city court or the marshal, as designated by the city judge, and all such funds so collected, excluding costs, shall be paid to the city treasury by the person collecting same immediately upon receipt thereof, and such person shall take a receipt therefor. 
(Code 1958,  9-1) 
Sec. 11-2. - Court costs; collection, use, audit of account. 
    It is the duty of the person designated by the city judge to collect fines, forfeitures, penalties and costs, when collecting fines assessed by the court or when executing the forfeiture of appearance bonds ordered by the court, to collect the court costs assessed by the court and to pay such costs to the clerk of the city court of the city, to be deposited in a special fund to be known as the "city court operation and expense fund". When an appearance bond is taken by the police department there shall be added to the amount thereof such sum as may be directed and ordered by the city judge as court costs. All costs deposited in the city court operation and expense fund shall be disbursed by the city judge for the operational and maintenance costs of the city court, including stationery, supplies, office equipment, clerical fees and similar expenditures, as may be approved by the judge of said court. An audit of such account shall be made by the regularly employed auditors of the city at such times as the records of the police department are audited. Any surplus, as hereinafter defined, created in such fund in excess of and beyond the needs for which the fund is created shall be paid by the judges into the general fund of the city. The term surplus or excess funds as used herein is defined as the April 30 operation and expense fund balance computed on the modified accrual basis of accounting in excess of ninety thousand dollars ($90,000.00). The method of transfer of any such surplus shall be that the excess funds, if any, will be recorded as a liability on April 30 of each fiscal year in the city court's accounting records and the liability will be liquidated by the transfer of the excess funds to the city within thirty (30) days of the release of the city court's annual audit report. 
(Code 1958,  9-2; Ord. No. 9494, 12-27-94) 
Sec. 11-3. - Parole and release of prisoners, suspending sentence; authority of judge. 
    The presiding judge of the city court is hereby vested with power and authority to parole and release from custody defendants detained, arrested or convicted for violations of this code and the ordinances of the city, and to suspend the whole or any portion of sentences imposed by such court, all in accordance with the provisions of the Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure, and especially Article 894 thereof, and the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended, and especially R.S. 15:81 thereof. 
(Code 1958,  9-3) 
Chapter 11.5 - CIVIC CENTER COMPLEX 

Sec. 11.5-1. - Rates, rentals. 
    The following schedules of rates and/or rentals are hereby established and adopted as the rates and/or rentals for the use of the Monroe Civic Center Complex, which includes the Arena, the Theater, the Conference/Exhibit Hall, the Livestock Pavilion, the Monroe River Market and such other facilities and/or events which are sponsored and/or maintained under the department of community affairs. 
(1)  General. Manager is authorized and shall have the right to negotiate in the name of and on behalf of the City of Monroe, execution and delivery of contracts with promoters and other users of the Facility. Manager shall negotiate for rental rates consistent with this rate schedule and industry standards and with the goal of maximizing use of the facilities. 
(2)  Event related costs. Rental of each of the facilities shall include or exclude, as applicable, the following event related costs: 
(1)  Set up; 
(2)  Ushers; 
(3)  Police; 
(4)  Medical attendants; 
(5)  Occupational license, if applicable; 
(6)  Ticket takers; 
(7)  Security; 
(8)  Doormen; 
(9)  Cleaning; 
(10)  Treasurer; 
(11)  Receptionist/clerk. 
Note: Stagehands, rigging, production staff and costs are specifically excluded therein from the definition of event related costs. The actual costs will be paid by the licensee. 
(3)  Co-Promotions. The manager may contract for the use of the facility by entering into co-promotion contracts with commercial users. The city's designated representative shall approve all contracts for co-promoted events entered into by manager. 
The facility shall receive a fixed or variable percentage of net profits based on a negotiated co-promotion agreement with the applicable user or users. The co-promotion contract may provide or require that the facility's financial participation occur at various levels and thresholds of net profits and be subject to a maximum limit. Co-promotions by nature involve a degree of risk to the facility and licensee and there is no assurance that the promotion or event will be successful. As a result, it is possible that the facility and/or licensee would be required to share in net losses as a result of the unsuccessful promotion or event. 
For purposes of this subsection (3): 
a.  Net profits shall be defined as gross admission receipts less (i) applicable sales and use taxes, (ii) direct building event related expenses, (iii) direct promoter expenses in the production and presentation of the event and (iv) other reasonable mutually agreed show expenses for the co-promoted event. 
b.  Building event related expenses may include but are not limited to minimum rent, box office fees, event services, event staffing, public safety (police, fire, first aid), advertising/promotion, group sales expenses, utilities, costs related to complimentary tickets, furniture rental, equipment rental, miscellaneous expenses mutually agreed to by manager and licensee. 
c.  Promoter expenses may include but are not limited to artist and talent fees, advertising/promotions, ASCAP/BMI, catering expenses, equipment, sound and lighting, other production costs, stagehands, local ground transportation and lodging, runners, miscellaneous expenses mutually agreed to between manager and licensee. 
d.  Net losses shall be defined as that amount of building event related expenses and promoter expenses that exceed net ticket sales. 
(4)  Civic use; no free events. The city objectives for the facilities include providing a vehicle for the presentation of a variety of cultural, educational, entertainment, sporting, social, and other activities for the community. In addition, the city intends to provide fair access to community and civic organizations and therefore has adopted a rate ordinance specifically tailored to address the needs of the civic community while minimizing, to the extent practicable, the net expense to the city of such use. 
The manager shall not allow the use of the facilities without a reasonable charge for such use. The city agrees not to waive rent or other use costs for any users. The use of the facilities for official city business, such as official city functions, commodities give away, city department meetings, mayor's commission, civil service exams, etc., shall not be required to pay rent, however, the city agrees to pay all associated event expenses incurred. 
(5)  Rent waivers and reductions. The city recognizes the need to maximize the use of the facilities by its commercial users and licensees. Therefore, the reasonableness of pre-negotiated rental rates are in part dependent upon the success of an event or promotion. Consequently, subsequent usage of the facility by these licensees is dependent upon the facility's flexibility in re-negotiating previously contracted rental rates when such event or promotion failed to meet licensee and facilities economic expectations. 
Accordingly, manager shall have the right to reduce the amounts to be paid by a user or promoter of all or part of pre-negotiated rental rates when: 
a.  In manager's good faith judgment the event or activity concludes at a loss to a licensee who has historically utilized the facility in a financially successful manner or is likely to be a user of the facility for future events; or 
b.  In the event that an act of God occurs which affects day of event walk up ticket sales; or 
c.  In manager's good faith judgment a licensee discount would induce such licensee to, additional and or future events, book multi-performance events by one or more artists or where the event generated significant ancillary revenues to the facility (food and beverage, merchandise and novelty sales, and parking) whereby a rent reduction would create goodwill for future business. 
Manager agrees to utilize diligent good faith efforts to apply any rent reductions in a fair and equitable manner. The city acknowledges that the operation of the facilities are generally unique to the exhibition, entertainment and sports industries and that judgments and actions of the manager are subjective and susceptible change, variation, and amendment given the applicable circumstances of each decision. 
(6)  Multiple events/performances. The city recognizes the need to maximize the utilization of the facilities with commercial users and licensees. When multiple performances or multiple show days are involved the amount charged for rental rates may vary from the amounts set forth in the rate ordinance. Accordingly the manager shall have the authority to deviate and negotiate daily rental rates for multiple events or events with multiple performances, when in manager's good faith judgment it is deemed appropriate or necessary and in the best interest of the facility customer relationship. 
(7)  Advertising space. The city recognizes the need to further maximize the use of the facilities to allow for advertising by commercial or private vendors and, accordingly, management is hereby authorized to lease rental space by use of written signs, billboards or mechanical means for display at the Monroe Civic Center Complex. The extent of the number and use of advertising space in the complex shall be at the discretion of the director of community affairs and the fee shall be based on current market value. 
CIVIC CENTER RATE AND USAGE FEE SCHEDULE 
Arena Rental 
Commercial Civic A. Concerts, One-Night Ticketed Events: 1. Inclusive Structure: The greater of $6,500.00 or 17.5% of net ticket sales receipts, with a ceiling of $12,500.00. Rental includes box office fee and event related expenses. Stagehands and production costs are excluded N/A 2. Itemized Structure: The greater of $2,500.00 or 10% of net ticket sales receipts plus (i) event related expenses, (ii) stagehands and production costs (iii) Box office set up fee of $275.00 plus two (2) per cent of net ticket sales receipts. The greater of $1,500.00 vs 8% of net ticket sales receipts, plus (i) event related expenses (ii) stagehands and production costs, (iii) box office set up fee of $275.00 plus two (2) per cent of net ticket sales receipts. B. Flat Show, Non-Ticketed and Other. The greater of $2,000.00 or 10% of net ticket sales plus event expenses, stagehands, production costs, plus direct box office expenses, if any. $1,500.00 flat per day plus event related expenses, stagehands and production costs plus box office expenses, if any. 3/4 referred to as half $1,500.00 $850.00 Note- Move-in days will be billed at 75% of flat daily rate. Minimal environmental comfort levels will be maintained.  
Daily Theater Rental 
Commercial Civic A. Ticketed Events. 1. Inclusive Structure: The greater of $2,500.00 or 15% of net ticket sales receipts, with a ceiling of $5,000.00. Rental includes box office fees and event related expenses. Stagehands and production costs are excluded. N/A 2. Itemized Structure: The greater of $1,500.00 or 12% of net ticket sales receipts, plus (i) event related expenses, (ii) stagehands and production costs, (iii) Box office set up fee of $150.00 plus two (2) per cent of net ticket sales receipts. The greater of $750.00 or 8% of net ticket sales receipts plus (i) event related expenses, (ii) stagehands and production costs, (iii) box office set up fee of $275.00 plus two (2) per cent of net ticket sales receipts. B. Non-Ticketed and Other. $1,500.00 per day plus event related expenses, stagehands, production costs and direct box office expenses, if any. $900.00 per day plus event related expenses, stagehands, production costs and direct box office expenses, if any. Note- Move-in days will be billed at 75% of flat daily rate. Minimal environmental comfort levels will be maintained.  
Conference/Exhibit Hall 
Commercial Civic Day is defined as: Rental period from 8:00 a.m.-12:00 a.m. (midnight). After midnight and before 8:00 a.m. is charged at $100.00 per hour. A twenty (20) per cent rental discount for catered events will be applied. A. Full Hall (14,000 sq. ft.) $1,000.00 per day $  750.00 per day B. 1/2 Hall (7,000 sq. ft.) $  600.00 per day $  500.00 per day C. 1/4 Hall (3,500 sq. ft.) $  350.00 per day $  300.00 per day D. Service Clubs Multi-date, food oriented, civic organizations 1. Rent N/A $  0 2. Set Up Fee per event N/A $ 50.00 E. Ouachita/Richland/Caldwell Room $200.00 $200.00 F. Louisiana Room $150.00 $150.00  
Conference/Parking Lots 
South West Lot $300.00 $300.00 South East Lot $400.00 $400.00 North Lot $300.00 $300.00  
Livestock Pavilion 
Commercial Civic Day is defined as: Rental period from 8:00 a.m.-12:00 a.m. (midnight). After midnight and before 8:00 a.m. is charged at $100.00 per hour. A. Pavilion Rental. $750.00 per day plus event related expenses, stagehands, production costs and direct Box Office expenses, if any. $375.00 per day plus event related expenses, stagehands, production costs and direct box office expenses, if any. B. Stall Rental. $15.00 per stall/per day $15.00 per stall/per day Note: Driver and tractor available at $35.00 per hour.  
Twin City Queen 
Rental includes captain and crew but excludes other event related expenses. Cruise Rates A. Minimum two-hour cruise. $500.00 B. Each additional one hour. $150.00 C. Each additional one hour after midnight. $250.00  
Equipment, Staging and Rental Schedules 
(A) Services Cleanup Labor Hourly charged per man Electrical Usage (Arena only) $287.50 per day Electrical Service (110v 20 amp) $ 12.50 per day per drop Water Hookups $ 12.50 each per day Backdrops $ 57.50 each per day Sound/Light Equipment Rates available upon request Other Electrical Services Rates available upon request Sign Printing Rates available upon request Catering Refer to MCC Menu Venue Set-up $200.00 (Day of event) Set Up Changes $100.00 Pipe and Drape/per wall-Convention Center $50.00 Pipe and Drape/per wall-Banquet Hall $75.00 Pipe and Drape per wall-Arena $75.00 China Dishes, Glasses $ .30 Coffee Cups, Saucers $ .25 Rectangular Chafing Dish $5.00 Flatware $ .10 (B) Staffing (3 hour minimum) Public Services/Security Supervisor (uniformed & armed) $ 18.00/hour Security Officer $ 16.00/hour Ticket Takers $  5.75/hour Ushers $  5.75/hour Peer Security Supervisor $  9.25/hour Peer Security $  7.50/hour Door Guards $  7.50/hour Overnight Security (in-house) $  7.50/hour Medical Attendants (RN) $ 57.50/event Receptionist $ 57.50/event Stagehands $  9.00/hour $ 28.00/performance* Riggers (Climbing) $ 23.00/hour* Riggers (ground) $ 11.00/hour* Loaders $ 25.00/man/truck Ambulance $ 50.00/hour *Minimum three (3) hour call-Overtime and holiday rates available upon request. (C) Equipment Tables: 8' Rectangular $  9.50 each per day 6' Rectangular $  7.00 each per day 5' Round $  9.50 each per day Exhibit Booth/Divider Curtains $  2.50/foot Chairs $  3.00 per day Staging: Arena (concert) Included in set up fee Larger riser (Conference Hall) $ 30.00/day Small Riser (Conference Hall) $ 30.00/day Barricade $115.00/event Pianos: Concert Grand Baldwin (9') (Theater only) $223.00/event Baby Grand Steinway (5'10?) $115.00/event Upright-Story & Clark (Theatre Pit Only) $ 57.50/event Tuner Prevailing rate Spotlights Super Troopers (Arena) $ 85.00 each per event Trooper/Ultra Arcs (Theatre) $ 45.00 each per event 2100 ALT Sports (Conf. Hall) $ 25.00 each per event Stagelights (no charge in Theatre) $  4.00 each per day Forklift: Three (3) hour set up $100.00 Two (2) hour strike Lift $ 25.00/hour (D) Set Up Fees Basketball (court, scoreboard & bench) $550.00 Concert (stage and chairs) $500.00 Boxing/Wrestling $350.00 Audio/Visual: Slide Projector $ 30.00 each per day 16mm Projector (Theatre only) $ 57.00 each per day 30' x 30' Projection Screen (Theatre only) $ 30.00 each per day Stand Up Projection Screen $ 25.00 each per day Easels $  4.00 each per day Microphones (no charge in Theatre) $ 15.00 each per day Electrical Dis-Connect Boxes $ 25.00 each per day Extension Cords $ 20.00 each per day Telephone-Local/Credit card only phone hook up $ 90.00 each per day Xerox Copies $  0.25 each Facsimile Service $  3.00 per call  
Advance Orders Floor Orders (E) Consumer/Trade Show Equipment Power Requirements 110 volts   15 amps/single outlet $ 15.00 $ 25.00 229 volts    30 amps/single outlet $ 27.50 $ 57.50 220 volts   up to 30 amps/single outlet $ 20.00 $800.00   up to 50 amps/single outlet $ 15.00 $110.00 Extension Cords: Power not included-25' long   Single Outlet $ 20.00 $ 25.00   Quad Outlet $ 15.00 $ 25.00 Tables Unfinished Display Tables-29? High 96?L x 24? (not skirted) $  7.00 $ 14.00 72?L x 30? (not skirted) $  7.00 $ 14.00 96?L x 30? (not skirted) $ 18.50 $ 37.00 Finished Display Tables-29? High 96?L x 24? (not skirted) $ 14.00 $ 28.00 72?L x 30? (not skirted) $ 14.00 $ 28.00 96?L x 30? (not skirted) $ 18.50 $ 37.00 Table Skirts $  3.00 $  5.00 Table Covers $  5.00 $ 10.00 Booth Carpet: 9' x 10' Navy Blue $ 40.00 $ 57.50 9' x 20' Navy Blue $ 75.00 $105.00 9' x 30' Navy Blue $110.00 $150.00 Chairs: Red Cushion, brown frame, folding, padded chair $  2.50 $  5.00 Audio/Visual Slide Projector $ 30.00 $ 57.50 16mm Projector (Theatre only) $ 57.50 $115.00 96? x 120? Screen $ 30.00 $ 57.50 Pegboards $ 15.00 $ 17.50 Chalkboard/Bulletin Board $ 15.00 $ 17.50 Exhibitor Sign (7? x 36?) $  7.50 $ 12.00  
(Ord. No. 7362, 2-23-82; Ord. No. 9183, 11-27-90; Ord. No. 9512, 5-9-95; Ord. No. 11,125, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 11,339, 11-13-12) 
Sec. 11.5-2. - Parking; fees. 
(a)  Plan authorized. Whenever in the opinion of the management staff of the Monroe Civic Center, the type of event and expected attendance of an event warrant control, management of traffic, parking and security in the parking lot facilities of the Monroe Civic Center, the management staff shall put into effect a parking plan to provided the control, management and security thereof. 
(b)  Whenever the above-mentioned parking plan is put into effect, there is hereby established a fee per vehicle for each vehicle utilizing the parking facilities of the Monroe Civic Center. Fees are as follows: 
(1)  Two dollars ($2.00) per vehicle for "Ticketed Entertainment Events" in the Arena, Theatre and Conference Hall including but not limited to concerts, music and/or dance, theatre productions, pageants, Bingo, etc. 
(2)  One dollar ($1.00) per vehicle for "Nonentertainment Ticketed Events," including dance recitals, music recitals, consumer shows, etc. 
(3)  No charge per vehicle for "Nonprofit and Nonticketed Events," including civic club meetings, approved fund raising events, religious, charitable and educational events, graduations, conventions, seminars, banquets, social balls, etc. 
(4)  There is hereby levied an additional fee of one dollar ($1.00) per ticket at all ticketed events at the Monroe Civic Center Complex, which includes the Arena, the Theater, the Conference/Exhibit Hall, the Convention Center and the Livestock Pavilion for the operation and maintenance of the parking facilities at the complex. 
(Ord. No. 7417, 7-27-82; Ord. No. 9184, 11-27-90; Ord. No. 10,400, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 10,476, 4-12-05) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9184, adopted Nov 27, 1990, has been treated as amendatory of  11.5-2. The fees set out therein shall take effect Dec. 1, 1990. 
Sec. 11.5-3. - Regulation of smoking in the Monroe Civic Center Arena, Theater and Conference Hall. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, smoking is prohibited in all enclosed areas of the Monroe Civic Center Arena, Theater and Conference Hall. 
(b)  Smoking is defined herein as the inhaling, exhaling, burning or carrying of any lighted cigarette, cigar, pipe or other combustible product. 
(Ord. No. 9381, 6-8-93) 
Sec. 11.5-4. - Designated smoking areas in the Monroe Civic Center Arena, Theater and Conference Hall. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary, smoking shall be permitted in (a) private enclosed offices and (b) in designated smoking areas which shall be so situated as to allow nonsmoking individuals the opportunity to conduct normal activity in a reasonably smoke-free environment. 
    Areas in which smoking is prohibited shall be conspicuously posted by posting signs to that effect. 
    Designated smoking areas shall be conspicuously identified by posting signs in every place where smoking is permitted. 
    Signs shall be of such color, size and design so as to be conspicuous. The international "smoking" and "no smoking" symbols may be used. 
(Ord. No. 9381, 6-8-93) 
Sec. 11.5-5. - Violation, penalty. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to smoke where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of section 11.5-3. 
(b)  Any person who violates the provisions of sections 11.5-3 and 11.5-5(a) shall be subject to a misdemeanor summons and a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(c)  Any person who refuses to comply with the provisions of section 11.5-3 after being asked to do so by civic center staff, may be escorted from the premises by the civic center staff or by officers of the Monroe Police Department, in addition to the penalty set forth hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 9381, 6-8-93) 
Chapter 12 - CRIMINAL CODE 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Definitions. 
    In this chapter the terms enumerated shall have the designated meanings: 
    Another refers to any person or legal entity, including the State of Louisiana or any subdivision thereof. 
    Anything of value must be given the broadest possible construction, including any conceivable thing of the slightest value, movable or immovable, corporeal or incorporeal, public or private. It must be construed in the broad popular sense of the phrase, and not necessarily as synonymous with the traditional legal term "property." 
    City means the city or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of same. 
    City secretary and treasurer . Whenever the words "city secretary and treasurer," "secretary and treasurer," "city secretary," or "city treasurer" are used, they shall be construed to mean the secretary and treasurer of the city or the director of administration. 
    Dangerous weapon includes any gas, liquid or other substance or instrument which, in the manner used, is calculated or likely to produce death or great bodily harm. 
    Foreseeable refers to that which ordinarily would be anticipated by a human being of average reasonable intelligence and perception. 
    Property refers to both public and private property movable and immovable and corporeal and incorporeal property. 
    Public officer, public office, public employee or position of public authority means and applies to any executive, ministerial, administrative, judicial or legislative officer, office, employee or position of authority respectively, of the State of Louisiana or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision. Unless otherwise specified, local references are to those who function in the city. 
    Public place . The term "public place" shall mean any place open to and accessible to the general public. 
    Real property shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    State means the State of Louisiana, or any parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof, or any agency, board, commission, department or institution of said state, parish, municipality, district or other political subdivision thereof. 
    Whoever in a penalty clause refers only to natural persons insofar as imprisonment is provided, but insofar as a fine may be imposed "whoever" in a penalty clause refers to any person. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Only those definitions given in the amendment of  12-1 by Ord. No. 7450 which are not duplicative of definitions given in  1-2 of this Code have been included in  12-1. 
Cross reference- Additional definitions applicable,  1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:2. 
Sec. 12-2. - Interpretation. 
    The provisions of this chapter cannot be extended by analogy so as to create crimes not provided for herein; however, in order to promote justice and to effect the objects of the law, all of its provisions shall be given a genuine construction, according to the fair import of their words, taken in their usual sense, in connection with the context, and with reference to the purpose of the provision. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:3. 
Sec. 12-3. - Civil remedies not affected. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall affect any civil remedy provided by the law pertaining to civil matters, or any legal power to inflict penalties for contempt. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:6. 
Sec. 12-4. - Seizure and disposition of evidence. 
(a)  Any evidence, property or paraphernalia seized as the result of a criminal investigation which does not result in an immediate arrest and wherein a warrant is advised by the investigating agency shall be returned to the party from whom it was seized, provided of course that he has legal right of possession thereto or is the legal owner thereof, at the expiration of thirty (30) days from the date of said seizure, if within said thirty (30) days the complainant has not applied for a warrant for the arrest of the suspected culprit in that matter. 
(b)  This section shall not be construed so as to prevent the seizing authority from, in its discretion, returning the object of seizure prior to the elapse of the above mentioned thirty (30) days. 
(c)  Upon conviction of a person for the crime of gambling, the evidence, property, and paraphernalia seized as instruments of such crime shall, upon order of the court, be destroyed when it is no longer needed as evidence and all such evidence, property, and paraphernalia found to be in use in the conduct of such unlawful activity and having a value for lawful purposes, shall be sold under the orders of the court at the public auction by a duly licensed auctioneer and the proceeds paid to the court. Upon conviction, as aforesaid, any monies and other things of value, except as herein provided, shall be transferred to the city's general fund. 
(Ord. No. 7205, 11-11-80) 
Secs. 12-5-12-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ELEMENTS OF CRIME 

Sec. 12-16. - Crime defined. 
    A crime is that conduct which is defined as criminal in this chapter. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:7. 
Sec. 12-17. - Criminal conduct. 
    Criminal conduct consists of: 
(1)  An act or a failure to act that produces criminal consequences, and which is combined with criminal intent; or 
(2)  A mere act or failure to act that produces criminal consequences, where there is no requirement of criminal intent; or 
(3)  Criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:8. 
Sec. 12-18. - Criminal consequences. 
    Criminal consequences are any set of consequences prescribed in the various articles of this chapter as necessary to constitute any of the various crimes defined herein. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:9. 
Sec. 12-19. - Criminal intent. 
    Criminal intent may be specific or general: 
(1)  Specific criminal intent is that state of mind which exists when the circumstances indicate that the offender actively desired the prescribed criminal consequences to follow his act or failure to act. 
(2)  General criminal intent is present whenever there is specific intent, and also when the circumstances indicate that the offender, in the ordinary course of human experience, must have adverted to the prescribed criminal consequences as reasonably certain to result from his act or failure to act. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:10. 
Sec. 12-20. - Criminal intent; how expressed. 
    The definitions of some crimes require a specific criminal intent, while in others no intent is required. Some crimes consist merely of criminal negligence that produces criminal consequences. However, in the absence of qualifying provisions, the terms "intent" and "intentional" have reference to "general criminal intent." 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:11. 
Sec. 12-21. - Criminal negligence. 
    Criminal negligence exists when, although neither specific nor general criminal intent is present, there is such disregard of the interest of others that the offender's conduct amounts to a gross deviation below the standard of care expected to be maintained by a reasonably careful man under like circumstances. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:12. 
Secs. 12-22-12-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CULPABILITY 

Sec. 12-31. - Insanity. 
    If the circumstances indicate that because of a mental disease or mental defect, the offender was incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong with reference to the conduct in question, the offender shall be exempt from criminal responsibility. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:14. 
Sec. 12-32. - Intoxication. 
    The fact of any intoxicated or drugged condition of the offender at the time of the commission of the crime is immaterial except as follows: 
(1)  Where the production of the intoxication or drugged condition has been involuntary, and the circumstances indicate this condition is the direct cause of the commission of the crime, the offender is exempt from criminal responsibility. 
(2)  Where the circumstances indicate that an intoxicated or drugged condition has precluded the presence of a specific criminal intent or of special knowledge required in a particular crime, this fact constitutes a defense to a prosecution for that crime. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:15. 
Sec. 12-33. - Mistake of fact. 
    Unless there is a provision to the contrary in the definition of a crime, reasonable ignorance of fact or mistake of fact which precludes the presence of any mental element required in that crime is a defense to any prosecution for that crime. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:16. 
Sec. 12-34. - Mistake of law. 
    Ignorance of the provisions of this chapter is not a defense to any criminal prosecution. However, mistake of law which results in the lack of an intention that consequences which are criminal shall follow, is a defense to a criminal prosecution under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Where the offender reasonably relied on an act of this city in repealing an existing criminal provision, or in otherwise purporting to make the offender's conduct lawful; or 
(2)  Where the offender reasonably relied on a final judgment of a competent court of last resort that a provision making the conduct in question criminal was unconstitutional. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:17. 
Sec. 12-35. - Justification generally. 
    The fact that an offender's conduct is justifiable, although otherwise criminal, shall constitute a defense to prosecution for any crime based on that conduct. This defense of justification can be claimed under the following circumstances: 
(1)  When the offender's conduct is an apparently authorized and reasonable fulfillment of any duties of public office; or 
(2)  When the offender's conduct is a reasonable accomplishment of an arrest which is lawful under the laws of the state or of this chapter; or 
(3)  When for any reason the offender's conduct is authorized by law; or 
(4)  When the offender's conduct is reasonable discipline of minors by their parents, tutors or teachers; or 
(5)  When the crime consists of a failure to perform an affirmative duty and the failure to perform is caused by physical impossibility; or 
(6)  When any crime is committed through the compulsion of threats by another of death or great bodily harm, and the offender reasonably believes the person making the threats is present and would immediately carry out the threats if the crime were not committed; or 
(7)  When the offender's conduct is in defense of persons or of property under any of the circumstances described in Articles 19 through 22 of the Louisiana Criminal Code. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:18. 
Sec. 12-36. - Use of force or violence in defense. 
    The use of force or violence upon the person of another is justifiable, when committed for the purpose of preventing a forcible offense against the person or a forcible offense or trespass against property in a person's lawful possession; provided that the force or violence used must be reasonable and apparently necessary to prevent such offense and that this article shall not apply where the force or violence results in a homicide. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:19. 
Sec. 12-37. - Aggressor cannot claim self defense. 
    A person who is the aggressor or who brings on a difficulty cannot claim the right of self-defense unless he withdraws from the conflict in good faith in such a manner that his adversary knows or should know that he desires to withdraw and discontinue the conflict. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:21. 
Sec. 12-38. - Defense of others. 
    It is justifiable to use force or violence in the defense of another person when it is reasonably apparent that the person attacked could have justifiably used such means himself, and when it is reasonably believed that such intervention is necessary to protect the other person. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:22. 
Sec. 12-39. - Principals. 
    All persons concerned in the commission of a crime, whether present or absent, and whether they directly commit the act constituting the offense, aid and abet in its commission, or directly or indirectly counsel or procure another to commit the crime, are principals and are guilty of a crime. 
(Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:24. 
Secs. 12-40-12-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INCHOATE OFFENSES 

Sec. 12-51. - Conspiracy. 
(a)  Criminal conspiracy is the agreement or combination of two (2) or more persons for the specific purpose of committing any crime; provided that an agreement or combination to commit a crime shall not amount to a criminal conspiracy unless, in addition to such agreement or combination, one or more of such parties does an act in furtherance of the object of the agreement or combination. 
    If the intended basic crime has been consummated, the conspirators may be tried for either the conspiracy or the completed offense, and a conviction for one shall not bar prosecution for the other. 
(b)  Whoever is a party to a criminal conspiracy to commit any other crime shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the same manner as for the offense contemplated by the conspirators; but such fine or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half of the largest fine, or one-half the longest term of imprisonment prescribed for such offense, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:26. 
Sec. 12-52. - Attempt. 
(a)  Any person, who, having a specific intent to commit a crime, does or commits an act for the purpose of and tending directly toward the accomplishing of his object is guilty of an attempt to commit the offense intended; and it shall be immaterial whether, under the circumstances, he would have actually accomplished his purpose. 
(b)  Mere preparation to commit a crime shall not be sufficient to constitute an attempt; but lying in wait with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, or searching for the intended victim with a dangerous weapon with the intent to commit a crime, shall be sufficient to constitute an attempt to commit the offense intended. 
(c)  An attempt is a separate but lesser grade of the intended crime; and any person may be convicted of an attempt to commit a crime, although it appears on the trial that the crime intended or attempted was actually perpetrated by such person in pursuance of such attempt. 
(d)  Whosoever attempts to commit any crime shall be fined or imprisoned, or both, in the same manner as for the offense attempted; but such fine or imprisonment shall not exceed one-half of the largest fine or one-half of the longest imprisonment prescribed for the offense or attempted, or both. 
(Code 1958,  10-4.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:27. 
Secs. 12-53-12-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON 

Sec. 12-61. - Simple battery. 
(a)  Defined. Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon the person of another or the intentional administration of poison or other noxious liquid or substance to another. 
(b)  Declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of simple battery. Simple battery is a battery, without the consent of the victim, and committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Section 12-61 formerly defined "battery" and was derived from Code 1958,  10-6. 
State Law reference- "Battery" defined, R.S. 14:33; simple battery, R.S. 14:35. 
Sec. 12-62. - Simple battery on police officer. 
(a)  Declared unlawful. It shall be unlawful to commit a simple battery upon a police officer. 
(b)  Definitions. 
(1)  Battery. Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon a police officer while in the process of carrying out, or attempting to carry out his official duties; or the intentional administration of poison or other noxious liquid or substance to said officer. 
(2)  Simple battery upon a police officer. Simple battery upon a police officer is a battery without the consent of said officer and committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Section 12-62 formerly defined "simple battery" and was derived from Code 1958,  10-6. 
State Law reference- Battery of a police officer, R.S. 14:34.2; simple battery, R.S. 14:35. 
Sec. 12-63. - Simple assault. 
    Assault is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of another in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of simple assault. Simple assault is an assault committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Section 12-63 formerly defined "assault" and was derived from Code 1958,  10-3. 
State Law reference- Assault defined, R.S. 14:36; simple assault, R.S. 14:38. 
Sec. 12-64. - Simple assault on police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an act of simple assault on a police officer. The crime of simple assault on a police officer is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of said officer in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery, while performing his official duties and committed without a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Section 12-64 formerly defined "simple assault" and made the act unlawful. The section was formerly derived from Code 1958,  10-3. 
Sec. 12-65. - Aggravated assault. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of aggravated assault. Aggravated assault is an assault committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(Code 1958,  10-4) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:37. 
Sec. 12-66. - Aggravated assault on police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an act of aggravated assault on a police officer. The crime of aggravated assault on a police officer is an attempt to commit a battery, or the intentional placing of said officer in reasonable apprehension of receiving a battery while in the process of carrying out or attempting to carry out his official duties and committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Section 12-66 formerly dealt with negligent injuring and was derived from Code 1958,  10-43. Negligent injuring is now covered by  12-69. 
Sec. 12-67. - Aggravated battery. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit the offense of aggravated battery. 
    Battery is the intentional use of force or violence upon the person of another; or the intentional administration of a poison or other noxious liquid or substance to another. 
    Aggravated battery is a battery committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Section 12-67 formerly dealt with intimidation by officers, which is now covered in  12-70. 
State Law reference- "Battery" defined, R.S. 14:33; aggravated battery, R.S. 14:34. 
Sec. 12-68. - Aggravated battery on police officer. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an aggravated battery upon a police officer. 
    Battery on a police officer is the intentional use of force upon a police officer while in the process of carrying out or attempting to carry out his official duties, or the intentional administration of poison or other noxious substance to said officer. 
    Aggravated battery on a police officer is a battery on a police officer committed with a dangerous weapon. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Section 12-68 formerly dealt with terrorizing, which is now covered by  12-71. 
Sec. 12-69. - Negligent injuring. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of negligent injuring. Negligent injuring is the infliction of any injury upon the person of another by criminal negligence. 
(Code 1958;  10-43; Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Formerly,  12-66. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:39. 
Sec. 12-70. - Intimidation by officers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any officer to commit the crime of intimidation by an officer. 
    Intimidation by officers is the intentional use by any police officer, or other person charged with the custody of parties accused of a crime or violation or a municipal ordinance, of threats, violence or any means of inhuman treatment designed to secure a confession or incriminating statement from the person in custody. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Formerly,  12-67. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40. 
Sec. 12-71. - Terrorizing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of terrorizing. 
    Terrorizing is the intentional communication of information, known by the offender to be false, that the commission of a crime of violence is imminent or in progress or that a circumstance dangerous to human life exists or is about to exist, and thereby causing any person to be in sustained fear for his or another person's safety; causing evacuation of a building, a public structure, or a facility of transportation; or causing other serious disruption to the public. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Formerly,  12-68. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:40.1. 
Sec. 12-72. - False imprisonment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of false imprisonment. False imprisonment is the intentional confinement or detention of another, without his consent and without proper legal authority. 
(Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79; Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Editor's note- Formerly,  12-69. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:46. 
Sec. 12-73. - Domestic abuse battery. 
(a)  Domestic abuse battery is the international use of force or violence committed by one household member upon the person of another household member without the consent of the victim. 
(b)  For purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Community service activities" as used in this section may include duty in any morgue, coroner's office, or emergency treatment room of a state-operated hospital or other state-operated emergency treatment facility, with the consent of the administrator of the morgue, coroner's office, hospital, or facility. 
(2)  "Household members" means any person of the opposite sex presently living in the same residence or living in the same residence within five (5) years of the occurrence of the domestic abuse battery with the defendant as a spouse, whether married or not. 
(c)  On a first conviction, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the offender shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall be imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months. Imposition or execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
(1)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve two (2) days in jail and participate in a court-approved abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence; or 
(2)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve two (2) days in jail and participate in court-approved community service activities and participate in a court-approved domestic abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence; or 
(d)  On a conviction of a second offense, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) and shall be imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months. At least forty-eight (48) hours of the sentence imposed shall be served without benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
(1)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve fifteen (15) days in jail and participate in a court-approved domestic abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence; or 
(2)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform thirty (30) eight-hour days of court-approved domestic abuse prevention program, and the offender shall not own or possess a firearm throughout the entirety of the sentence. 
(e)  (1)  For purposes of determining whether a defendant has a prior conviction for violation of this section, a conviction under this section or a conviction under the laws of any state or an ordinance of a municipality, town, or similar political subdivision of another state which prohibits the intentional use of force or violence committed by one household member upon another household member of the opposite sex presently or formerly living in the same residence with the defendant as a spouse, whether married or not, shall constitute a prior conviction. This determination shall be made by the court as a matter of law. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a prior conviction shall not include a conviction for an offense under this section if committed more than ten (10) years prior to the commission of the crime for which the defendant is being tried, and such conviction shall not be considered in the assessment of penalties hereunder. However, periods of time during which the offender was incarcerated in a penal institution in this or any other state shall be excluded in computing the ten-year period. 
(f)  An offender ordered to participate in a domestic abuse prevention program required by the provisions of this section shall pay the cost incurred in participation in the program. Failure to make such payment shall subject the offender to revocation of probation, unless the court determines that the offender is unable to pay. 
(g)  Any crime of violence, as defined in R.S. 14:2(13), against a person committed by one household member against another household member, shall be designated as an act of domestic violence. 
(h)  If the victim of domestic abuse battery is pregnant and the offender knows that the victim is pregnant at the time of the commission of the offense, the offender shall be required to serve a minimum of thirty (30) days without the benefit of suspension of sentence for a first conviction. Upon a second or subsequent conviction, the offender shall be imprisoned for not less than six (6) months without benefit of suspension of sentence. 
(Ord. No. 10,398, 5-11-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:35.3. 
Secs. 12-74-12-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PROPERTY RIGHTS 

Sec. 12-86. - Criminal damage to property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of criminal damage to property. Criminal damage to property is the intentional damaging of any property of another, without the consent of the owner. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) shall apply only if the value of the property damages is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Code 1958,  10-17) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:56. 
Sec. 12-86.1. - Simple arson. 
    It shall be illegal to commit the offense of simple arson. Simple arson is the intentional damaging by any explosive substance or the setting fire to any property of another, without consent of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Simple arson, R.S. 14:52. 
Sec. 12-87. - Criminal mischief. 
    Criminal mischief is the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Tampering with any property of another, without the consent of the owner, with the intent to interfere with the free enjoyment of any rights of anyone thereto, or with the intent to deprive anyone entitled thereto of the full use of the property; or 
(2)  Giving of any false alarm of fire; or filing any false police report; or 
(3)  Driving of any tack, nail, spike or metal over one and one-half inch in length into any tree located on lands belonging to another, without the consent of the owner, or without the later removal of the object from the tree; or 
(4)  The felling, topping or pruning of trees or shrubs within the right-of-way of a state highway, without prior written approval of the assistant secretary of the department of transportation and development who supervises the office of highways of that department or his representative, provided prior written approval is not required for agents or employees of public utility companies in situations of emergency where the person or property of others is endangered; or 
(5)  Giving of any false report or complaint to a sheriff, or his deputies, or to any officer of the law relative to the commission of, or an attempt to commit, a crime; or 
(6)  Throwing any stone or any other missile in any street, avenue, alley, road or highway, or open space or public square, or enclosure, or throwing any stone or other missile from any place into any street, avenue, road, highway, alley, open space, public square or enclosure; or 
(7)  Taking temporary possession of any part or parts of a place of business, or remaining in a place of business after the person in charge of such business or portion of such business has directed such person to leave the premises and to desist from the temporary possession of any part or parts of such business. 
    No person shall commit the crime of criminal mischief. 
(Code 1958,  10-16; Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:59. 
Sec. 12-88. - Damaging, defacing or improperly using property at civic and government centers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally damage, without the consent of the owner, any property within the consent of the owner, any property within the bounds of the Monroe Civic Center or the Monroe Government Center; or 
(2)  Deface any property within the bounds of the Monroe Civic Center or the Monroe Government Center by making, without the consent of the owner, signs or figures thereon, or by posting or writing on or otherwise attaching to such property any indecent or obscene word, words, or sentences; or 
(3)  Wade, swim, sit, stand or lie, without the consent of the city, in any fountain or pool within the bounds of the Monroe Civic Center or the Monroe Government Center; or 
(4)  Throw or intentionally drop, without the consent of the city, any object other than coins into any fountain or pool at the Monroe Civic Center or the Monroe Government Center. 
(b)  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and by imprisonment for a term of not less than three (3) days and not more than six (6) months. 
(Code 1958,  10-18.1) 
Sec. 12-89. - Defacing buildings. 
    It shall be unlawful to deface any building within the corporate limits of the city, by making signs or figures thereon, or write any indecent or obscene word, words, or sentences on any building, room, hall, closet, wall, or fence. 
(Code 1958,  10-18) 
Sec. 12-90. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  No person shall enter any structure, watercraft, or movable owned by another without express, legal, or implied authorization. 
(b)  No person shall enter upon immovable property owned by another without express, legal, or implied authorization. 
(c)  No person shall remain in or upon property, movable or immovable, owned by another without express, legal, or implied authorization. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to a prosecution for a violation of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section, that the accused has express, legal, or implied authority to be in the movable or on the immovable property. 
(e)  The following persons may enter or remain upon the structure, watercraft, movable or immovable property, of another: 
(1)  A duly commissioned law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties. 
(2)  Any firefighter, whether or not a member of a volunteer or other fire department, and any employee or agent of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry engaged in locating and suppressing a fire. 
(3)  Emergency medical personnel engaged in the rendering of medical assistance to an individual. 
(4)  Any federal, state or local government employee, public utility employee or agent engaged in suppressing or dealing with an emergency that presents an imminent danger to human safety or health or the environment. 
(5)  Any federal, state or local government employee, public utility employee or agent in the performance of his duties when otherwise authorize by law to enter or remain on immovable or movable property. 
(6)  Any person authorized by a court of law to enter or remain on immovable property. 
(7)  Any person exercising the mere right of passage to an enclosed estate, as otherwise provided by law. 
(f)  The following persons may enter or remain upon immovable property of another, unless specifically forbidden to do so by the owner or other person with authority, either orally or in writing: 
(1)  A professional land surveyor or his authorized personnel, engaged in the "practice of land surveying", as defined in R.S. 37:682. 
(2)  A person, affiliate, employee, agent or contractor of any business, which is regulated by the Louisiana Public Service Commission or by a local franchising authority or the Federal Communication Commission under the Cable Regulation Act of 1992 or of a municipal or public utility, while acting in the course and scope of his employment or agency relating to the operation, repair, or maintenance of a facility, servitude or any property located on immovable property which belongs to such a business. 
(3)  Any person making a delivery, soliciting, selling any product or service, conducting a survey a poll, a real estate licensee or other person who has a legitimate reason for making a delivery, conducting business or communicating the owner, lessee, custodian or a resident of the immovable property, and who, immediately upon entry, seeks to make the delivery, to conduct business or to conduct the communication. 
(4)  An employee of the owner, lessee or custodian of the immovable property while performing his duties, functions and responsibilities in the course and scope of his employment. 
(5)  The owner of domestic livestock or his employees or agents while in the process of retrieving his domestic livestock that have escaped from an area fenced to retain such domestic livestock. 
(6)  The owner of a domestic animal while in the sole process of merely retrieving his domestic animal from immovable property and not having a firearm or other weapon on his person. 
(7)  Any candidate for political office or any person working on behalf of a candidate for a political office. 
(8)  The owner or occupant of a watercraft or vessel traveling in salt water engaged in any lawful purpose for the purpose of retrieval of his property or for obtaining assistance in an emergency situation. 
(g)  The following penalties shall be imposed for a violation of this section: 
(1)  For the first offense, the fine shall be not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment for not more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(2)  For the second offense, the fine shall be not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) and not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), or imprisonment for not more than ninety (90) days, or both. 
(3)  For the third offense and all subsequent offenses, the fine shall be not be less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisonment for not less than sixty (60) days and not more than six (6) months, or both, and forfeiture to the law enforcement authority of any property seized in connection with the violation. 
(4)  A person may be convicted of a second offense any subsequent offenses regardless of whether any prior conviction involved the same structure, watercraft, movable or immovable property and regardless of the time sequence of the occurrence of the offenses. 
(h)  The provisions of any other law notwithstanding, owners, lessees, and custodians of structures, watercraft, movable and immovable property shall not be answerable for damages sustained by any person who enters upon the structure, watercraft, movable or immovable property without express, legal or implied authorization, or who without legal authorization, remains upon the structure, watercraft, movable or immovable property after being forbidden by the owner, or other person with authority to do so; however, the owner, lessee or custodian of the property may be answerable for damages only upon a showing that the damages sustained were the result of the intentional acts or gross negligence of the owner, lessee or custodian. 
(i)  A minor ten (10) years old or younger shall not be arrested, detained or apprehended for the crime of trespass. 
(Code 1958,  10-59; Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82; Ord. No. 10,399, 5-11-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63. 
Sec. 12-90.1. - Loitering. 
(a)  The following persons are guilty of loitering: 
(1)  Intoxicated persons or persons who appear intoxicated through articulable factors who spend time idly, and/or linger in an aimless way, and or move slowly and indolently away from and/or off of public or private property when told to do so by law enforcement officials and/or the owners of such property. 
(2)  Able-bodied persons who loaf the streets and/or on public or private properties at late or unusual hours of the night, or who linger around any public or private place without lawful business or lawful cause. 
(3)  Persons found in or on any structure, vessel, or private grounds, without being able to account for their lawful presence therein or thereon; or 
(4)  Persons found at, in, or on any privately owned business property, movable or immovable, during or after regular operating hours of said business with open containers of alcohol or alcoholic beverages without the permission of the business owner. 
(5)  Persons found at, in, or on any privately owned business property, movable or immovable, after regular operating hours of said business without the permission of the business owner. 
(6)  Prostitutes who spend time idly, and/or linger in an aimless way, and or move slowly and indolently away from and/or off of public or private property when told to do so by law enforcement officials and/or the owners of such property. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of loitering shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 9403, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 12-91. - Illegal posting. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of illegal posting on public or private property. Illegal posting is the posting or the placing and/or maintaining of posted signs on property by anyone other than: 
(1)  The owner or his duly authorized agent or representative. 
(2)  The lessee or his duly authorized agent or representative. 
Sec. 12-92. - Destruction, defacing or removing of posted signs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally and without authority destroy, deface or remove posted signs, or signs designating or purporting to designate the boundary lines of immovable property. 
Sec. 12-93. - Entry on or remaining in places after being forbidden. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person without authority of laws to go into or upon or remain in or upon immovable property or any structure, dwelling, watercraft or any other movable which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, after having been forbidden to do so, either orally or in writing, including by means of any signs hereinafter described, by any owner, lessee or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For the purpose of this section, the above mentioned signs means a sign or signs posted on or in the structure, watercraft or any other movable, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or part, portion or area thereof at a place where such sign may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.3. 
Sec. 12-94. - Aiding and abetting others to enter or remain on premises where forbidden. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to incite, solicit, urge, encourage, exhort, instigate or procure any other person to go into or upon or to remain in or upon any structure, watercraft or any other movable or immovable, which belongs to another, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or any part, portion or area thereof, knowing that such other person has been forbidden to go or remain there, either orally or in writing, including by means of any sign hereinafter described, by the owner, lessee or custodian of the property or by any other authorized person. For the purposes of this section, the above mentioned sign means a sign posted on or in the structure, watercraft or any other movable or immovable, including public buildings and structures, ferries and bridges, or part, portion or area thereof, at a place where such sign may be reasonably expected to be seen. 
(b)  Any law enforcement officer investigating a complaint that the provisions of this section are being or have been violated or any such officer making any arrest for violation of the provisions of this section, is hereby vested with authority to require any person involved in such investigation or arrest to identify himself to such officer. Upon demand of such officer, the person involved shall inform the officer of his true name and address. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:63.4. 
Sec. 12-95. - Theft. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an act of theft. 
    The crime of theft is the misappropriation or taking of anything of value which belongs to another, either without consent of the other to the misappropriation or taking, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations. 
    An intent to deprive the other permanently of whatever may be subject of the misappropriation or taking is essential. 
(Code 1958,  10-58; Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67. 
Sec. 12-96. - Unauthorized use of access or credit card. 
(a)  As used in this section: 
(1)  Access card shall mean and include any card, plate, paper, book or any other device issued to a person which authorizes such person to obtain credit, money, goods, services or anything of value, whether contemporaneous or not, by use of any credit or deferred payment plan with issuer or by use of debiting or charging such person's demand deposit or savings or time account with issuer or by debiting or charging any other funds such person has on deposit with issuer. 
(2)  Revoked access card shall mean an access card which has been cancelled or terminated by the issuer of said access card. 
(3)  Issuer shall be the depository and/or creditor issuing the access card, directly or through another entity. 
    The aggregate amount or value of credit, money, goods, services or anything else of value obtained shall determine the value of the misappropriation or taking when the offender has obtained the credit, money, goods, services or anything else of value from any one issuer or the offender has used an access card, or referred to a nonexistent access card on two (2) or more occasions within any consecutive ninety-day period. This section shall not apply if such value is one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more. 
(b)  Whoever, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, with intent to defraud: 
(1)  Uses a forged access card, 
(2)  Makes reference by number or other description to a nonexistent access card, 
(3)  Steals or wrongfully appropriates an access card, or 
(4)  Uses an access card belonging to another person without authority of said person: 
    Thereby obtaining, whether contemporaneously or not, credit, money, goods, services or anything of value shall be guilty of petty theft. 
(c)  Whoever, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, with intent to defraud, uses a revoked access card, thereby obtaining, whether contemporaneously or not, credit, money, goods, services or anything of value shall be guilty of theft. For purposes of this subsection, it shall be presumptive evidence that a person used a revoked access card with intent to defraud if the said person, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, uses the said access card after actually receiving oral or written notice that the access card has been cancelled or terminated, or if said person, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, uses the said access card at a time period more than five (5) days after written notice of the termination or cancellation of said access card has been deposited by registered or certified mail in the United States mail system. Said notice shall be addressed to the person to whom such access card has been issued at the last known address for such person as shown on the records of the issuer. 
(d)  Whoever, directly or indirectly, by agent or otherwise, with the intent to defraud, uses an access card to obtain, whether contemporaneously or not, money, goods, services or anything of value, and the final payment for said items is to be made by debiting or charging said person's demand deposit or savings or time account with issuer, or by debiting or charging any other funds said person has on deposit with issuer, and there are not sufficient funds on deposit to the credit of said person with the issuer to make payment in full of said items obtained, said person shall have committed the crime of petty theft. Said person's failure to pay the amount due on said items obtained: 
(1)  Within ten (10) days after written notice of said amount due has been deposited by certified or registered mail in the United States mail system addressed to the person to whom such access card has been issued at the last known address for such person as shown on the records of issuer; or 
(2)  Within ten (10) days of delivery or personal tender of said written notice shall be presumptive evidence of said person's intent to defraud. 
(e)  As used herein, the access card itself shall be a thing of value, with a value less than one hundred dollars. 
(f)  In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed, the court may, at its discretion, order as a part of the sentence, restitution. 
(Code 1958,  10-58.1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.3. 
Sec. 12-97. - Theft of utility services. 
(a)  Theft of utility service is the misappropriation, or taking, or obtaining for use any electricity, gas or water manufactured, held for sale or distributed by any person engaged in the manufacture, sale or distribution of electricity, gas, or water, without the consent of, and with the intent to defraud such person by diverting by any means or device any quantity of electricity, gas, or water from the wires, cables, pipes or mains of such person, or by preventing the meter furnished by such person from properly registering the quantity of electricity, gas, or water passing through such meter, or from registering the full amount of electricity, gas, or water actually used or consumed, or by diverting electricity, gas, or water around such meter so as to interfere with the accurate registration of such meter. 
(b)  The presence at any time on or about any wire, cable, pipe, main or meter, or the equipment to which said wire, cable, pipe, main or meter is affixed or attached, of any device or devices resulting in diversion of electricity, gas or water or any device resulting in the prevention of the proper action or accurate registration of the meter used to measure the amount of utility services rendered, or interfering with the proper action or accurate registration of such meter, shall constitute prima facie evidence of knowledge of the person, firm or corporation having custody or control of the room, structure or place where such device or wire, cable, pipe, main or meter is located, and benefiting from the misappropriation of such utility service, and shall constitute prima facie evidence of the intention on the part of such person to defraud and shall bring such person prima facie within the scope, meaning, and penalties provided in subsection (c) herein. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of theft of utility service shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first offense. 
(Ord. No. 7103, 11-27-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:67.6. 
Sec. 12-98. - Unauthorized use of movables. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of unauthorized use of movables. Unauthorized use of movables is the intentional taking or use of any movable which belongs to another, either without the other's consent, or by means of fraudulent conduct, practices or representations, but without any intention to deprive the other of the movable permanently. The fact that the movable so taken or used may be classified as an immovable, according to the law pertaining to civil matters, is immaterial. 
(Code 1958,  10-58.2; Ord. No. 7094, 10-23-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68. 
Sec. 12-99. - Unauthorized removal of shopping carts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to remove a shopping cart or basket belonging to another from the parking area or grounds of any store without authorization therefor. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:68.1. 
Sec. 12-100. - Illegal possession of stolen things. 
    Illegal possession of stolen things is the intentional possessing, procuring, receiving, or concealing of anything of value which has been the subject of any robbery, theft or taking under circumstances which indicate that the offender knew or had good reason to believe that the thing was the subject of one of these offenses. 
(Code 1958,  10-53; Ord. No. 7464, 11-24-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:69. 
Sec. 12-101. - Issuing worthless checks. 
(a)  Issuing worthless checks is the issuing, in exchange for anything of value, whether the exchange is contemporaneous or not, with intent to defraud, of any check, draft or order for the payment of money upon any bank or other depository, knowing at the time of the issuing that the offender has not sufficient credit with the bank, or other depository for the payment of such check, draft or order in full upon its presentation. This provision shall not apply to payments on installment contracts or open accounts. 
(b)  The offender's failure to pay a check, draft or order, issued for value, within ten (10) days after notice of its nonpayment upon presentation has been deposited by certified mail in the United States mail system addressed to the issuer thereof either at the address shown on the instrument or the last-known address for such person shown on the records of the bank upon which such instrument is drawn or within ten (10) days after delivery or personal tender of the written notice to said issuer by the payee or his agent, shall be presumptive evidence of his intent to defraud. 
(c)  In addition to any other fine or penalty imposed, the court may, at its discretion, order as part of the sentence, restitution in the amount of the check. 
(Code 1958,  10-61; Ord. No. 7049, 3-13-79; Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:71. 
Sec. 12-102. - Extortion. 
    Extortion is the communication of threats to another with the intention thereby to obtain anything of value or any acquittance, advantage or immunity of any description. The following kinds of threats shall be sufficient to constitute extortion: 
(1)  A threat to do any unlawful injury to the person or property of the individual threatened or of any member of his family or of any other person held dear to him; 
(2)  A threat to accuse the individual threatened or any member of his family or any other person held dear to him of any crime; 
(3)  A threat to expose or impute any deformity or disgrace to the individual threatened or to any member of his family or to any other person held dear to him; 
(4)  A threat to expose any secret affecting the individual threatened or any member of his family or any other person held dear to him; 
(5)  A threat to do any other harm. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:66. 
Sec. 12-103. - Forgery. 
    Forgery is the false making or altering, with intent to defraud, of any signature to, or any part of, a writing purporting to have legal efficacy. 
    Issuing or transferring, with intent to defraud, a forged writing, known by the offender to be a forged writing, shall also constitute forgery. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:72. 
Secs. 12-104-12-113. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES AFFECTING PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 12-114. - Possession of drug paraphernalia. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for anyone to possess drug paraphernalia. 
(b)  As used in this section, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the term "drug paraphernalia" shall mean and include, but not be limited to any and all definitions and/or meanings indicated in R.S. 40:1021 et seq. 
(c)  In determining whether an object is drug paraphernalia, a Monroe City Court shall consider, in addition to all other legally relevant factors, all matters indicated and/or included in R.S. 40:1021, et seq. 
(d)  To the fullest extent of the law, the city adopts by reference all provisions of the State Law of Louisiana which are or may be necessary to enforce the prosecution and/or execution of this law. 
(e)  Whoever commits the crime of possession of drug paraphernalia may be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 9407, 9-14-93; Ord. No. 11,876, 9-25-18) 
State Law reference- Drug paraphernalia, R.S. 40:1021 et seq. 
Sec. 12-115. - Possession of marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or chemical derivatives thereof. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly or intentionally possess marijuana, tetrahydrocannabinol or chemical derivatives thereof, unless such substance was obtained directly, or pursuant to a valid prescription or order, from a practitioner or as provided in R.S. 40:978, while acting in the course of his or her professional practice, or except as otherwise authorized by part X of Chapter 4 of title 40 of the Revised Statutes of the State of Louisiana. 
(b)  Definitions: 
(1)  The term "cannabis" includes all parts of plants and the Genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(2)  The term "marijuana" means all parts of plants and the Genus Cannabis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or resin, but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
(3)  The term "practitioner" means a physician, dentist, veterinarian, scientific investigator, pharmacist, hospital, pharmacy, or other person licensed, registered, or otherwise permitted and/or authorized to distribute, dispense, conduct research with respect to, or administer a controlled dangerous substance in the course of professional practice or research in this state. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of possession of marijuana may be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(Ord. No. 9405, 9-6-93) 
State Law reference- Controlled substances, R.S. 40:961 et seq. 
Sec. 12-116. - Cruelty to juveniles. 
    Cruelty to juveniles is the intentional or criminally negligent mistreatment or neglect, by anyone over the age of seventeen (17), of any child under the age of seventeen (17), whereby unjustifiable pain or suffering is caused to said child. Lack of knowledge of the child's age shall not be a defense. No person shall commit the crime of cruelty to juveniles. 
(Code 1958,  10-14; Ord. No. 7050, 3-13-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:93. 
Sec. 12-117. - Contributing to delinquency of juveniles. 
    It shall be unlawful to contribute to the delinquency of juveniles. Contributing to the delinquency of juveniles is the intentional enticing, aiding, or permitting, by anyone over the age of seventeen (17), of any child under the age of seventeen (17) to: 
(1)  Beg, sing, sell any article or play any musical instrument in any public place for the purpose of receiving alms; or 
(2)  Associate with any vicious or disreputable persons, or frequent places where the same may be found; or 
(3)  Visit any place where spirituous or intoxicating liquors are the principal commodity sold, given away or consumed; or 
(4)  Visit any place where any gambling device is found, or where gambling habitually occurs; or 
(5)  Habitually trespass where it is recognized he has no right to be; or 
(6)  Use any vile, obscene, or indecent language; or 
(7)  Perform any sexually immoral act; or 
(8)  Absent himself or remain away, without authority of his parents or tutor, from his home or place of abode; or 
(9)  Violate any law of the state within the city or ordinance of the city; or 
(10)  Visit any place where sexually indecent and obscene material, of any nature, is offered for sale, displayed or exhibited. 
    Lack of knowledge of the juvenile's age shall not be a defense. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92. 
Sec. 12-117.1. - Indecent behavior with juveniles. 
    Indecent behavior with juveniles is the commission by anyone over the age of seventeen (17) of any lewd or lascivious act upon the person or in the presence of any child under the age of seventeen (17), where there is an age difference of greater than two (2) years between the two (2) persons, with the intention of arousing or gratifying the sexual desires of either person. Lack of knowledge of the child's age shall not be a defense. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:81. 
Sec. 12-117.2. - Enticing of a juvenile. 
(a)  Enticing of a juvenile is the intentional enticing, aiding, permitting, secreting, persuading, and/or causing, by anyone over the age of seventeen (17), of any child under the age of seventeen (17), and no exception shall be made for a child who may be emancipated by marriage or otherwise, to: 
(1)  Beg, sing, sell any article or play any musical instrument in any public place for the purpose of receiving alms; 
(2)  Associate with any vicious or disreputable persons, or frequent or visit a place or places where the same may be found; 
(3)  Visit any place where beverages of either high or low alcoholic content are the principal commodity sold or given away; 
(4)  Visit any place where any gambling device or activity is the principal commodity sold or given away; 
(5)  Habitually trespass where it is recognized the juvenile and or offender has no right to be; 
(6)  Use any vile, obscene or indecent language; 
(7)  Perform any sexually immoral act; or visit any place where sexually indecent and obscene material, of any nature, is offered for sale, displayed, or exhibited; 
(8)  Absent himself or remain away, without the authority of his parents or tutor, from his home or place of abode; 
(9)  Violate any law of the state or ordinance of any parish, village, town or municipality; or 
(10)  Leave, go away from, stray, or absent himself from a school campus during regular school hours and/or during a regularly conducted or recognized school activity without the consent or permission of the juvenile's parent, guardian, tutor, or school supervisor. 
(b)  Lack of knowledge of the juvenile's age shall not constitute a defense. 
(c)  The manner of enticement is not essential to the completion of this crime. 
(d)  Whoever commits the crime of enticement of a juvenile shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(e)  Whoever commits the crime of enticement of a juvenile under paragraph (10) shall be fined not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 9406, 9-14-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:92. 
Sec. 12-118. - Obscenity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit an act of obscenity. 
(b)  The crime of obscenity is the intentional: 
(1)  Exposure of the genitals, pubic hair, anus, vulva, or female breast nipples in any location or public place open to the view of the public or people at large, including but in no way limited to streets, highways, neutral grounds, sidewalks, parks, beaches, river banks, eating places, drinking places, or supermarkets with the intent of arousing sexual desire, or which appeals to the prurient interest, or which is patently offensive. 
(2)  Solicitation or enticement of an unmarried person under the age of seventeen (17) to commit any act prohibited herein. 
(3)  Sale, allocation, consignment, distribution, dissemination, advertisement, exhibition, or display of obscene material or the preparation, manufacture, publication, or possession of obscene material for sale, allocation, consignment, distribution, advertisement, exhibition, or display. 
(4)  Participation or engagement in, or management, production, presentation, performance, promotion, exhibition, advertisement, sponsorship, or display of hard core sexual conduct when the trier of fact determines that the average person applying contemporary community standards would find that the conduct, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest; and the hard core sexual conduct, as specifically defined herein, is presented in a patently offensive way; and the conduct taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political or scientific value. 
(5)  Performance by any person or persons in the presence of another person or persons with the intent of arousing sexual desires, of any lewd, lascivious, sexually indecent dancing, lewd, lascivious or sexually indecent posing, lewd, lascivious or sexually indecent body movement. 
(c)  Hard core sexual conduct is the public portrayal, for its own sake, and for ensuing commercial gain of: 
(1)  Ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual, simulated or animated, whether between human beings, animals, or an animal and a human being; or 
(2)  Masturbation, excretory functions or lewd exhibition, actual, simulated or animated, of the genitals, pubic hair, anum, vulva, or female breast nipples; or 
(3)  Sadomasochistic abuse, meaning actual, simulated or animated flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in a costume which reveals the pubic hair, anus, vulva, genitals, or female breast nipples, or in the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained, on the part of one so clothed; or 
(4)  Actual, simulated, or animated touching, caressing or fondling of, or other similar physical contact with a pubic area, anum, female breast nipple, covered or exposed, whether alone or with the opposite sex, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification; or 
(5)  Actual, simulated, or animated stimulation of a human genital organ by any device whether or not the device is designed, manufactured, or marketed for such purpose. 
(d)  Obscene material is any tangible work or thing which the trier of fact determines: 
(1)  That the average person applying contemporary community standards would find, taken as a whole, appeals to prurient interest, and 
(2)  Depicts or describes in a patently offensive way, hard core sexual conduct specifically defined above, and 
(3)  The work or thing taken as a whole lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
(e)  "A public place" and as applied to an enclosure, room or building, must be considered as one wherein, by general invitation, members of the public attend for reasons of business, entertainment, instruction or the like, and are welcome so long as they conform to what is customarily there done. An eating house is a public place and a restaurant is an eating house under another name. It is within this definition that a church is a public place and so a barber shop. 
(Ord. No. 7115, 12-11-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, Obscenity, R.S. 14:106. 
Sec. 12-119. - Letting premises for obscenity. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of letting premises for obscenity. Letting premises for obscenity is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of any premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of obscenity or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
Sec. 12-120. - Prostitution. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of prostitution. Prostitution is: 
(a)  The practice by a person of indiscriminate sexual intercourse with others for compensation. 
(b)  The solicitation by one person of another with the intent to engage in indiscriminate sexual intercourse with the latter for compensation. 
(Code 1958,  10-50; Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:82. 
Sec. 12-121. - Soliciting for prostitutes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of soliciting for prostitutes. Soliciting for prostitutes is the soliciting, inviting, inducing, directing or transporting a person to any place with the intention of promoting prostitution. 
(Code 1958,  10-51) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:83. 
Sec. 12-122. - Letting premises for prostitutes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of letting premises for prostitutes. Letting premises for prostitution is the granting of the right of use or the leasing of premises, knowing that they are to be used for the practice of prostitution, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(Code 1958,  10-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:85. 
Sec. 12-123. - Gambling generally. 
(a)  Gambling is the intentional conducting, or directly assisting in the conducting, as a business, of any game, contest, lottery, or contrivance whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(b)  No person shall commit the crime of gambling. 
(Code 1958,  10-34-10-39) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90. 
Sec. 12-124. - Gambling in public. 
(a)  Gambling in public is the aiding or abetting or participation in any game, contest, lottery, or contrivance, in any location or place open to the view of the public or the people at large, such as streets, highways, vacant lots, neutral grounds, alleyway, sidewalk, park, beach, parking lot, or condemned structures whereby a person risks the loss of anything of value in order to realize a profit. 
(b)  This section shall not prohibit activities authorized under the Charitable Raffles, Bingo and Keno Licensing Laws, nor shall it apply to bona fide fairs and festivals conducted for charitable purposes. 
(c)  No person shall commit the crime of gambling in public. 
(Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:90.2; charitable raffles, bingo and keno licensing law, R.S. 4:701 et seq. 
Sec. 12-125. - Keeping a disorderly place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of keeping a disorderly place. Keeping a disorderly place is the intentional maintaining of a place to be used habitually for any illegal purpose or for any immoral sexual purpose or the maintaining of a place so as to disturb the quiet of the vicinity or the peace and good order of the city. 
(Code 1958,  10-25) 
State Law reference- Keeping a disorderly place, R.S. 14:104. 
Sec. 12-126. - Letting a disorderly place. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of letting a disorderly place. Letting a disorderly place is the granting of the right of use of any premises knowing that they are to be used as a disorderly place, or allowing the continued use of the premises with such knowledge. 
(Code 1958,  10-26) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:105. 
Sec. 12-127. - Unlawful sales to minors and purchases by minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make unlawful sales to minors. Unlawful sales to minors is the selling, or otherwise delivering for value by anyone over the age of seventeen (17) of any intoxicating or spirituous liquors, or any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, to any person under the age of eighteen (18). Lack of the knowledge of the minor's age shall not be a defense. 
(b)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to purchase any alcoholic beverage either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any adult to purchase on behalf of a person under the age of eighteen (18) any alcoholic beverages either of high or low alcoholic content. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed as relieving any licensed retail dealer in beverages of either high or low alcoholic content of any responsibilities imposed upon said dealer under the provisions of Title 26 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 as amended. 
(Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91-14:91.4. 
Sec. 12-128. - Peeping tom. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform such acts as will make him a "peeping tom" on or about the premises of another, or go upon the premises of another for the purpose of becoming a "peeping tom." 
(b)  "Peeping tom" as used in the section means one who peeps through windows or doors, or other like places, situated on or about the premises of another for the purpose of spying upon or invading the privacy of persons spied upon without the consent of the persons spied upon. It is not a necessary element of this offense that the "Peeping tom" be upon the premises of the person being spied upon. 
(Code 1958,  10-58) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:284. 
Sec. 12-129. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit the crime of cruelty to animals. Cruelty to animals is the intentional or criminally negligent mistreatment of any animal by any act or omission, whereby unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused or permitted upon said animal. 
(Code 1958,  5-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:102. 
Sec. 12-129.1. - Prohibition on the sale or other transfer of animals in certain restricted areas. 
(a)  Prohibition. No person shall sell, exchange, barter, trade, lease, rent, give away, transfer or display any live animal on any roadside public right-of-way, parkway, median, park, playground, or other recreational area, flea market, commercial or retail parking lot, or any property adjacent to such locations that is generally accessible to the public, regardless of whether or not such access is authorized by the owner of that property. 
(b)  Exception. This section shall not apply to humane societies, animal welfare groups, animal control agencies or similar non-profit organizations if qualified under IRC 501 (c)(3) and who are sponsoring animal adoption events and which have obtained a permit from the city for such event. Such permits shall be obtained through the legal department for the City of Monroe at no cost to the requestor. 
(c)  Penalties. Whoever commits a violation of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of up to five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six (6) months or both. 
(Ord. No. 11,177, 4-26-11) 
Sec. 12-130. - Desecration of graves. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to desecrate a grave. Desecration of graves is the: 
(1)  Unauthorized opening of any place of interment, or building wherein the dead body of a human being is located, with the intent to remove or to mutilate the body or any part thereof, or any article interred or intended to be interred with the said body. 
(2)  Intentional or criminally negligent damaging in any manner, of any grave, tomb or mausoleum erected for the dead. 
Cross reference- Cemeteries, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:101. 
Sec. 12-131. - Crime against nature. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit a crime against nature. The crime against nature is the unnatural carnal copulation by a human being with another, of the same or opposite sex or with an animal. Emission is not necessary, and when committed by a human being with another, the use of the genital organ of one of the offenders of whatever sex is sufficient to constitute the crime. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:89. 
Sec. 12-132. - Unlawful sale of tobacco or purchase of tobacco by persons under the age of eighteen; unlawful possession of tobacco by persons under the age of eighteen; signs required on vending machines; penalty. 
(a)  [ Sale or distribution. ] It is unlawful for any manufacturer, distributor, retailer or other person to knowingly sell or distribute any tobacco product to a person under the age of eighteen (18). However, it shall not be unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to accept receipt of a tobacco product from an employer when required in the performance of such person's duties. At the point of purchase a sign in type not less than 30-point type shall be displayed that reads "LOUISIANA LAW PROHIBITS THE SALE OF TOBACCO TO PERSONS UNDER AGE 18." 
(b)  [ Vending machine signs. ] It is unlawful for a vending machine operator to place in use a vending machine to vend any tobacco product automatically, unless the machine displays a sign or sticker in not less than 22-point type on the front of the machine stating, "LOUISIANA LAW PROHIBITS THE SALE OF TOBACCO TO PERSONS UNDER AGE 18." 
(c)  [ Unlawful purchase. ] It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to buy any tobacco product. 
(d)  [ Possession. ] 
(1)  It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess any tobacco product. 
(2)  However, it shall not be unlawful for a person under the age of eighteen (18) to possess any tobacco product under any of the following circumstances: 
a.  When a person under eighteen (18) years of age is accompanied by a parent, spouse, or legal guardian twenty-one (21) years of age or older. 
b.  In private residences. 
c.  When the tobacco product is handled during the course and scope of his employment and required in the performance of such person's duties. 
(e)  [ Definitions. ] For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Tobacco product means any cigar, cigarette, smokeless tobacco, or smoking tobacco. 
(2)  Cigar means any roll of tobacco for smoking, irrespective of size or shape, and irrespective of the tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredients, where such roll has a wrapper made chiefly of tobacco. 
(3)  Cigarette means any roll for smoking made wholly or in part of tobacco, irrespective of the tobacco being flavored, adulterated, or mixed with any other ingredient, where such roll has a wrapper or cover made of paper, or any other material, except where such wrapper is wholly or in greater part made of tobacco. 
(4)  Smokeless tobacco means any finely cut, ground, powdered, or leaf tobacco that is intended to be placed in the oral or nasal cavity. 
(5)  Smoking tobacco means granulated, plug cut, crimp cut, ready rubbed, and any other kind and form of tobacco prepared in such manner as to be suitable for smoking in a pipe or cigarette. 
(f)  [ Fines and penalties. ] For purposes of this section, the following penalties apply: 
(1)  A person who violates the provisions of this section by selling or buying tobacco products shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first violation. The penalties for subsequent violations shall be a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation, a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the third violation, and a fine of not more than four hundred dollars ($400.00) for any violation thereafter. 
(2)  A person who violates the provisions of this section by possessing tobacco products shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) for each violation. 
(g)  [ Penalties for signage violations. ] A violation of the signage requirement of subsection (a) of this section shall be deemed to be a violation by the owner of the establishment where the violation occurred. A violation of the signage requirement of subsection (b) of this section shall be deemed to be a violation by the owner of the vending machine. For the first such violation, the owner shall be fined not more than fifty dollars ($50.00). The penalties for subsequent violations shall be a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second violation, a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the third violation, and a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for any violation thereafter. 
(h)  [ Notification to office of alcoholic beverage control. ] The law enforcement agency issuing the citation or making the arrest or the clerk of the court in which a prosecution is initiated, as the case may be, shall notify the commissioner of the office of alcoholic beverage control of the action and the final disposition of the matter. 
(Ord. No. 9720, 8-26-97) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:91.6-14:91.8 
Secs. 12-133-12-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 12-151. - Obstruction of street or drive. 
    It shall be unlawful to obstruct a street or highway of commerce, or a public or private drive of another without the authorization of the owner, intentionally or in a criminally negligent manner, or by placing of anything or performance of any act on any railway, railroad, navigable waterway, road, street, highway, thoroughfare or runway of an airport, which will render movement thereon difficult, lawful parking excepted. 
(Code 1958,  23-5) 
Cross reference- Streets generally, Ch. 31. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:97. 
Sec. 12-152. - Obstruction of public passages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct the free, convenient and normal use of any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road or other passageway, or the entrance, corridor or passage of any public building, structure, watercraft or ferry, by impeding, hindering, stifling, retarding or restraining traffic or passage thereon or therein. 
(b)  This section shall not be applicable to the erection or construction of any barricades or other forms of obstructions as a safety measure in connection with construction, excavation, maintenance, repair, replacement or other work, in or adjacent to any public sidewalk, street, highway, bridge, alley, road or other passageway, nor to the placing of barricades or other forms of obstruction by governmental authorities, or any officer or agent thereof, in the proper performance of duties. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100.1. 
Sec. 12-153. - Disturbing the peace. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to commit an act of disturbing the peace. 
(b)  Disturbing the peace is the doing of any of the following in such a manner as would foreseeably disturb or alarm the public, or create any dangerous or violent conditions: 
(1)  Engaging in a fistic encounter; or 
(2)  Using profane or threatening language or making obscene remarks, gestures, or indecent proposals to or toward another which in the manner uttered has a tendency to incite an ordinary addressee to violent retaliatory action and a breach of the peace; or 
(3)  Appearing in an intoxicated condition; or 
(4)  Engaging in any act in a violent and tumultuous manner by any three (3) or more persons; or 
(5)  Holding of an unlawful assembly; or 
(6)  Interruption of any lawful assembly of people. 
Disturbing the peace shall also include the commission of any act other than that permitted as an exercise of free speech or free assembly guaranteed by the constitutions of the United States and the State of Louisiana, in such a manner as to disturb or alarm the public, or make such a disturbance imminent, or to provoke another or other to retaliatory action or violence. 
(Code 1958,  10-27; Ord. No. 7087, 9-11-79) 
Cross reference- Noise, Ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Disturbing the peace, R.S. 14:103. 
Sec. 12-154. - Obstruction of firemen. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally to obstruct any fireman while in the performance of his official duties. Obstructing a fireman is hereby defined as intentionally hindering, delaying, hampering, interfering with, or impeding the progress of, any regularly employed member of a fire department of any municipality, parish or fire protection district of the state, or any volunteer fireman of the State of Louisiana while in the performance of his official duties; or cursing, reviling or using any opprobrious language directed at any such fireman while in the performance of his official duties. This provision does not attempt to prohibit any obstruction made felonious under the provisions of R.S. 14:327. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:327. 
Sec. 12-155. - Telephone communications, improper language, harassment. 
(a)  No person shall: 
(1)  Engage in or institute a telephone call, telephone conversation or telephone conference with another person, anonymously or otherwise, and therein use obscene, profane, vulgar, lewd, lascivious or indecent language, or make any suggestion or proposal of an obscene nature or threaten any illegal or immoral act with the intent to coerce, intimidate or harass another person; or 
(2)  Make repeated telephone communications anonymously or otherwise in a manner reasonably expected to annoy, abuse, torment, harass, embarrass or offend another, whether or not conversation ensues; or 
(3)  Make a telephone call and intentionally fail to hang up or disengage the connection; or 
(4)  Knowingly permit any telephone under his control to be used for any purpose prohibited by this section. 
(b)  Any offense committed by use of a telephone set forth in this section shall be deemed to have been committed at either the place where the telephone call or calls were originated or received. 
(Code 1958,  10-57.1; Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:285. 
Sec. 12-156. - Riot. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in a riot or incite any other person to riot. 
(b)  A riot is a public disturbance involving an assemblage of three (3) or more persons acting together or in concert which by tumultuous and violent conduct, or the imminent threat of tumultuous and violent conduct, results in injury or damage to person or property or creates a clear and present danger of injury or damage to persons or property. 
(c)  Inciting to riot is the endeavor by any person to incite or procure any other person to create or participate in a riot. "To incite" means to urge on, stimulate or prompt to action, instigate, stir up or set in motion. 
(d)  Any law enforcement, peace officer or public official responsible for keeping the peace may issue a command to disperse under the authority of R.S. 14:329.1-14:329.8 if he reasonably believes that riot is occurring or about to occur. The command to disperse shall be given in a manner reasonably calculated to be communicated to the assemblage. 
(Code 1958,10-55.1, 10-55.2; Ord. No. 7206, 11-11-80) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:329.1 et seq. 
Sec. 12-157. - Stalking. 
(a)  Stalking is the willful, or malicious following or repeated following or harassing of another person, accompanied by the making of a credible threat; either before or after the willful, or malicious following or repeated following or harassing of another person, with the intent to place that person in reasonable fear of death, seriously bodily injury, or annoying mental distress. 
(b)  Whoever commits the crime of stalking may be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(c)  Whoever commits the crime of stalking-second offense shall be punished in accordance with subsection (d) below. 
(d)  Any person who commits the offense of stalking, when there is a temporary restraining order or an injunction in effect against the offender prohibiting the offender from committing acts which otherwise constitute the crime of stalking against the victim in the criminal proceeding, shall be punished by imprisonment of not less than thirty (30) days and not more than six (6) months and fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or both. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Harassing" means the engaging in a knowing and willful course of conduct directed at a specific person which seriously alarms, annoys, or distresses the person, and which serves no peaceful purpose. The conduct must be such as would cause a reasonable person to suffer substantial emotional distress and must actually cause emotional distress to the person. 
(2)  "Creditable threat" means a threat made with the apparent ability to carry out the threat so as to cause the person who is the target of the threat to reasonably fear for his or her safety. The threat must be against the life or mental or physical or proprietary well being of the person alleged to be threatened. 
(f)  For the purpose of further defining "harassing", the following words shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Course of conduct" means a series of acts over a period of time, however short, tending to demonstrate an intent to inflict emotional distress, mental, emotional or physical annoyance, or physical harm upon the person. Constitutionally protected activity is not included within the meaning of pattern of conduct. 
(Ord. No. 9404, 9-14-93) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:14.2. 
Secs. 12-158-12-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - OFFENSES AGAINST GOVERNMENT 

Sec. 12-181. - Resisting an officer. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist an officer. Resisting an officer is the intentional opposition or resistance to, or obstruction of, an individual acting in his official capacity and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest, lawful detention or seizure of property, or to serve any lawful process or court order, when the offender knows or has reason to know that the person arresting, detaining, seizing property or serving process is acting in his official capacity. 
(b)  The phrase "obstruction of" as used herein shall, in addition to its common meaning, signification and connotation, mean: 
(1)  Flight by one sought to be arrested before the arresting officer can restrain him and after notice is given that he is under arrest. 
(2)  Any violence toward or any resistance or opposition to the arresting officer after the arrested party is actually placed under arrest and before he is incarcerated in jail. 
(3)  Refusal by the arrested party to give his name and make his identity known to the arresting or detaining officer. 
(4)  Congregating with others on a public street and refusal to move on when ordered by the officer. 
(Code 1958,  10-55; Ord. No. 11,927, 4-9-19) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:108. 
Sec. 12-181.1. - Interfering with an officer. 
    The crime of interfering with an officer shall be the intentional delaying or obstructing of an individual acting in his official capacity and authorized by law to make a lawful arrest, investigation, seizure of property, or service of process. 
    The phrase "obstruction of" as used herein shall mean, but is not limited to, the disruption and/or distraction of an officer who is conducting a lawful investigation, seizure of property, service of process or making lawful arrest. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Resisting an officer, R.S. 14:108. 
Sec. 12-182. - Escape. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an escape. The crime of escape is the intentional departure of a person from lawful custody of an officer or from any place where he is lawfully detained by any officer. 
(Code 1962,  10-28) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:110. 
Sec. 12-182.1. - Aggravated escape. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an aggravated escape. 
    Aggravated escape is the intentional departure of a person, under circumstances wherein human life is endangered, from lawful custody of any officer, or from any place where he is lawfully detained by any officer. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:110(C). 
Sec. 12-182.2. - Assisting an escape. 
    It shall be unlawful to assist in any escape. 
    Assisting in an escape is the: 
(1)  Permitting, by any public officer, of the escape of any prisoner in his custody, by virtue of his active assistance or intentional failure to act; or 
(2)  The active assistance given by any person to one in legal custody with intent to aid him in escaping therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:111. 
Sec. 12-183. - False swearing. 
(a)  False swearing is the intentional making of a written or oral statement, known to be false, under sanction of an oath or an equivalent affirmation, where such oath or affirmation is required by law; provided that this section shall not apply where such false statement is made in, or for use in, a judicial proceeding or any proceeding before a board or official, wherein such board or official is authorized to take testimony. 
(b)  It shall constitute false swearing whenever any person, having made a statement under sanction of an oath, or an equivalent affirmation, required by law, shall thereafter swear or affirm in a manner materially contradictory of or inconsistent with his former sworn or affirmed statement. It shall not be necessary for the prosecution, in such case, to show which of the contradictory or inconsistent statements was false; but it shall be an affirmative defense that at the time he made them, the accused honestly believed both statements to be true. 
(c)  No person shall commit the crime of false swearing. 
(Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:125, 14:126. 
Sec. 12-183.1. - Perjury. 
    Perjury is the intentional making of a false written or oral statement in, or for use in, a judicial proceeding, or any proceeding before a board or official, wherein such board or official is authorized to take testimony. In order to constitute perjury, the false statement must be made under sanction of an oath or an equivalent affirmation and must relate to matter material to the issue or question in controversy. 
    It is a necessary element of the offense that the accused knew the statement to be false; but an unqualified statement of that which one does not know or definitely believe to be true is equivalent to a statement of that which he knows to be false. 
    It shall constitute perjury whenever any person, having taken an oath required by law, or made an equivalent affirmation, swears or affirms any fact or state of facts material to the issue or question in controversy; and thereafter in the same or other proceedings where such matter is material to the issue or question in controversy, swears or affirms in a manner materially contradictory of or inconsistent with his former sworn or affirmed statement. It shall not be necessary for the prosecution, in such case, to show which of the contradictory or inconsistent statements was false; but it shall be an affirmative defense that at the time he made them, the accused honestly believed both statements to be true. 
(Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:123. 
Sec. 12-184. - Obstruction of fire prevention. 
    It shall further be unlawful to interfere with fire prevention by the intentional performance of any of the following acts: 
(1)  Defacing or destroying fire warning notices or posters. 
(2)  Injuring, destroying, removing or in any manner interfering with the use of any tools, equipment, towers, buildings or telephone lines used in the detection, reporting or suppression of fire. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:206. 
Sec. 12-185. - Interference with educational process. 
(a)  No person shall, on the campus or lands of any university, college, junior college, trade or vocational-technical school, special school, elementary or secondary school in this state, hereinafter referred to as "institutions of learning" or at or in any building or other facility thereof owned, operated or controlled by the state or any of its agencies or political subdivisions, willfully deny to students, school officials, faculty, employees, invitees and guests thereof: 
(1)  Lawful freedom of movement on the campus or lands; or 
(2)  Lawful use of the property, facilities or parts of any institution of learning; or 
(3)  The right of lawful ingress and egress to and from the institution's physical facilities. 
(b)  No person shall, on the campus of any institution of learning or at or in any building or other facility thereof owned, operated or controlled by the state or any agency or political subdivision thereof, willfully impede the staff or faculty of such institution in the lawful performance of their duties, or willfully impede a student of such institution in lawful pursuit of his educational activities, through use of restraint, abduction, coercion or intimidation, or when force and violence are present or threatened. 
(c)  No person shall willfully refuse or fail to leave the property of, or any building or other facility owned, operated or controlled by the state or any agency or political subdivision thereof, upon being requested to do so by the chief administrative officer thereof, or by his designee charged with maintaining order on the campus or grounds and in its facilities, or a dean of such institution of learning, if such person is committing, threatens to commit, or incites others to commit, any act which would or is likely to disrupt, impair, interfere with or obstruct the lawful missions, processes, procedures or functions of such institutions of learning. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:329.5. 
Sec. 12-186. - Demonstrations in or near buildings housing a court or occupied as residence by judge, juror, witness or court officer. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, with the intent of interfering with, obstructing or impeding the administration of justice, or with the intent of influencing any judge, juror, witness or court officer, in the discharge of his duty, to picket or parade in or near a building housing a court of the state, or in or near a building or residence occupied or used by such judge, juror, witness or court officer or with such intent use any sound-truck or similar device or resort to any other demonstration in or near any such building or residence. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:401. 
Secs. 12-187-12-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 12-201. - Illegal carrying. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to illegally carry a weapon. Illegal carrying of weapons is: 
(1)  The intentional concealment of any firearm, or other instrumentality customarily used or intended for probable use as a dangerous weapon, on one's person; or 
(2)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any firearm or other instrumentality customarily used as a dangerous weapon, at any time by an enemy alien; or 
(3)  The ownership, possession, custody or use of any tools, or dynamite or nitroglycerine, or explosives, or other instrumentality customarily used by thieves or burglars at any time by any person with the intent to commit a crime; or 
(4)  The manufacture, ownership, possession, custody or use of any switchblade knife, spring knife or other knife or similar instrument having a blade which may be automatically unfolded or extended from a handle by the manipulation of a button, switch latch or similar contrivance. 
    The provisions of this section except paragraph (4) shall not apply to sheriffs and their deputies, state and city police, constables and town marshals, or persons vested with police power when in the actual discharge of official duties. 
(Code 1958,  10-20) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:95. 
Sec. 12-202. - Discharging firearms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge, either in the daytime or nighttime, any firearm within the corporate limits of the city; this ordinance shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Law enforcement officers in the discharge of their duties; 
(2)  Persons using the firing range at the Monroe Regional Airport when same is open for use by the public and when same is being supervised by a Louisiana POST certified law enforcement officer; 
(3)  A duly authorized school function which has been approved by the appropriate school board, chief of police, and the city council; 
(4)  A licensed and approved indoor shooting range; 
(5)  A licensed gunsmith with the necessity to discharge weapons in an approved gun box for the purpose of repairing the weapon; 
(6)  Circumstances otherwise permitted by state or federal law. 
(Code 1958,  10-22; Ord. No. 7010, 3-14-78; Ord. No. 10,165, 11-13-01) 
Sec. 12-203. - Illegal display. 
    It shall be unlawful to draw, display, present or exhibit with the intention of committing any crime or of intimidating any person, any pistol, bowie knife, gun or any other dangerous weapon, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1958,  10-23) 
Sec. 12-204. - Air guns. 
    The use, firing, shooting and explosion of "air guns" or "air rifles" and "blow guns" within the corporate limits of the city, is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, shoot or explode "air guns" or "air rifles" or "blow guns" within the city limits. 
(Code 1958,  10-2) 
Secs. 12-205-12-219. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - OTHER OFFENSES 

Secs. 12-220, 12-221. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 12-220, prohibiting operation of a vehicle while under the influence of drugs, has been deleted as superseded by similar provisions enacted by Ord. No. 7449, adopted Oct. 26, 1982, as  33-10.1; and  12-221, prohibiting driving while intoxicated, derived from Code 1958,  10-40.1, 24-6, 24-6.1; Ord. No. 7043,  1, adopted Feb. 27, 1979; and Ord. No. 7105, adopted Nov. 27, 1979, has been deleted as superseded by similar provisions enacted by Ord. No. 7449 as  33-10. 
Sec. 12-222. - Reckless operation of a vehicle. 
    Reckless operation of a vehicle is the operation of any motor vehicle, aircraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance in a criminally negligent or reckless manner. 
    No person shall commit the crime of reckless operation of a vehicle. 
(Code 1958,  24-15) 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 33. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:99. 
Sec. 12-223. - Hit and run driving. 
    It shall be unlawful to commit an act of hit and run driving. 
    The crime of hit and run driving is the intentional failure of the driver of a vehicle involved in or causing any accident, to stop such vehicle at the scene of the accident, to give his identity and to render reasonable aid. 
    To give his identity, for the purpose of this section, shall mean that the driver of any vehicle involved in any accident shall give his name, address and the license number of his vehicle, or shall report the accident to the police. 
(Code 1958,  10-40) 
Cross reference- Traffic, Ch. 33. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:100. 
Sec. 12-224. - False personation. 
    False personation is the performance of any of the following acts with the intent to injure or defraud, or to obtain or secure any special privilege or advantage: 
(1)  Impersonating any public officer, or private individual having special authority by law to perform an act affecting the rights or interests of another, or the assuming, without authority, of any uniform or badge by which such officer or person is lawfully distinguished; or 
(2)  Performing any act purporting to be official in such assumed character. 
    No person shall commit the crime of false personation. 
(Ord. No. 7121, 12-26-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:112. 
Sec. 12-224.1. - Prohibition of identical or substantially similar uniforms. 
(a)  No private security agency, ambulance service or other person, firm, association or corporation doing business within the City of Monroe shall utilize any uniform which is identical or substantially similar to that utilized by the Monroe Police Department. 
(b)  Any private security agency, ambulance service or other person, firm, agency, association or corporation who utilizes or whose agents, employees or representatives utilize a uniform which is identical or substantially similar to the uniform utilized by the Monroe Police Department shall, upon receiving notice of the violation of this section, immediately refrain from the transaction of any further business activities within the City of Monroe until the violation of this section shall cease. 
(c)  "Substantially similar" means of a similar color and having such an overall appearance that a member of the general public could not easily and readily distinguish, even in an emergency situation, that such uniform was not utilized by the Monroe Police Department. 
(d)  The chief of police of the City of Monroe shall have the authority to waive compliance with the provisions of this section as to a particular uniform or for a particular period of time or for a particular use as he shall deem appropriate. Any such waiver shall be in writing, dated and signed by the chief of police or his authorized representative. 
(e)  Continued violation of the provisions of this section, after reasonable notice, shall be a violation of this code by the employee utilizing such prohibited uniform and by the employer continuing to authorize the use of said prohibited uniform, and shall subject the employee and the employer to the penalties set forth in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(f)  Each day that said uniform is utilized, after notice, shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 9696, 5-27-97) 
Sec. 12-225. - Abandoned refrigerators. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling, in a place accessible to children, any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any other container of any kind which has an airtight door, snap lock or other device thereon, without first removing the snap lock or doors from such icebox, refrigerator or container or any thing similar thereto. 
(Code 1958,  10-1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:324. 
Sec. 12-226. - Playing ball in streets. 
    It shall be unlawful to play ball or play with balls on streets within the business district. 
(Code 1958,  10-5) 
Sec. 12-227. - Restrictions on circuses, carnivals, etc., located near residences, schools, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate any circus, show, carnival, street fair, or any other entertainment or exhibition using tents at any locality within the city which is within nine hundred (900) feet (measured by air line) of any church, or school building, or building used by occupants as a residence, on more than one consecutive day or date. 
(Code 1958,  10-8) 
Sec. 12-228. - Posting bills, etc. 
    The fastening by posting, or any other device, of any poster, advertisement or notice of whatsoever character, on any property of another, including the property of this city, without the consent of the owner or agent of such property, within the city limits, is unlawful and is hereby declared to be a nuisance. 
(Code 1958,  10-49) 
Sec. 12-229. - Peddlers, solicitors: uninvited in or upon premises as a nuisance, exceptions. 
(a)  The practice of going in and upon private residences and/or public property in the city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise not having been requested or invited to do so by the owners, occupant or occupants of such private residences and or public property for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise and or disposing of and peddling or hawking the same, or soliciting money for charitable or benevolent purposes is declared to be a nuisance and punishable as such nuisance as a misdemeanor. 
(b)  "Public property" as used in this section means any city-owned property, including public places as defined in section 12-1 of this Code, and any private property which, because of its use, is open to the public in general. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale or soliciting of orders for the sale of milk dairy products, vegetables, poultry, eggs and other farm and garden produce so far as the sale of the commodities named herein is now authorized by law. 
(Code 1958,  10-47; Ord. No. 7450, 10-26-82) 
Cross reference- Peddlers, transient merchants, Ch. 25.5. 
Sec. 12-230. - Curfew for persons seventeen years of age and under. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person sixteen (16) years of age and under to be or remain upon any street, alley, boulevard, park, other public place or vacant premises in the City of Monroe between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday, unless such person is accompanied by a parent legal guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor. 
(b)  It shall be the responsibility, obligation and duty of the parent, legal guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of any such person sixteen (16) years of age or under to ascertain and maintain that such person sixteen (16) years of age and under shall not go, be or remain upon any street, alley, boulevard, park, other public place or vacant premises in the City of Monroe between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of midnight and 5:00 a.m. Friday and Saturday, unless such minor person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or other person having legal custody of such minor. It shall be unlawful for the parent, legal guardian, or other person having the legal care and custody of any person sixteen (16) years of age or under to fail, refuse or neglect to ascertain and maintain that such person sixteen (16) years of age and under shall not violate the provisions of subsection (a) hereinabove. 
(c)  It shall not be a violation of this section if the minor is on, about or upon any street, alley, boulevard, park, other public place or vacant premises in the City of Monroe during the time restricted in the sections hereinabove provided the minor is engaged in the following: 
(1)  Participating in any civic, religious or school-sponsored activity; 
(2)  Engaged in lawful employment; 
(3)  In direct and immediate route to or from any of the above. 
(d)  Every member of the police department is hereby authorized to detain and to take into custody any such minor, sixteen (16) years of age and under who violates the provisions of subsection (a) herein. Said officer shall immediately cause the parent, legal guardian or other person having the legal care and custody of such minor to be notified of the detention. A citation shall be issued to the minor. The minor shall be referred to the state juvenile authorities for appropriate action on the citation. 
(e)  The first violation of the provisions of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section 12-230 may be punished under the general penalty provisions contained in section 1-11 of the City of Monroe Code, including community service, probation and suspension of sentence by the presiding judge. 
    Any second or subsequent violation shall, in addition to any sentence imposed by the presiding judge, be punished by a mandatory sentence of at least thirty-two (32) hours of approved community service. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to aid, abet, urge, entice, assist, encourage or force any person subject to the provisions of section 12-230 to violate or to circumvent the provisions of this section 12-230. 
    Any juvenile who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be given a citation and referred to the state juvenile authorities for appropriate action. 
    Any person sixteen (16) years of age who violates the provisions of this subsection shall be given a citation and may be punished under the general penalty provisions contained in section 1-11 of the City of Monroe Code, including community service, probation and suspension of sentence by the presiding judge. 
(Ord. No. 9189, 12-20-90; Ord. No. 9196, 1-22-91; Ord. No. 9320, 8-11-92) 
Sec. 12-230.1. - Children of compulsory school age to be in attendance at school; parental duty imposed. 
(a)  No child between the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16), inclusive, other than a child that has been suspended or expelled from school shall be at any place within the city limits except in attendance at school, between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m., during any school day as defined by the Monroe City School Board, the B.E.S.E. board, or any other qualified educational institution, depending on which entity governs the school the child attends, unless the child has written proof from school authorities excusing him or her from attending school at that particular time, or unless the child is accompanied by a parent or legal guardian or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the child or is otherwise lawfully excused from being present in school such as in the case of persons who are being instructed at home as home schoolers. 
(b)  Each parent or legal guardian of a child between the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16), inclusive, shall have a duty to prohibit the child from behaving contrary to subsection (a) of this section. No person shall negligently fail to fulfill the duty imposed by this provision. 
(c)  Owners, operators or employees of any establishment, "establishment" being defined as any privately owned place of business where business is carried on for a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited, shall not knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment where the minor is behaving contrary to subsection (a) of this section. A violation of this subsection shall subject the violator to a written warning of the first violation and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional violation. 
(d)  It shall be an affirmative defense to subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section that the child, at the time her or she was found at a place other than in school, was not required by law to be in attendance at school. 
(e)  It shall be affirmative defense to subsection (b) of this section that the parent or legal guardian initiated the jurisdiction of the juvenile court against the child prior to the time that the child was found violating subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Any police officer or school attendance officer may transport any child found violating this section to the child's residence and may release the child into the care of a parent or court-appointed tutor or legal guardian, to the school the child usually attends, or to any location designated by the authorities of the school which the child usually attends as a receiving center of such children, the choice of destination to be made at the discretion of the police officer or school attendance officer based on proximity of the destination and other relevant factors, and subject to the need to respond to emergency or priority calls. 
(g)  A child violating this section shall be required to perform eight (8) hours of community service for the first violation and sixteen (16) hours of community service for the second violation. Additionally, his/her parent, tutor or other court-appointed legal guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the child may be subject of a complaint under Title VII of the Children's Code (Families in Need of Services) and subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. 
(h)  If a child is found in violation of this section, on the third or subsequent occasion within a three hundred sixty-five-day period, the parent, tutor or other court-appointed legal guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the child, after having previously been notified of these violations, shall be guilty of negligently failing to supervise a child of compulsory school age, a misdemeanor, subject to the jurisdiction of the court having jurisdiction over this offense and be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or sentenced to not more than thirty (30) days in jail or both. 
(Ord. No. 9991, 9-14-99) 
Sec. 12-230.2. - Children suspended or expelled from school. 
(a)  If a child is suspended or expelled from school in the City of Monroe, then each parent, tutor, person with the guardianship of the child as defined by the Louisiana Children's Code Article 116, or other responsible adult of the child shall have the following duties for the duration of the suspension or expulsion: 
(1)  The duty to personally supervise the child, or to arrange for a responsible adult to supervise the child, at the times that the child would otherwise have been required to be in attendance in school and he or she has not been suspended or expelled; and 
(2)  The duty to prohibit the child from being at any public place at the times that the child would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled except in the following circumstances: 
a.  When the child is accompanied by the parent or legal guardian, or a responsible adult selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the child; or 
b.  When a child is employed pursuant to an age and schooling certificate issued by the school authorities during the times that the child is on the job or traveling directly to or from a job site; or 
c.  When the child is on an emergency errand. "Emergency errand" is defined for the purposes of this section as an errand which requires seeking medical attention, attending a funeral or any other activity which involves the health care or safety of the child or his or her immediate family; or 
d.  When the child has been directed by the parent or legal guardian to engage in a specific activity or to carry out expressed instructions during the times that the child is actually engaged in fulfilling those directions or instructions. 
No person shall fail to fulfill the duties imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(b)  No child that has been suspended or expelled from school shall fail to comply with supervision provided or arranged by a parent or legal guardian pursuant to subsection (a) of this section. 
(c)  No child that has been suspended or expelled from school shall be in any public place at the times that he or she would have been required to be in attendance at school had he or she not been suspended or expelled, except in the circumstances described in subsection (a) above. 
(d)  As used in this section, "public place" includes any street, recreational center, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, parking lot or any other place engaging in the sale of merchandise, public accommodation or amusement. 
(e)  Owners, operators or employees of any establishment, shall not knowingly allow a minor to remain upon the premises of the establishment where the minor is behaving contrary to subsection (c) of this section. A violation of this subsection shall subject the violator to a written warning on the first violation and a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each additional violation. 
(f)  As used in this section, "establishment" is defined as any privately owned place where business is carried on for a profit or any place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited. 
(g)  A police officer or school designated attendance officer may transport any child found violating this section to the child's residence and may release the child into the care of the parent, tutor or court-appointed legal guardian, or to any location designated by the school authorities as a receiving center for such children. The choice of destination can be made at the discretion of the police officer or school attendance officer based on proximity of the destination and other relevant factors and subject to the need to respond to emergency or priority calls. 
(h)  A child violating this section shall be required to perform sixteen (16) hours of community service for the first violation and thirty-two (32) hours of community services for the second violation. Additionally, his/her parent, tutor or other court-appointed legal guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the child may be the subject of a complaint under Title VII of the Children's Code (Families in Need of Services) and subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court. 
(i)  If a child is found to be in violation of this section on the third or subsequent occasion within a three hundred sixty-five-day period, the parent, tutor, responsible adult, court appointed adult guardian, or other responsible adult person having the care and custody of the child, after having previously been notified of these violations, shall be guilty of failing to supervise a suspended or expelled child, a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense or a section of not more than thirty (30) days in jail or both. 
(j)  For the purposes of this section, the word "child" is defined as any person between the ages of seven (7) and sixteen (16) years of age, inclusive. 
(Ord. No. 9991, 9-14-99) 
Sec. 12-231. - Prohibition of the possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages in public places. 
(a)  Definitions: For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the respective meaning ascribed to them: 
(1)  Alcoholic beverages. Beverages of high and low alcoholic content as defined in section 4-1 of the city Code. 
(2)  Sidewalks, grounds, parks, streets, highways, alleys and parking lots. Any public sidewalk, public grounds, public park, public street, public highway, and/or public alley within the city. 
(3)  Parking lots. Any public parking lot within the city; any public or school parking lot within the city, and any privately owned parking lot within the city whereon public parking is allowed without charge. 
(4)  Open container. Any container or receptacle containing any alcoholic beverage, wherein the seal or stamp has been broken, or any can, bottle or container that contains any alcoholic beverage that has been opened subsequent to the filling of such can, bottle or container by the manufacturer, brewery or distillery. Alcoholic beverages contained in jars, drinking glasses, and cups, including paper cups, plastic cups and styrofoam cups, regardless of whether such container has a top affixed to it shall be deemed an "open container," unless the method of closing and sealing any drinking glass or cup which is filled with an alcoholic beverage at the point of sale has been submitted prior to its use to the chief of police or his designee for approval. 
(b)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink, consume or possess any alcoholic beverage in any "open container" on any public sidewalks, grounds, parks, streets, highways, alleys or parking lots, as defined herein, in the city. 
(c)  Penalty. Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be punished by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both. 
(d)  Exceptions. Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, this section shall not apply on dates, times, and places specifically authorized by resolution of the city council after due consideration at a regular or special meeting called for the consideration of declaring such exception. 
(Ord. No. 9713, 7-22-97) 
Sec. 12-232. - Cruelty to animals; simple and aggravated. 
(a)  (1)  Any person who intentionally or with criminal negligence commits any of the following shall be guilty of simple cruelty to animals: 
a.  Overdrives, overloads, drives when overloaded, or overworks a living animal. 
b.  Torments, cruelly beats, or unjustifiably injures any living animal, whether belonging to himself or another. 
c.  Having charge, custody, or possession of any animal, either as owner or otherwise, unjustifiably fails to provide it with proper food, proper drink, proper shelter, or proper veterinary care. 
d.  Abandons any animal. A person shall not be considered to have abandoned an animal if he delivers to an animal control center an animal which he found running at large. 
e.  Impounds or confines or causes to be impounded or confined in a pound or other place, a living animal and fails to supply it during such confinement with proper food, proper drink, and proper shelter. 
f.  Carries, or causes to be carried, a living animal in or upon a vehicle or otherwise, in a cruel or inhumane manner. 
g.  Unjustifiably administers any poisonous or noxious drug or substance to any domestic animal or unjustifiably exposes any such drug or substance, with intent that the same shall be taken or swallowed by any domestic animal. 
h.  Injures any animal belonging to another person. 
i.  Mistreats any living animal by any act or omission whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain, suffering or death is caused to or permitted upon the animal. 
j.  Causes or procures to be done by any person any act enumerated in this subsection. 
(2)  a.  Whoever commits the crime of simple cruelty to animals shall be fined not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
b.  Whoever commits a second or subsequent offense of simple cruelty to animals shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. In addition, the court shall issue an order prohibiting the defendant from owning or keeping animals for a period of time deemed appropriate by the court. 
c.  In addition to any other penalty imposed, a person who commits the crime of cruelty to animals shall be ordered to perform five (5) eight-hour days of court-approved community service. The community service requirement shall not be suspended. 
d.  In addition to any other penalty imposed, the court may order a psychological evaluation or anger management treatment for a first conviction of the crime of simple cruelty to animals. For a second or subsequent offense of the crime of simple cruelty to an animal, the court shall order a psychological evaluation or anger management treatment. Any costs associated with any evaluation or treatment ordered by the court shall be borne by the defendant. 
(3)  For purposes of this subsection, if more than one animal is subject to an act of cruel treatment by an offender, each act shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  (1)  Any person who intentionally or with criminal negligence tortures, maims, or mutilates any living animal, whether belonging to himself or another, shall be guilty of aggravated cruelty to animals. 
(2)  Any person who tampers with livestock at a public livestock exhibition or at a private sale shall also be guilty of aggravated cruelty to animals. 
(3)  Any person who causes or procures to be done by any person any act designated in this subsection shall also be guilty of aggravated cruelty to animals. 
(4)  Any person who intentionally or with criminal negligence mistreats any living animal whether belonging to himself or another by any act or omission which causes or permits unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain, suffering, or death to the animal shall also be guilty of aggravated cruelty to animals. 
(5)  In addition to any other penalty imposed for a violation of this subsection, the offender shall be ordered to undergo a psychological evaluation and subsequently recommended psychological treatment and shall be banned by court order from owning or keeping animals for a period of time deemed appropriate by the court. Any costs associated with any evaluation or treatment ordered by the court shall be borne by the defendant. 
(6)  Whoever commits the crime of aggravated cruelty to animals shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and not more than six (6) months in jail or both. 
(7)  For purposes of this subsection, where more than one animal is tortured, maimed, mutilated, or maliciously killed or where more than one head of livestock is tampered with, each act comprises a separate offense. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to any of the following: 
(1)  The lawful hunting or trapping of wildlife as provided by law. 
(2)  Herding of domestic animals. 
(3)  Accepted veterinary practices. 
(4)  Activities carried on for scientific or medical research governed by accepted standards. 
(5)  Traditional rural Mardi Gras parades, processions, or runs involving chickens. 
(6)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the standard transportation and agricultural processing of agriculture products as defined in R.S. 3:3602(5) and (6). 
(Ord. No. 11,409, 8-27-13) 
State Statue Provision- LSR 14:102.1. 
Sec. 12-233. - Seizure and disposition of animals cruelly treated. 
(a)  When a person is charged with cruelty to animals, said person's animal may be seized by the arresting officer and held pursuant to this section. 
(b)  (1)  The seizing officer shall notify the owner of the seized animal of the provisions of this section by posting written notice at the location where the animal was seized or by leaving it with a person of suitable age and discretion residing at that location within twenty-four (24) hours of the seizure. 
(2)  The seizing officer shall photograph the animal within fifteen (15) days after posting of the notice of seizure and shall cause an affidavit to be prepared in order to document its condition in accordance with R.S. 15:436.2. 
(3)  The seizing officer shall appoint a licensed veterinarian or other suitable custodian to care for any such animal. The custodian shall retain custody of the animal in accordance with this section. 
(4)  The seized animal shall be held by the custodian provided for in paragraph (3) for a period of fifteen (15) consecutive days, including weekends and holidays, after such notice of seizure is given. Thereafter, if a person who claims an interest in such animal has not posted bond in accordance with subsection (c), the animal may be humanely disposed of by sale, adoption, or euthanasia. 
(c)  (1)  A person claiming an interest in any animal seized pursuant to this section may prevent the disposition of the animal as provided for in subsection (b) of this section by posting a bond with the court within fifteen (15) days after receiving notice of such seizure. Such bond shall prevent the disposition of the animal for a period of thirty (30) days commencing on the date of initial seizure. 
(2)  a.  The amount of the bond shall be determined by the department, agency, humane society, and the custodian of the animal as authorized by the court and shall be sufficient to secure payment for all reasonable costs incurred during the thirty-day period for the boarding and medical treatment of the animal after examination by a licensed veterinarian. 
b.  The court shall order that the bond be given to the custodian of the animal to cover such costs. 
(3)  Such bond shall not prevent the department, agency, humane society, or other custodian of the animal from disposing of the animal in accordance with subsection (b) of this section at the end of the thirty-day period covered by the bond, unless the person claiming an interest posts an additional bond for such reasonable expenses for an additional thirty-day period. In addition, such bond shall not prevent disposition of the animal for humane purposes at any time, in accordance with subsection (e) of this section. 
(d)  Upon a person's conviction of cruelty to animals, it shall be proper for the court, in its discretion, to order the forfeiture and final determination of the custody of any animal found to be cruelly treated in accordance with this section and the forfeiture of the bond posted pursuant to subsection (c) as part of the sentence. The court may, in its discretion, order the payment of any reasonable or additional costs incurred in the boarding or veterinary treatment of any seized animal prior to its disposition, whether or not a bond was posted by the defendant. In the event of the acquittal or final discharge without conviction of the accused, the court shall, on demand, direct the delivery of any animal held in custody to the owner thereof and order the return of any bond posted pursuant to subsection (c), less reasonable administrative costs. 
(e)  Nothing in this section shall prevent the euthanasia of any seized animal, at any time, whether or not any bond was posted, if a licensed veterinarian determines that the animal is not likely to survive and is suffering, as a result of any physical condition. In such instances, the court, in its discretion, may order the return of any bond posted, less reasonable costs, at the time of trial. 
(Ord. No. 11,409, 8-27-13) 
State Statute Reference- R.S. 14:102.2. 
Sec. 12-234. - Search warrant; animal cruelty offenses. 
    If the complaint is made, by affidavit, to any magistrate authorized to issue search warrants in criminal cases, that the complainant has reason to believe that an animal has been or is being cruelly treated in violation of R.S. 14:102.1, in any building or place, such magistrate, if satisfied that there is reasonable cause for such belief, shall issue a search warrant to any law enforcement officer authorized by law to make arrests for such offenses, authorizing any such officer to make a search of said building or place, and to arrest any person found violating R.S. 14:102.1. Said warrant may also authorize said officer to seize any animal believed to be cruelly treated and to take custody thereof. This section shall not be construed as a limitation on the power of law enforcement officers to seize animals as evidence at the time of the arrest. 
(Ord. No. 11,409, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 12-235. - Confined animals; necessary food and water. 
    When a living animal is impounded or confined, and continues without necessary food and water for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours, any law enforcement officer may, as often as is necessary, enter any place in which the animal is impounded or confined and supply it with necessary food and water so long as it shall remain impounded or confined. 
(Ord. No. 11,409, 8-27-13) 
Sec. 12-236. - Dogfighting; training and possession of dogs for fighting. 
(a)  No person shall intentionally do any of the following: 
(1)  For amusement or gain, cause any dog to fight with another dog, or cause any dogs to injure each other. 
(2)  Permit any act in violation of paragraph (1) to be done on any premises under his charge or control, or aid or abet any such act. 
(3)  Promote, stage, advertise, or be employed at a dogfighting exhibition. 
(4)  Sell a ticket of admission or receive money for the admission of any person to any place used, or about to be used, for any activity described in paragraph (2). 
(5)  Own, manage, or operate any facility kept or used for the purpose of dogfighting. 
(6)  Knowingly attend as a spectator at any organized dogfighting event. 
(7)  a.  Own, possess, keep, or train a dog for purpose of dogfighting. 
b.  The following activities shall be admissible as evidence of a violation of this paragraph: 
1.  Possession of any treadmill wheel, hot walker, cat mill, cat walker, jenni, or other paraphernalia, together with evidence that the paraphernalia is being used or intended for use in the unlawful training of a dog to fight with another dog, along with the possession of any such dog. 
2.  Tying, attaching, or fastening any live animal to a machine or power propelled device, for the purpose of causing the animal to be pursued by a dog, together with the possession of a dog. 
3.  Possession or ownership of a dog exhibiting injuries or alterations consistent with dogfighting, including but not limited to torn or missing ears, scars, lacerations, bite wounds, puncture wounds, bruising or other injuries, together with evidence that the dog has been used or is intended for use in dogfighting. 
(b)  "Dogfighting" means an organized event wherein there is a display of combat between two (2) or more dogs in which the fighting, killing, maiming, or injuring of a dog is the significant feature, or main purpose, of the event. 
(c)  Whoever violates any provision of subsection (a) of this section shall be fined not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or be imprisoned for not more than six (6) months or both. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit any of the following activities: 
(1)  The use of dogs for hunting. 
(2)  The use of dogs for management of livestock by the owner, his employees or agents, or any other person having lawful custody of livestock. 
(3)  The training of dogs or the possession or use of equipment in the training of dogs for any purpose not prohibited by law. 
(4)  The possessing or owning of dogs with ears cropped or otherwise surgically altered for cosmetic purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11,409, 8-27-13) 
State Statute Reference- R.S. 14:102.5. 
Sec. 12-237. - Seizure and destruction or disposition of dogs and equipment used in dogfighting. 
(a)  (1)  Any law enforcement officer making an arrest under R.S. 14:102.5 may lawfully take possession of all fighting dogs on the premises where the arrest is made or in the immediate possession or control of the person being arrested, whether or not the dogs are actually engaged in a fight at the time, and all paraphernalia, implements, equipment, or other property or things used or employed in violation of that section. 
(2)  The legislature finds and declares that fighting dogs used or employed in violation of R.S. 14:102.5 are dangerous, vicious, and a threat to the health and safety of the public. Therefore, fighting dogs seized in accordance with this section are declared to be contraband and, notwithstanding R.S. 14:102.1, the officer, an animal control officer, or a licensed veterinarian may cause them to be humanely euthanized as soon as possible by a licensed veterinarian or a qualified technician and shall not be civilly or criminally liable for so doing. Fighting dogs not destroyed immediately shall be disposed of in accordance with R.S. 14:102.2. 
(b)  (1)  The officer, after taking possession of any dogs other than those destroyed or disposed of pursuant to subsection (a) and of the other paraphernalia, implements, equipment, or other property or things, shall file with the district court of the parish within which the alleged violation occurred an affidavit stating therein the name of the person charged, a description of the property so taken and the time and place of the taking thereof, together with the name of the person who claims to own such property, if known, and that the affiant has reason to believe and does believe, stating the ground of such belief, that the property so taken was used or employed in such violation. 
(2)  The seizing officer shall dispose of any dogs or other animals seized in the manner provided for in R.S. 14:102.2. 
(3)  He shall thereupon deliver the other property so taken to such court which shall, by order in writing, place such paraphernalia, implements, equipment, or other property in the custody of a suitable custodian, to be kept by such custodian until the conviction or final discharge of the accused, and shall send a copy of such order without delay to the district attorney of the parish. The custodian so named and designated in such order shall immediately thereupon assume the custody of such property and shall retain the same, subject to the order of the court before which the accused shall be required to appear for trial. 
(c)  Any person claiming an interest in a seized animal may post a bond with the court in accordance with the provisions of R.S. 14:102.2(C) in order to prevent the disposition of such animal. 
(d)  Upon conviction of the person so charged, all dogs so seized shall be adjudged by the court to be forfeited and the court shall order a humane disposition of the same in accordance with R.S. 14:102.2. The court may also in its discretion order the forfeiture of the bond posted, as well as payment of any reasonable or additional costs incurred in the boarding or veterinary treatment of any seized dog, as provided in R.S. 14:102.2. In the event of the acquittal or final discharge, without conviction, of the accused, the court shall, on demand, direct the delivery of the animals and other property so held in custody to the owner thereof and order the return of any bond posted pursuant to R.S. 14:102.2(C), less reasonable administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 11,409, 8-27-13) 
Chapter 12.5 - DISCRIMINATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 12.5-1-12.5-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING DISCRIMINATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7079, adopted Aug. 14, 1979, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion of  1-7 as Ch. 12.5, art. II,  12.5-16-12.5-22, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 12.5-16. - Policy. 
    It is the policy of the city to provide, within constitutional limitations, for fair housing throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 7079,  1, 8-14-79) 
Sec. 12.5-17. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article: 
(a)  Dwelling means any building, structure or portion thereof which is occupied as, or designed or intended for occupancy as, a residence by one or more families, and any vacant land which is offered for sale or lease for the construction thereon of any such building, structure or portion thereof. 
(b)  Family includes a single individual. 
(c)  Person includes one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers and fiduciaries. 
(d)  To rent includes to lease, to sublease, to let and otherwise to grant for a consideration the right to occupy premises not owned by the occupant. 
(e)  Discriminatory housing practice means an act, that is unlawful under section 12.5-19, 12.5-20 or 12.5-21. 
(f)  Complainant is a person who feels he has been denied fair housing in violation of this article. 
(g)  Respondent includes the one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships, associations, labor organizations, legal representatives, mutual companies, joint stock companies, trusts, unincorporated organizations, trustees, trustees in bankruptcy, receivers or fiduciaries who the complainant has accused of violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7079,  2, 8-14-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 51:2603. 
Sec. 12.5-18. - Coverage. 
(a)  The provision against discrimination in advertising, subsection 12.5-19(c), shall apply to all advertisements made with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling. 
(b)  The remainder of section 12.5-19, the provisions against discrimination in the sale or rental of housing, shall not apply to: 
(1)  The sale or rental of any single-family house sold or rented by an owner. The owner may not own an interest in more than three (3) such single-family houses at one time. If the owner was not the most recent resident, this exemption will only apply to one such sale or rental within any twenty-four-month period. The owner may not employ or use in any manner the sales or rental facilities or services of any person engaged in the business of selling or renting of dwellings or any employee of such a person. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the use of attorneys, escrow agents, abstractors, title companies and other such professional assistance necessary to perfect or transfer the title. 
(2)  Any sale, rental or occupancy of a dwelling by a religious organization, association or society, or any agent operated, supervised or controlled by or in conjunction with such a religious organization. The dwelling must not have a commercial purpose. The religious organization shall not be one that restricts its membership on the basis of race, color, sex or national origin. 
(3)  Any rental or occupancy by a private club not in fact open to the public, which provides lodgings which it owns or operates as an incident of membership. The private club may not use said lodgings for a commercial purpose. 
(4)  Any sale or rental of rooms or units in dwellings containing living quarters occupied or intended to be occupied by no more than four (4) families, living independently of each other, if the owner actually maintains and occupies one of the rooms or units as his residence. 
(c)  For the purpose of subsection (b), a person shall be deemed to be in the business of selling or renting dwellings if: 
(1)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as principal in three (3) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(2)  He has, within the preceding twelve (12) months, participated as agent, other than in the sale of his own personal residence, in providing sales or rental facilities or sales or rental services in two (2) or more transactions involving the sale or rental of any dwelling or any interest therein; or 
(3)  He is the owner of any dwelling designed or intended for occupancy by, or occupied by, five (5) or more families. 
(Ord. No. 7079,  3, 8-14-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 51:2604. 
Sec. 12.5-19. - Discrimination in the sale or rental of housing. 
    Except as exempted by section 12.5-18, it shall be unlawful: 
(a)  To refuse to sell or rent after the making of a bona fide offer, or to refuse to negotiate for the sale or rental of, or otherwise make unavailable or deny, a dwelling to any person because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. 
(b)  To discriminate against any person in the terms, conditions or privileges of sale or rental of a dwelling, or in the provision of services or facilities in connection therewith, because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. 
(c)  To make, print or publish, or cause to be made, printed or published, any notice, statement or advertisement, with respect to the sale or rental of a dwelling, that indicates any preference, limitation or discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex or national origin, or an intention to make any such preference, limitation or discrimination. 
(d)  To represent to any person because of race, color, religion, sex or national origin that any dwelling is not available for inspection, sale or rental when such dwelling is in fact so available. 
(e)  For profit, to induce or attempt to induce any person to sell or rent any dwelling by representations regarding the entry or prospective entry into the neighborhood of a person or persons of a particular race, color, religion, sex or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 7079,  4, 8-14-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 51:2606. 
Sec. 12.5-20. - Discrimination in the financing of housing. 
    It shall be unlawful for any bank, building and loan association, insurance company or other corporation, association, firm or enterprise whose business consists in whole or in part in the making of commercial real estate loans, to deny a loan or other financial assistance to a person applying therefor for the purpose of purchasing, constructing, improving, repairing or maintaining a dwelling, or to discriminate against him in the fixing of the amount, interest rate, duration, or other terms or conditions of such loan or other financial assistance, because of the race, color, religion, sex or national origin of such person or of any person associated with him in connection with such loan or other financial assistance or the purposes of such loan or other financial assistance, or of the present or prospective owner, lessees, tenants or occupants of the dwelling or dwellings in relation to which such loan or other financial assistance is to be made or given. However, nothing contained in this section shall impair the scope or effectiveness of the exemptions contained in section 12.5-18. 
(Ord. No. 7079,  5, 8-14-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 51:2607. 
Sec. 12.5-21. - Discrimination in the provision of brokerage services. 
    It shall be unlawful to deny any person access to or membership or participation in any multiple-listing service, real estate brokers' organization, or other service, organization or facility relating to the business of selling or renting dwellings, or to discriminate against him in the terms or conditions of such access, membership or participation, on account of race, color, religion, sex or national origin. 
(Ord. No. 7079,  6, 8-14-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 51:2608. 
Sec. 12.5-22. - Interference, coercion, intimidation. 
    It shall be unlawful to coerce, intimidate, threaten or interfere with any person in the exercise or enjoyment of, or on account of his having exercised or enjoyed, or on account of his having aided or encouraged any other person in the exercise or enjoyment of, any right granted or protected by section 12.5-18, 12.5-19, 12.5-20, or 12.5-21. 
(Ord. No. 7079,  7, 8-14-79) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 51:2609. 
Chapter 13 - DRAINAGE AND FLOOD CONTROL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9423, adopted Feb. 8, 1994, amended Ch. 13, Art. II, in its entirety. Former Art. II,  13-21-13-29, 13-41-13-44 and 13-56-13-60 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 7119, adopted Dec. 11, 1979; Ord. No. 7631, adopted Dec. 27, 1983; and Ord. No. 7985, adopted Mar. 10, 1987. 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4.08. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; electricity, Ch. 11; gas, Ch. 17; housing, Ch. 19; planning and development, Ch. 26; plumbing. Ch. 27; sewers and drains, Ch. 30; subdivisions, Ch. 32; water, Ch. 36; zoning, Ch. 37. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 13-1-13-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD HAZARD AREAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-21. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, and extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood loses are created by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the occupancy of flood hazard areas by uses vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands because they are inadequately elevated, floodproofed or otherwise protected from flood damage. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-22. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(3)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(4)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
(5)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(6)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize future flood blight areas; and 
(7)  Insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-23. - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
    In order to accomplish its purposes, this article uses the following methods: 
(1)  Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause excessive increases in flood heights or velocities; 
(2)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(3)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters; 
(4)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; 
(5)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-24. - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this article shall be interpreted to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this article its most reasonable application. 
    Alluvial fan flooding means flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths. 
    Apex means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with a one per cent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one per cent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AO, A1-99, V-O, VI-30, VE or V. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one per cent chance of being equalled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (belowground level) on all sides. 
    Critical feature means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protections system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised. 
    Development means any manmade change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (post and piers), or shear walls parallel to the floor of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of floodwaters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3 (e) (5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Existing construction means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures." 
    Existed manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters. 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the flood boundary floodway map. 
    Floodplain or flood-prone area means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 
    Floodplain management means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations. 
    Floodplain management regulations means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction. 
    Flood protection system means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards. 
    Flood proofing means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway (regulatory floodway) means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Functionally dependent use means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(1)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of Interior or; 
(2)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Levee means a manmade structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
    Levee system means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 
    Manufactured home means a structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle". 
    Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two (2) or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    Mean sea level means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is (i) built on a single chassis; (ii) Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and (iv) designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction (for other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured home. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) per cent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: (1) Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or (2) Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
    Variance is a grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this article when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. (For requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.) 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
    Water surface elevation means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-25. - Lands to which this ordinance applies. 
    The article shall apply to all areas within the jurisdiction of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-26. - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Ouachita Parish, Louisiana and Incorporated Areas", dated January 20, 2016 with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and flood boundary-floodway maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94; Ord. No. 11,638, 12-8-15) 
Sec. 13-27. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-28. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-29. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-30. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be; (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-31. - Warning and disclaimer or liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Secs. 13-32-13-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 13-41. - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
    The planning and urban development director is hereby appointed the floodplain administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this article and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management, except as otherwise provided herein, where certain duties with accompanying functions and authority are specifically assigned to the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-42. - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
    Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(3)  Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this article. 
(4)  Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U. S. C. 1334) from which prior approval is required. 
(5)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the floodplain administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. 
(6)  Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the state coordinating agency which is the State of Louisiana's Department of Urban and Community Affairs, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(7)  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained. 
(8)  When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with section 13-26, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article II, Division 3. 
(9)  When a regulatory floodway has not been designated, the floodplain administrator must require that no new construction, substantial improvements, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones Al-30 and AE on the community's FIRM, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. 
(10)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations, a community may approve certain development in Zones A1-30, AE, AH, on the community's FIRM which increases the water surface elevation of the base flood by more than one foot, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-43. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Application for a development permit shall be presented to the floodplain administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be floodproofed; 
(3)  A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed structure shall meet the floodproofing criteria of [subsection 13-57(b)]; 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
(5)  Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with article II, division 2, section 13-42(a). 
(b)  Approval or denial of a development permit by the floodplain administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this article and the following relevant factors: 
(1)  The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
(2)  The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
(3)  The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
(4)  The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
(5)  The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles: 
(6)  The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems; 
(7)  The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; 
(8)  The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; 
(9)  The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
(10)  The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-44. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The floodplain management appeal board is hereby created which shall consist of the city engineer, the planning and urban development director, a professional engineer (registered in Louisiana) appointed by the mayor and two (2) members appointed by the city council. This board, herein after will be referred to as the appeal board, shall hear and render judgement on requests for variances from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The appeal board shall hear and render judgement on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the appeal board may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction. 
(d)  The floodplain administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this article. 
(f)  Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half (1/2) acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in subsection 13-43(b) of this article have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half (1/2) acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
(g)  Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this article, the appeal board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this article (article II, division 1, section 13-22). 
(h)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(i)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(j)  Prerequisites for granting variances: 
1.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. 
2.  Variances shall only be issued upon: (i) Showing a good and sufficient cause; (ii) A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and (iii) A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to the public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
3.  Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(k)  Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that (i) the criteria outlined in article II, division 2, section 13-44 (a)-(i) are met, and (ii) the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Secs. 13-45-13-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 13-56. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements. 
(1)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy; 
(2)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage; 
(4)  All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(5)  All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(6)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from the systems into floodwaters; and, 
(7)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-57. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of specific flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in section 13-26, section 13-42(8), or section 13-58(c), the following provisions are required: 
(a)  Residential construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure in all special flood hazard areas other than unprotected areas of the Chauvin Basin shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to six (6) inches or more above the base flood elevation. All residences constructed within the unprotected areas of the Chauvin Basin shall be constructed with the lowest floor at or above elevation seventy-two and a half (72.5) feet NGVD. The Chauvin Basin is herein defined as that portion of land east of the east levee of the Ouachita River, north and west of Bayou DeSiard and south of Louisiana Highway 553. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standard of this subsection as proposed in section 13-43(a)(1), is satisfied. 
(b)  Nonresidential construction: New construction and substantial improvements of any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure in special flood hazard areas outside the Chauvin Basin shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to six (6) inches or more above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction, and shall certify that the design and all methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this subsection. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are floodproofed shall be maintained by the floodplain administrator. All of the above provisions for nonresidential construction outside of the Chauvin Basin shall apply to nonresidential construction within the Chauvin Basin except that the base flood elevation shall be considered to be seventy-two (72) feet NGVD. 
(c)  Enclosures: New construction and substantial improvements, with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria: 
(1)  A minimum of two (2) openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. 
(2)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot abovegrade. 
(3)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves, or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(d)  Manufactured homes: 
(1)  Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over the top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable state and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(2)  Require that manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM on sites (i) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision, (ii) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iii) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision, or (iv) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision on which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as a result of a flood, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
(3)  Require that manufactured homes be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision with Zones A1-30, AH and AE on the community's FIRM that are not subject to the provisions of paragraph (4) of this section be elevated so that either: 
a.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation, or 
b.  The manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height abovegrade and be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. 
(e)  Recreational vehicles: Require that recreational vehicles placed on sites within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's FIRM either (i) be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, (ii) be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or (iii) meet the permit requirements of section 13-43(a), and the elevation and anchoring requirements for "manufactured homes" in paragraph (4) of this section. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions. 
(f)  Areas not otherwise covered: In all areas not otherwise covered in this article and not protected by approved flood proofing methods, the lowest floor elevation shall be at least eight (8) inches abovegrade, or eight (8) inches above the crown of the nearest street, whichever is higher, except that where the land is sloped in such a way that streets adjacent to a proposed building site will not act as a dam to cause floodwaters to pond and flood the proposed building, the lowest floor elevation shall not be required to be eight (8) inches above the crown of the nearest street. 
(g)  Sitework for new construction: The site of any new construction shall be graded so that it will drain to city right-of-way or easements which have been graded or improved to receive such drainage. The city engineer shall review the site plan for said new construction and shall make the determination whether the drainage design for this construction is adequate to meet this requirement. He shall then take appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-58. - Standards for subdivision proposals. 
(a)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with sections 13-21, 13-22, and 13-23 of this chapter. 
(b)  All proposals for the development of subdivisions shall meet development permit requirements of sections 13-27, section 13-43, and the provisions of article II, division 3 of this chapter. 
(c)  Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than fifty (50) lots or five (5) acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to section 13-26 or section 13-42 of this chapter. 
(d)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(e)  All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. 
(f)  Grading; drainage design. All subdivisions shall be graded so that each individual lot shall drain to an adjacent city right-of-way or easement which has been graded or improved to receive this drainage. If the site is low and will be subject to six (6) inches or more of flooding, then the developer shall add sufficient fill material graded and compacted, to raise the average grade of the site to such elevation as to hold site flooding to less than six (6) inches. The city engineer shall review the site plans and plats for each proposed subdivision and shall determine whether the drainage design for the subdivision is adequate to meet these requirements. He shall then take appropriate action. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-59. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO/AH Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 13-26 are areas designated as shallow flooding. These areas have special flood hazards associated with base flood depths of one to three (3) feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist and where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow; therefore, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential structures have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified). 
(2)  All new construction and substantial improvements of nonresidential structures: 
a.  Have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated above the highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified in feet on the community's FIRM (at least two (2) feet if no depth number is specified), or; 
b.  Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads of effects of buoyancy. 
(3)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall submit a certification to the floodplain administrator that the standards of this section, as proposed in section 13-43(a)(1), are satisfied. 
(4)  Require within Zones AH or AO adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-60. - Floodways. 
    Floodways. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 13-26, are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Encroachments are prohibited, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements and other development within the adopted regulatory floodway unless it has been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment would not result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(2)  If subsection (1) above is satisfied, all new construction and substantial improvements shall comply with all applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of article II, division 3. 
(3)  Under the provisions of 44 CFR Chapter 1, Section 65.12, of the National Flood Insurance Regulations, a community may permit encroachments within the adopted regulatory floodway that would result in an increase in base flood elevations, provided that the community first applies for a conditional FIRM and floodway revision through FEMA. 
(Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94) 
Sec. 13-61. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phase of this article is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way affect the validity of the remaining portions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,638, 12-8-15) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,638, adopted Dec. 8, 2015, amended  13-61 in its entirety, in effect repealing and reenacting said section to read as herein set out. Former  13-61 pertained to enforcement, and derived from Ord. No. 9423, 2-8-94. 
Sec. 13-62. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The city engineer or his representative shall be empowered to halt construction on any project, whether public or private, which appears to be in conflict with this article or which he determines will contribute to flooding in the city. The city engineer or his representative may halt construction by serving a stop work order on the foreman on a construction project or on the person, firm, or corporation who let the contract for the project, or the owners of the land on which the construction is taking place. No further construction shall take place on the project until the stop work order has been rescinded either by the city engineer or his representative. 
(b)  Any action by the city engineer or his representative in ordering that construction cease, may be appealed to the city council or to the floodplain management appeal board, either of which shall have the authority to lift the stop work order. To lift a stop work order issued by the city engineer or his representative, the floodplain management appeal board must have at least three (3) members other than the city engineer present and voting. The city engineer may not vote when the board is considering such action. 
(c)  Violation of a stop work order or any other provisions of this article shall subject the foreman on a construction project for which a stop work order has been issued or the person, firm or corporation who let the contract for the project or the owners of the land on which the construction is taking place to a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisonment of not more than six (6) months or, both. Each day of violation of a stop work order or failure to comply shall constitute a separate offense. An act of appeal by a person, firm or corporation to the city council or floodplain management appeal board to lift a stop work ordered by the city engineer or his representative shall not exempt the person, firm or corporation from obeying the stop work order until it has been duly rescinded. 
(Ord. No. 11,638, 12-8-15) 
Chapter 14 - ELECTRICITY[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; theft of utility services,  12-97; housing code,  19-16 et seq. 
State Law reference- Building codes, R.S. 33:4771 et seq.; state uniform construction code, R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard the public from personal hazard from electrical causes and buildings and their contents from hazards arising from the use of electricity for any purpose. 
(Code 1958,  12-2(a)) 
Sec. 14-2. - Electrical equipment defined. 
    As used in this chapter the term "electrical equipment" shall mean electrical conductors, fittings, devices, motors, appliances, fixtures, signs and gaseous tubing, or other apparatus. 
(Code 1958,  12-2(b)) 
Sec. 14-3. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all installations of, and work done on, or pertaining directly to, electrical equipment located in or on buildings or premises within the city limits or which are connected to the electrical distribution system for the purpose of obtaining a supply of electrical energy except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all electrical equipment used for power supply to radio transmitting equipment, but shall not apply to other equipment used for radio transmission. 
(c)  This chapter shall not be construed to be applicable to any building owned and operated by the United States government. 
(d)  The various buildings owned and operated by the city shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter except that they shall be exempt from the requirement of fees. 
(Code 1958,  12-2(b), (c)) 
Sec. 14-4. - Unauthorized use of notices or seals; removal of same. 
    It shall be unlawful for any other person to place or attach any seal of a type used by the planning and urban development director or to break, change, destroy, tear, mutilate, cover, or otherwise deface or injure any official notice or seal posted by the planning and urban development director in the performance of his official duties, and the person in whose name the meter or permit is issued shall be held responsible for such acts. 
(Code 1958,  12-7) 
Sec. 14-5. - Performance of electrical work. 
    Except as may be otherwise provided hereinafter, no person shall do electrical work unless such person is either a licensee or registrant as herein provided, or an officer, employee or partner of such licensee or registrant acting within the course and scope of his employment with such licensee or registrant. All work done by a registrant shall be supervised by the licensee named in the registration. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(k)) 
Sec. 14-6. - Inspections. 
    Subject to constitutional limitations, the planning and urban development director shall have the right during reasonable hours to enter any building or premises in the discharge of official duties, or for the purpose of making any inspections, reinspections or test of the electrical equipment contained therein or its installation. 
(Code 1958,  12-5(b)) 
Sec. 14-7. - Dangerous or unsafe conditions. 
    When the installation of any electrical conductors or electrical equipment is found to be in a dangerous or unsafe condition, the owner or person using or operating same shall be notified in writing by the planning and urban development director and shall cause such equipment to be repaired or replaced in such a manner as to place such equipment in a safe condition and in compliance with this Code within the time specified in such notice. 
(Code 1958,  12-15) 
Sec. 14-8. - Civil liability. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve from or lessen the responsibility or liability of any party owning, operating, controlling or installing any electrical equipment for damages to persons or property caused by any defect therein, nor shall the city be held as assuming any such liability, by reason of inspection or reinspection authorized herein, or certificate of approval issued, or by reason of approval or disapproval of any electrical equipment authorized herein. 
(Code 1958,  12-2(f)) 
Secs. 14-9-14-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-21. - Service of notices or orders. 
    When any order or notice is issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to any person who cannot be found after a reasonable search, then such order or notice may be served by posting same in a conspicuous place upon the premises occupied by him, or on the premises where the defects are alleged to exist. Such posting of the notice shall be considered equivalent to personal service of such order or notice. An order sent by mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid and directed to the address of the electrical contractor, owner, lessee or occupant of the premises shall be equivalent to personal service of such order. 
(Code 1958,  12-7) 
Sec. 14-22. - Assistance of police. 
    Whenever, in the opinion of the planning and urban development director, it shall become necessary to call upon the police department for aid and assistance in making an arrest or stopping work, he shall have the authority to do so. The planning and urban development director shall not have the power or authority to make any arrest. 
(Code 1958,  12-5(a)) 
Sec. 14-23. - Disconnection of electrical service. 
(a)  The planning and urban development director shall have the authority to disconnect or cause to be disconnected the electrical service to electrical equipment or installations which are dangerous or unsafe if the dangerous or unsafe condition has not been corrected within the time limits established by the director. 
(b)  In case of emergency, where necessary for the safety or protection of persons or of property, the director shall have the authority to immediately disconnect or cause the immediate disconnection of any electrical equipment. In cases of emergency, where electrical equipment may interfere with the work of the fire department or create a hazard to persons or to property, the senior officer of the fire department shall, in the absence of a representative of the director, have the authority to cause the immediate disconnection of such electrical equipment and said electrical equipment shall not again be energized until same has been inspected and approved by the planning and urban development director. 
(Code 1958,  12-5(b)) 
Sec. 14-24. - Measures to prevent use of electricity. 
    The planning and urban development department is hereby empowered to attach to electrical cabinets and equipment any official notice or seal to prevent the use of electricity. 
(Code 1958,  12-7) 
Sec. 14-25. - Removing obstructions to inspections. 
    The planning and urban development director shall have the authority to remove or compel the removal of any obstruction or hindrance which may interfere with, render inaccessible or prevent a full and complete inspection of any electrical equipment. 
(Code 1958,  12-5(c)) 
Sec. 14-26. - Hindering enforcement. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder or interfere with the planning and urban development director in the discharge of his duties. 
(Code 1958,  12-5(d)) 
Sec. 14-27. - Handling of funds. 
    All moneys collected by the planning and urban development director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited daily with the director of administration and a receipt for same given. On or about the fifteenth day of each month, the director shall prepare, in duplicate, a statement of the fees and of all moneys received by him, and shall file one with the mayor and the other with the director of administration. The statement shall set forth the names of the parties from whom fees or funds have been collected and the date and amount of each collection thereof. 
(Code 1958,  12-5(f)) 
Sec. 14-28. - Special rulings, waivers, etc. 
(a)  The electrical regulations of this chapter may be waived or modified by special permission of the planning and urban development director in particular instances where such modification or waiver is reasonable or justified, does not differ from the intent of this chapter, and does not create an injustice. Such special permission shall be obtained in writing prior to starting the work. 
(b)  If a special ruling by the planning and urban development director is necessary to govern some particular type of electrical construction or some particular occupancy or building not covered by this chapter or by the National Electrical Code as approved and adopted by the city, whereby all construction of this type or for this type occupancy or building will be changed in future operations, a copy of such ruling shall be mailed to each licensed electrical contractor in the city. 
(Code 1958,  12-6) 
Sec. 14-29. - Appeals. 
    Any person may file with the city electrical board an appeal for a review of any decision of the planning and urban development director made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, provided that such an appeal is made in writing within five (5) days after the date that such person was notified of such decision by the director. Upon receipt of such appeal the board shall, within five (5) days, proceed to hear the appeal and determine whether the action of the director complies with this chapter and within five (5) days from the date of the review shall render a decision in accordance with its findings. 
(Code 1958,  12-8(h)) 
Secs. 14-30-14-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY ELECTRICAL BOARD 

Sec. 14-41. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a city electrical board. 
(Code 1958,  12-8(a)) 
Sec. 14-42. - Members. 
(a)  The city electrical board shall consist of: 
(1)  The planning and urban development director or his designee. 
(2)  One employee from the company which furnishes electricity to the city. 
(3)  One electrical contractor licensed in the city. 
(4)  One person who is thoroughly familiar with the electrical business in both manufacture and engineering and who is a legal resident of the city and is not employed by another board member. 
(5)  One electrical sign manufacturer licensed in the city. 
All members shall be appointed for terms of one year's duration, subject to the pleasure of the council. 
(b)  The members of the city electrical board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1958,  12-8(a), (b), (c)) 
Sec. 14-43. - Chairman. 
    The planning and urban development director, or his designee shall serve as chairman of the city electrical board. 
(Code 1958,  12-8(a)) 
Sec. 14-44. - Meetings. 
    A majority of the members of the city electrical board present at a meeting shall constitute a quorum and any action taken shall be as binding as if all members were present. The city electrical board shall meet when called by the chairman of same or by a majority of its members. 
(Code 1958,  12-8(c), (d)) 
Sec. 14-45. - Records. 
    A minute book shall be kept in which shall be recorded all business and transactions of the city electrical board. 
(Code 1958,  12-8(i)) 
Sec. 14-46. - Functions generally. 
    It shall be the duty of the city electrical board to periodically review the provisions of this chapter and make recommendations to the city council for appropriate amendments hereto of said code. 
    The board shall exercise such other powers and functions as are authorized by ordinance. 
(Code 1958,  12-8(f)) 
Secs. 14-47-14-55. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS AND INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 14-56. - Permit required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to install or remove any electrical equipment or to make any alteration in or addition to any existing electrical conductors or equipment, within or on any building, structure or premises covered by this chapter without first securing a permit from the planning and urban development director; provided, however, that emergency work may be performed by an electrical contractor without a permit, if an application for permit and inspection is filed with the director within twenty-four (24) hours after the work is started, Sundays and holidays excepted. 
(b)  On installations where more than one electrical contractor and/or electrical sign manufacturer is involved, each contractor shall apply for and secure a permit for the work performed by him. 
(Code 1958,  12-11, 12-12(h)) 
Sec. 14-57. - Permit application. 
(a)  Before proceeding with any work for which a permit is required by the provisions of this chapter, the electrical contractor or electrical sign manufacturer in charge of such proposed work shall first file with the planning and urban development director an application requesting a permit and inspection for such proposed work. 
(b)  Application for permit and inspection shall be made in writing by the person that is to perform such work and shall state the exact street number of the premises on which the work is to be done, name of owner or occupant, name of mechanic or mechanics, or supervisor to be in charge of proposed work, a description of the work, and the class of wiring. 
(c)  On all applications where plans and specifications require installation above the minimum requirements as set forth in this chapter, the plans and specifications shall accompany the application for inspection and shall be available for use by the director at all times. No deviation may be made in the installation described in such plans and specifications without written approval of the owner or architect. 
(Code 1958,  12-12(a)-(c)) 
Sec. 14-58. - Temporary permits. 
    On repair work, alterations or additions to existing installations where it is impossible to determine the exact amount of work to be performed, the electrical contractor and/or the electrical sign manufacturer shall make application to the planning and urban development director for a temporary permit. Such permit shall give all information required for an electrical permit, except that it shall state an indefinite amount of work because of the nature thereof. Such application shall be accompanied with the minimum fee as herein provided. Before final approval of the work performed, the contractor shall apply for a regular permit to replace the temporary permit and shall pay the difference between the amount paid for the temporary permit and the cost of the regular permit. Such application shall be accompanied with the minimum fee as hereinafter provided. Before final approval of the work performed, the contractor shall apply for a regular permit to replace the temporary permit and shall pay the difference between the amount paid with the temporary application, and the amount computed for the permanent permit. Such temporary permit shall be valid for thirty (30) days from issuance thereof, unless renewed and upon expiration of same, all fees accrued against same shall be due and payable. Should the work be stopped or terminated before completion, the permanent permit shall be issued to cover the actual work performed and such fees due. Should the work be later reopened, a like procedure shall be followed. 
(Code 1958,  12-12(g)) 
Sec. 14-59. - Inspections. 
(a)  Electrical contractors and/or electrical sign manufacturers shall at all times keep the planning and urban development director informed as to the progress of their work, and shall request inspections as the work progresses. Requests for inspections shall be made by the contractor at such times as shall enable the director to inspect all phases of the work. 
(b)  When electrical equipment is to be hidden from view by the permanent placement of parts of the building or other equipment, the planning and urban development director shall be notified by the contractor, and no person shall conceal or cause to be concealed such electrical equipment until it has been inspected, approved or authorized by the director or until twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, shall have elapsed from the time of such notification; provided, on large installations, where the concealment of equipment proceeds continuously, the person installing the electrical equipment shall give the director due notice and inspections shall be made periodically as the work progresses. 
(c)  The planning and urban development director shall have the authority to require building contractors to open such work which in any manner conceals electrical wiring that has been closed without its knowledge or permission, and in no case shall the director issue a clearance or approval until satisfied that the work is in accord with the provisions of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any contractor or his representative to refuse to remove any construction that may hinder a full and complete inspection of electrical equipment when ordered to do so by the director. 
(d)  When electrical signs are constructed, the sign manufacturer shall notify the planning and urban development director and the sign wiring and equipment shall not be concealed until it has been inspected, approved, or authorized or until after twenty-four (24) hours, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays, or holidays, have elapsed from the time of such notification. However, approval of the Underwriters' Laboratories Inc. evidenced by such label attached shall be deemed prima facie evidence to satisfy the requirements of this chapter, and the director is authorized to approve such equipment without requiring further tests thereof. 
(e)  In cases of electrical signs manufactured outside of the city, the electrical contractor or electrical sign manufacturer installing such sign shall, at the time of issuance of permit for erection of same, request inspection of same at the job site or any other location designated by the electrical inspector, provided, however, the label of the Underwriters' Laboratories Inc. attached to such equipment shall be deemed prima facie evidence to satisfy the requirements of this code, and the planning and urban development director is authorized to approve such equipment without requiring further tests to be made thereof. The serial number of such label shall accompany the application for permit covering installation of such equipment. 
(Code 1958,  12-13) 
Sec. 14-60. - Electric fees. 
    The following fees for inspections are hereby levied upon each contractor licensed under the provisions of this chapter or authorized to engage, in the city, in any electrical work. These fees must be paid to the city prior to the issuance of a permit: 
(1)  Fees for electrical work: 
Permit fee ..... $ 75.00 
Fee for each 25 fixtures or portions or thereof ..... 7.50 
Per circuit for first circuit ..... 5.00 
2 circuits ..... 9.00 
3 circuits ..... 13.00 
4 circuits ..... 17.00 
5 circuits ..... 21.00 
6 circuits ..... 25.00 
7 circuits ..... 29.00 
8 circuits ..... 33.00 
9 circuits ..... 37.00 
10 circuits ..... 41.00 
11 circuits ..... 45.00 
12 circuits ..... 49.00 
13 circuits ..... 53.00 
14 circuits ..... 57.00 
15 circuits ..... 61.00 
16 circuits ..... 65.00 
17 circuits ..... 69.00 
18 circuits ..... 73.00 
19 circuits ..... 77.00 
20 circuits ..... 81.00 
Per circuit over 20 ..... 1.20 
Fee for final inspection ..... 12.00 
Convenience re-inspection fee ..... 20.00 
Re-inspection fee for initial inspection failure: 
First re-inspection ..... $ 35.00 
Second re-inspection ..... 50.00 
Third and subsequent re-inspections ..... 75.00 
per re-inspection until 
inspection is passed 
Fees are to be assessed and collected prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy. No final certificate of occupancy, or final electrical inspection certificate shall be issued for a project with outstanding fees. 
Fees for roughing in work ..... $ 12.00 
Fee for electrical penalty ..... 60.00 
Commercial transformer ..... 20.00 
plus $3.00 per kva 
(2)  Fees for motor or generator: 
Fractional hp up to and including 1 hp ..... $ 5.00 
2 hp to 4 hp ..... 12.00 
5 hp to 10 hp ..... 15.00 
11 hp to 15 hp ..... 20.00 
16 hp to 20 hp ..... 22.00 
21 hp and over ..... 30.00 
(3)  Fees for replacement of service entrance equipment/meter base service amp: 
Per service up to and including 100 amperes ..... $ 15.00 
Per service up to and including 200 amperes ..... 17.00 
Per service up to and including 400 amperes ..... 22.00 
Per service up to and including 600 amperes ..... 24.00 
Per service up to and including 800 amperes ..... 29.00 
Per service up to and including 1,000 amperes ..... 34.00 
Per service up to and including 1,200 amperes ..... 39.00 
Per service up to and including 1,400 amperes ..... 44.00 
Per service up to and including 1,600 amperes ..... 48.00 
Per service up to and including 2,000 amperes ..... 53.00 
Per service up to and including 2,400 amperes ..... 58.00 
Per service up to and including 2,500 amperes and above ..... 60.00 
(4)  Fees, miscellaneous: 
Illuminated sign fee ..... $ 20.00 
For any sign with over one transformer, there shall be a fee of ..... 20.00 
and an additional fee, 
per ballast, of $3.00 
Temporary service ..... 25.00 
Receptacles ..... 10.00 
and $5.00 for every 
additional receptacle added 
Solar panels (multiple of 10) ..... 75.00 
at base amount and 
$7.50 each additional 
(5)  Penalty fees: 
First offense ..... $ 75.00 
Second offense ..... 250.00 
Third offense ..... 500.00 
and suspension of Monroe 
occupational license for one year 
Fees to be collected per section 14-60(1). 
(Code 1958,  12-16; Ord. No. 7947, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 10,197, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 10,470, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 11,610, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 11,854, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 14-61. - Refund of fees. 
    If no work has been done under an electrical permit, the planning and urban development director, when formally requested in writing, shall recommend to the city council that a refund of seventy-five (75) per cent of the original fee be made, provided, however, the city shall retain not less than two dollars ($2.00) of the fee paid to cover the cost of auditing the fee and preparing the request for refund. 
(Code 1958,  12-12(i)) 
Sec. 14-62. - Term and revocation. 
    Any regular electrical permit shall be valid for six (6) months from the date of issuance unless such time is extended by the planning and urban development director, provided, however, the director shall have the power to revoke any electrical permit at any time if there has been any misrepresentation of facts or any violation of this Code or for any other just cause. 
(Code 1958,  12-12(j)) 
Sec. 14-63. - Transfer. 
    Electrical permits shall not be transferable. 
(Code 1958,  12-12(i)) 
Sec. 14-64. - Certificates of approval. 
(a)  When the planning and urban development director finds an installation to be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, he shall issue to the person making the installation a certificate of approval, with a duplicate copy for delivery to the owner, authorizing the use of the installation and connection to the supply of electricity and shall give notice to the office of the general superintendent of electrical distribution that such authorization has been made and that such service may be energized. 
(b)  When a certificate of approval is issued authorizing the connection and use of a temporary installation, such certificate shall expire at a time stated therein, and shall be revoked by the director for cause. 
(c)  Permission may be granted authorizing the connection and use of specified portions of an incomplete installation; such preliminary connection may be revoked by the electrical inspector for cause. No certificate of approval shall be issued unless such work and materials are found to conform with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1958,  12-14) 
Sec. 14-65. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No permit shall be required for the replacement or repair of toggle switches, fuses, lamp sockets, lamps, fluorescent starters, extension cords, or individual units of neon tubing. No permit shall be required for the installation, repair, or alteration of electrical equipment for the operation of signals or for the transmission of intelligence by wire by a communication agency. 
(b)  No permit fees shall be required for the installation, alteration, or repair of electrical equipment installed by or for the city acting as an electrical supply agency for the use of same in the generation, transmission or distribution of electricity. 
(Code 1958,  12-11, 12-12(e)) 
Secs. 14-66-14-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TECHNICAL STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Building codes, R.S. 33:4771 et seq.;state uniform construction code, R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq. 

Sec. 14-76. - Generally. 
(a)  All electrical work shall be in strict conformance with this chapter, the statutes of the state and the rules and regulations issued under the authority of the statutes, and shall conform to approved standards of construction for the safety of life and property. 
(b)  The National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, as copyrighted by the National Fire Protection Association, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. A copy of such code is on file in the office of the clerk of the council of the city. The provisions of the National Electrical Code, 2008 Edition, shall be the standards for all electrical installations, equipment and appliances in the city, except where such code is inconsistent with this Code or applicable statutes, in which case this Code or such statutes shall govern. Conformity of installations of electrical equipment with applicable provisions of the National Electrical Code adopted herein shall be prima facie evidence that such installations are reasonably safe to persons and property. The electrical inspector may authorize the installation of special wiring methods. 
(c)  No electrical apparatus, fittings or material shall be used or placed on sale unless such apparatus, fittings or material is approved by the planning and urban development director as complying the safety requirements of this Code; provided, however, the approval or the appearance of the label of the Underwriters' Laboratories Inc., shall be deemed prima facie evidence to satisfy the requirements of this Code, and the planning and urban development director is authorized to approve such equipment without requiring further tests thereof. 
(Code 1958,  12-19; Ord. No. 7226, 12-23-80; Ord. No. 7683, 5-8-84; Ord. No. 9578, 3-26-96; Ord. No. 10,558, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 11,028, 2-23-10) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference,  2-15. 
State Law reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference, R.S. 33:1368 et seq. 
Sec. 14-77. - Workmanship generally. 
    All electrical work shall satisfactorily fulfill the purpose for which it is installed and shall be executed in a neat workmanlike manner. Slipshod work or work not executed in keeping with good electrical practice shall be classed as defective and shall not be approved. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(4)) 
Sec. 14-78. - Ascertainment of proper standards for existing work. 
    Electrical contractors and/or electrical sign manufacturers making extensions or additions to existing electrical systems shall, before proceeding with such work, ascertain from the planning and urban development director whether any or all of the existing installation shall be brought up to the requirements of this Code. 
(Code 1958,  12-12(f)) 
Sec. 14-79. - Service entrance in rigid metal conduit. 
    All service entrances shall be installed in rigid metal conduit and shall be located on the ground floor of any building; provided, however, in any case where this location is found to be impractical the planning and urban development director shall designate an alternate location. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(5)) 
Sec. 14-80. - Main disconnect. 
(a)  A main disconnect shall be installed in the service conductors of a building and shall be of ample size. Such device shall simultaneously disconnect all ungrounded conductors. This subsection shall apply to all services up to and including four hundred (400) amperes. 
(b)  Services larger than four hundred (400) amperes shall conform to the requirements of section 230-70 of the National Electrical Code. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(6)) 
Sec. 14-81. - Point of connection for overhead service. 
    The point of connection for overhead service shall be of sufficient height to clear anticipated traffic or contact between a person and ground. In general, the height shall not be less than ten (10) feet nor more than twenty-five (25) feet, provided, however, in exceptional cases the connection height may be designated by the electrical inspection. In all cases the point of connection shall be located at the point nearest the pole from which the service is to be made. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(7)) 
Sec. 14-82. - Underground services conduit. 
    All underground services shall be installed in galvanized rigid conduit not less than one inch and shall extend up the pole to a location close to secondary service wire or to a point designated by the planning and urban development director. In downtown business district where served by network system, service will be run to a point designated by the planning and urban development director for best connection by the electrical distribution system. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(8)) 
Sec. 14-83. - Size of service conductor. 
    No service conductor shall be smaller than number eight (8) copper or aluminum equivalent, and no entrance safety switch shall be less than thirty (30) amperes in capacity. Such switch shall not be located in any inaccessible place. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(9)) 
Sec. 14-84. - Meter location. 
    All electric meters shall be installed so as to be accessible to meter readers at all times. No meter shall be installed inside a residence; and no meter and/or metering equipment shall be installed inside a business occupancy except at the direction of the planning and urban development director. Should any meter be rendered inaccessible by future construction, such meter shall be moved by the owner or occupant to a location decided upon by the director. Buildings located on a single property under one ownership shall be supplied through one meter, except: 
(a)  Buildings of multiple occupancy may have a separate meter for each occupant. 
(b)  Where additional or special services are required for different classes of use, additional meters may be used if approved by the director. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(10)) 
Sec. 14-85. - Conduit for wire in fire district. 
    Any installation of electrical equipment in or on any building or premises located within the fire district, as defined by ordinance, shall be wired with rigid metal conduit or electrical metallic tubing and fittings approved for such, except private residences containing not more than two (2) apartments. All conduit or metallic tubing shall be secured in place by approved straps or hangers in such a manner that it will be permanently rigid. Nails may be used in conjunction with two-hole type straps only, and when such straps are attached to wood portions of the building. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(11)) 
Cross reference- Fire districts,  9-1. 
Sec. 14-86. - Installation in places of public assemblage. 
    Any building or premises, regardless of location with respect to the fire district, used as a place of business, church, school, auditorium, theater, or for any other use that assembles large gatherings of persons or public gatherings, shall have all electrical equipment installed in compliance with this Code, and Section 1584 of Title 40 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(12)) 
Cross reference- Fire districts,  9-1. 
Sec. 14-87. - Wiring in residence outside fire district. 
    Any building located outside the fire district and within a residence district as specified in the zoning ordinances, if the same is used or to be used for a one-family, two-family or multiple-family dwelling, or for an accessory use thereto, and if such building does not contain any nonconforming use, may be wired with nonmetallic sheathed cable, knob and tube type, or any type wiring approved for such occupancy by the National Electrical Code, except in no case shall BX cable be approved. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(14)) 
Cross reference- Fire districts,  9-1; zoning, Ch. 37. 
Sec. 14-88. - Size of conductors. 
    All electrical conductors governed by the provisions of this chapter shall be of sufficient size that the drop in voltage shall not be greater than three (3) per cent below that of the voltage supplied at the point of service. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(15)) 
Sec. 14-89. - Circuits in fire district. 
    Within the boundaries of the fire district not more than eight (8) current-consuming outlets shall be installed on any one branch circuit, except on circuits used exclusively for "strip light" fluorescent lighting and provided the fixtures are butted together in one continuous length. In the case of such fluorescent lighting the connected load shall be computed in amperes as designated on the ballast of each unit and the wire size shall be governed accordingly. However, within the fire district no conductor installed as a branch circuit for lights or power shall be smaller than number 12 gauge and no one lighting circuit shall have a combined load of more than two thousand (2,000) watts. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(16)) 
Cross reference- Fire districts,  9-1. 
Sec. 14-90. - Circuits outside fire district. 
    Outside of the fire district no branch circuit shall contain more than eight (8) current-consuming outlets. However, number 14 gauge wire will be permitted for switch legs, all other lighting circuits will be wired in number 12 wire. All circuits for convenience outlet receptacles shall be number 12 gauge or larger conductors. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(17)) 
Cross reference- Fire districts,  9-1. 
Sec. 14-91. - Drop cords from ceilings. 
    Drop cords from ceilings in residence will be permitted when seven and one-half (71/2) feet or more from the door and controlled by a wall switch, however, pull chain receptacles may be used in any room except bathrooms where such fixtures must be controlled by a wall switch. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(18)) 
Sec. 14-92. - Flexible cord lighting. 
    Flexible cord lighting may be used in garages, machine shops and similar locations for bench work, trouble lights, etc., provided the conductors are not smaller than number 16 gauge and a porcelain or other nonconductor type socket is used. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(19)) 
Sec. 14-93. - Joints and splices. 
    All joints or splices shall be soldered or made with suitable connectors approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories for this purpose. Wire nuts will not be permitted as a means of connection except at fixtures and then only when one solid conductor from the branch circuit is connected to the fixture wire. 
(Code 1958,  12-19) 
Sec. 14-94. - Headers and other wood supports for outlet boxes. 
    Headers or other wood supports for outlet boxes shall be a minimum of two (2) inches by four (4) inches and all boxes shall be securely fastened to such supports. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(21)) 
Sec. 14-95. - Distribution centers, etc. 
    Any and all switches, panelboards, control boards, or distribution centers or similar equipment of any and all types shall be completely dead front equipment, or shall be externally operative safety switches. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(22)) 
Sec. 14-96. - Wire service for heavy loads. 
    All commercial and industrial installations, and all residence installations having a connected load of two thousand (2,000) watts or more shall be served by a three-wire service and shall have not less than fifty (50) ampere current limiting main disconnecting device on such installations of eight hundred (800) square feet or more of floor area. The main service device shall be of one hundred (100) ampere capacity and the load on such services shall be balanced. Network voltage in the business district shall be 125/216, three-phase, four-wire. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(23)) 
Sec. 14-97. - Circuit and conductors for attic ventilation. 
    A separate circuit shall be provided for attic ventilation equipment and/or each air conditioner unit, and the conductors shall not be smaller than number 12 gauge. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(24)) 
Sec. 14-98. - Furnishing and location of meter equipment. 
    The current-supplying agency shall furnish the necessary meter socket and metering equipment for any installation to which it furnishes electrical current. Installations having more than one meter shall have each tagged, giving the street or apartment number it serves. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(25)) 
Sec. 14-99. - Outside signs and displays. 
    Outside signs and displays shall comply with the following: 
(a)  All electrical signs extending over the sidewalk shall be erected with a minimum sidewalk clearance of ten (10) feet from the lowest point of the sign to the sidewalk and shall not extend from the building past a point eighteen (18) inches inside the curb line up to a point fourteen (14) feet above the sidewalk; but any portion of the sign which is fourteen (14) feet or more above the sidewalk may extend to the curb line, but not beyond it, provided the sign is a safe distance from utility wires. Underwriters' Laboratories label on such electrical sign or display shall be prima facie evidence of acceptability of such sign or display at the option of the planning and urban development director. The support means of any electrical sign shall be adequate and subject to the approval of the director. All electrical signs shall be connected to a separate circuit or circuits installed in conduit or electrical metallic tubing and not more than thirteen hundred and twenty (1,320) watts shall be allowed on each circuit, provided, however, portable signs with self-contained transformers, and window displays with transformers designed for such, not exceeding two hundred and twenty-five (225) watts may be plugged into suitable receptacles. 
(b)  Lighting reflectors for the illumination of a building or sign board shall not project more than eight (8) feet beyond the building line. 
(c)  When upon inspection or reinspection any sign is found to be in dangerous or unsafe condition and the owner or user thereof fails to place such sign in safe condition after being notified to do so by the planning and urban development director within the time limit specified, the director shall remove such sign at the expense of owner or user. 
(d)  Unless a complete sign circuit is installed at the time of roughing in wiring, each commercial building shall be provided with a raceway from panel board through the front wall of the building. 
(e)  Any luminous tube sign or portion thereof within six (6) feet of the ground must have all high tension connections suitably enclosed to prevent accidental contact. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(26)) 
Cross reference- Advertising and signs, Ch. 3; electrical requirements for mobile signs,  3-25. 
Sec. 14-100. - Service conductors. 
    No service conductors shall be installed through attic or other enclosure except as may be specially designated and approved by the planning and urban development director. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(27)) 
Sec. 14-101. - Installation of nonmetallic sheathed cable. 
    All joists or other structural members of residential buildings shall be bored for the installation of any nonmetallic sheathed cable with the exception of buildings with two (2) by four (4) joists or old jobs having a readily accessible attic. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(28)) 
Sec. 14-102. - Temporary services. 
    All temporary services shall be installed on the equivalent of a four (4) by four (4) timber with point of attachment at a minimum of ten (10) feet above the ground, said timber to be substantially braced in three (3) directions. A weatherproof temporary service disconnect and panel, like or similar to Midwest P-71f, shall be used. This disconnect and panel shall not be lower than five (5) feet above the ground and shall be properly grounded to a driven ground. Said temporary service shall be located as near as possible to the permanent point of attachment. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(29)) 
Sec. 14-103. - Installation of meter sockets. 
    Each meter socket installation shall be on the outside of the building, residence or other structure and shall be mounted not more than seven (7) feet nor less than five (5) feet above the level of the standing space. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(30)) 
Sec. 14-104. - Location of fuse panels, circuit breakers, etc. 
    Fuse panels, circuit breakers and the like shall not be placed in hot water closets, bathrooms, clothes closet or any similar place where articles may be stored, thereby hindering accessibility. They shall be located where they are readily accessible to the occupant. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(31)) 
Sec. 14-105. - Installations of motors. 
    All installations of motors over twenty-five (25) horsepower shall have reduced voltage type starting. All installations of motors over five (5) horsepower shall be three-phase except by special permission when conditions may warrant. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(32)) 
Sec. 14-106. - Termination at point of attachment of service conductor. 
    The property owner shall provide at the point of attachment of the service conductor to the building or any other structure a means of termination. Porcelain screw knobs will not be acceptable. Such point of termination shall conform to Article 230 of the National Electrical Code. Pipe for service mast shall not be less than one and one-quarter (11/4) inches in diameter. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(33)) 
Secs. 14-107-14-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONTRACTORS[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate electricians, R.S. 33:4782. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-121. - Mechanics generally. 
    Electrical contractors and/or electrical sign manufacturers shall have competent journeymen mechanics for all jobs. 
(Code 1958,  12-19(4)) 
Sec. 14-122. - Special provisions for firms, corporations, etc.; registration of firm and licensee. 
(a)  A corporation, partnership, or other legal entity (hereinafter referred to as a "firm," whether it be a corporation, partnership, or other legal entity) or an individual shall act as an electrical contractor or electrical sign manufacturer, only if: 
(1)  A full time officer, employee or partner of the firm or individual who is actively engaged in the electrical contracting work or electrical sign manufacturing work of such firm or individual holds a city electrical contractor's license certificate (general or residential) or city electrical sign manufacturer's license certificate, or both, as appropriate; 
(2)  Both such firm or individual and the individual holding the license certificate have signed a registration certificate which shall be provided by the planning and urban development director and maintained on file in its office stipulating that such individual or firm may do electrical contracting work (general, or residential only, depending on the licensee's certificate) or electrical sign manufacturing work in the city under the licensee's supervision; 
(3)  The licensee named in the registration has not filed with the director, or if he has filed he has withdrawn, any other registration which stipulates that any other individual or firm may do electrical contracting work under his supervision. 
(b)  A person desiring registration shall make application to the electrical inspector upon a form provided by the planning and urban development director. The form shall be accompanied by the required fee. 
(c)  Any person seeking a registration certificate shall pay the same fifty dollars ($50.00) initial fee, and thereafter the same twenty-five dollars ($25.00) annual renewal fee, as is provided for a licensee doing the same type of work, and shall be entitled to engage in the same type of business as the licensee signing his or its registration certificate. A registration certificate shall remain in effect, so long as the annual fees are paid timely, until revoked by either the licensee or the registrant or until the licensee on such registration certificate no longer holds a valid license certificate from the city. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(b), (2)) 
Sec. 14-123. - List of employees. 
    Each licensee or registrant hereunder shall furnish the planning and urban development director a list, certified to be correct, of his full time employees engaged in the electrical contracting or electrical sign manufacturing business prior to the issuance of his license or registration certificate, and annually thereafter upon and as a prerequisite to the renewal of such license or registration certificate. The licensee or registrant filing such list shall promptly notify the planning and urban development director, between the annually required list filings, of any changes which should be made in the last list filed by such person because of employees leaving or joining such licensee or registrant. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(i)) 
Sec. 14-124. - Vehicles. 
    All vehicles of licensees and registrants hereunder doing electrical contracting or electrical sign manufacturing work shall be properly identified with the name of the licensee or registrant, as appropriate, and with his license certificate number or registration certificate number, as appropriate. Such identification shall be placed on both sides of each vehicle in letters and figures at least one and one-half (11/2) inches high, shall be of permanent design and shall be maintained in a legible condition at all times. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(j)) 
Sec. 14-125. - Unauthorized use of license or registration certificate. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee or registrant to allow any other person to use the license or registration certificate of such licensee or registrant for the purpose of obtaining a permit or executing any work covered by the provisions of this chapter. If proof of such action be submitted to the city electrical board, the board, after a fair and impartial hearing as more fully provided for hereinafter, shall instruct the planning and urban development director to suspend or revoke the license or registration certificate of such licensee or registrant, and the planning and urban development director shall act accordingly. During any such period of suspension or revocation all work in progress or for which permits have been granted under such license or registration certificate shall cease and shall not be resumed until after the period of suspension has elapsed or until such person has obtained a new license or registration certificate. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(1)) 
Sec. 14-126. - Revocation and suspension of license and registration certificates. 
(a)  The city electrical board shall have the right to suspend or revoke any license or registration certificate required herein when the licensee or registrant has violated any provisions of this chapter. Before such license or registration can be revoked or suspended for more than thirty (30) days: 
(1)  Notice of the particular charge or charges must be given, in writing, to the licensee or registrant; 
(2)  A public hearing must be held; 
(3)  The licensee or registrant must be given an opportunity to answer the charges and to offer any evidence, written or oral, on such charges. 
The licensee or registrant shall have the right to be represented by an attorney of his own choice and the right to cross-examine any witnesses. The examiner or the secretary of the committee or board shall have the right to summon witnesses and to have their testimony recorded. 
(b)  When it deems such action necessary for the protection of the public the board shall have the right to suspend any license or registration certificate for a period not in excess of thirty (30) days without a prior hearing, but, within such time and as soon as can be reasonably held, a hearing shall be scheduled by the board to consider the suspension or revocation of the license or registration certificate, as the case may be, of the person affected by such suspension. 
(c)  When a license or registration certificate has been revoked by the board, the planning and urban development director shall not issue a new license or registration certificate to the affected person until after the expiration of one year from the date of the revocation. 
(d)  The director shall have the authority to suspend any license granted under the provisions of this chapter if it is discovered that any of the provisions of this chapter have been violated by the person holding such license. Such suspension shall be for a period not to exceed sixty (60) days and during such suspension all work, either in progress or for which permits have been issued, shall cease and shall not be resumed until after such period of suspension has lapsed. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of a new license or registration certificate to the person affected by the revocation, a new application must be filed by the person desiring to be again licensed or registered and such person must prove his qualifications, pay the requisite fees, and, in the case of a person seeking a license, take the examination herein prescribed. The planning and urban development director shall have the right to consider, in determining whether the applicant should be issued a new license or registration, the previous record of the licensee or registrant in his operations in such capacity, including the facts which gave rise to any suspension or revocation of a certificate issued hereunder to such person. 
(Code 1958,  12-5(e), 12-9(m)) 
Secs. 14-127-14-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Charter reference- Occupational licenses,  14-121 et seq. 

Sec. 14-136. - Required. 
    No person shall engage in any electrical business unless such person holds a license issued by the city to cover such operations. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(b)) 
Sec. 14-137. - Types of license. 
    There shall be three (3) types of electrical licenses issued by the city as follows: 
(1)  Electrical contractor's license (general). This license shall entitle the licensee to engage in the business of installing, removing, altering and repairing electrical equipment of all kinds, except that such license shall not include the right to engage in the manufacture, installation, removal, alteration or repair of any electrical sign, display or outline wiring. 
(2)  Residential electrical contractor's license. This license shall entitle the licensee to engage in the business of installing, removing, altering or repairing electrical equipment only in residential buildings, including single and multifamily residences and apartments, but not including hotels and motels. 
(3)  Electrical sign manufacturer's license. This license shall entitle the licensee to engage in the business of the manufacture, installation, removal, alteration, or repair of electrical signs, displays and/or outline lighting of gaseous tube type on what is known as the secondary or high voltage side of the transformers necessary for the operation thereof. Such license certificate, however, does not entitle the holder to install or connect to the primary or low voltage wiring necessary for the operation of such transformers or other supply circuits, except that portable signs or window displays may be plugged in to a permanently installed suitable receptacle located not more than five (5) feet from the transformer and provided that the portable cord is of sufficient size and of an approved type. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(a)) 
Sec. 14-138. - Application. 
    No person shall engage in any electrical business unless such person holds a license or registration certificate to cover such operations. Any person desiring to engage in any of the electrical businesses described in section 14-137 shall make application to the electrical inspector on the form provided by the inspector for such license or registration; and, in the case of an applicant for license certificate, such person shall request an examination to cover operations. The application shall be accompanied by the fees hereinafter provided. 
    If the applicant seeks a license certificate, the electrical inspector shall set a date to give an examination to determine the qualifications of the applicant. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(b); Ord. No. 7412, 7-13-82) 
Sec. 14-139. - Examination. 
(a)  A written and/or oral examination shall be given to each applicant for a license certificate by the planning and urban development director and the answers to the questions shall be reviewed and properly graded by him. A grade of seventy-five (75) per cent shall be the lowest passing grade. The applicant shall be notified as to the results of the examination within seven (7) days after the examination is taken. The examination shall be given in a fair and impartial manner, and shall cover the field of work that the license certificate is to cover. Any applicant failing to pass the examination shall not be given another examination for a period of six (6) months following his last examination. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided herein no license certificate shall be issued to any person who does not pass such examination. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(c)) 
Sec. 14-140. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  A license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be valid, unless revoked or suspended as provided in this chapter, from January 1 through December 31 of each year, and shall expire on December 31 of the year for which it is issued. 
(b)  A valid license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be renewable, without examination, upon payment of the required renewal fee by March 1 of the year following its expiration. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(b), (c)) 
Sec. 14-141. - Fees. 
    The examination fee for a license required by the provisions of this chapter shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) and the original license fee shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Any applicant who fails to qualify for such license shall be refunded the latter fee. The annual renewal fee for a license shall be twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(Code 1958,  12-9(c), (d)) 
Sec. 14-142. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9068, adopted May 9, 1989, specifically revoked and deleted former  14-142, which pertained to special provisions for nonresidents and derived from Code 1958,  12-9(b). 
Sec. 14-143. - Personal nature of license. 
    Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be issued only in the name of the individual who applied for the same. Licenses shall not be issued in the names of corporations or partnerships or in trade names. All licenses shall be personal, nontransferable and nonheritable. 
(Code 1958,  12-9(g)) 
Chapter 15 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Fire department,  4-05. 
Cross reference- Residential requirements for fire civil service board members,  2-76. 
State Law reference- State fire marshal, R.S. 40:1561 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Interfering with firemen at fires. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way interfere, meddle with, or obstruct the firemen in the discharge of their duties at a fire. 
(Code 1958,  13-13) 
State Law reference- Obstructing a fireman, R.S. 14:327. 
Sec. 15-2. - Fire hydrants-Generally. 
(a)  No person other than an authorized city employee or a person possessing a permit from the public works director, shall unscrew or remove any cap from any fire hydrant, or open or close or tamper with any fire hydrant, or cause same to be done. 
(b)  No person shall introduce any foreign object into any fire hydrant, or mutilate or destroy or remove any part thereof, or cause same to be done. 
(c)  No person shall open, close or tamper with any fire hydrant with any other tool or appliance than a special five sided wrench which fits the operating nut of such hydrant, or cause same to be done. 
(d)  No person shall leave any fire hydrant open, or partly open, wasting water, unless he is an authorized city employee. 
(Code 1958,  22-5) 
Sec. 15-3. - Same-Obstructions. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or set any telegraph, telephone, electric light or other pole, or any post, column or support of any store, or work or structure of any kind whatsoever, within three (3) feet of any fire plug in the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place or plant any trees, shrubs, flowers, or plants of any kind whatsoever within five (5) feet of any fire plug in the city. 
(c)  All poles, posts, columns, supports, works and structures of any kind whatsoever within three (3) feet of any fire plug shall be removed after ten (10) days' notice in writing by the fire chief to the owner of such poles, posts, columns, supports, works or structures, or in case of telegraph or telephone poles, to the agent of the company owning same, and in event of the failure to remove such poles, posts, columns, supports, works or structures after the expiration of the delay of ten (10) days, above provided, the city shall cause them to be removed at the expense of the owner of same. 
(Code 1958,  13-14, 13-15; Ord. No. 7090, 9-25-79) 
Secs. 15-4-15-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE PREVENTION CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; obstruction of fire prevention,  12-184; gas code,  17-1. 

Sec. 15-16. - Adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the city, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire and explosions, the following publications, save and except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, corrected, modified, or amended by this chapter, and except such provisions that conflict with this Code of Ordinances: 
(1)  The NFPA 1-Fire Prevention Code, 2012 Edition; 
(2)  The NFPA 101-Life Safety Code, 2012 Edition. 
(b)  The provisions of the above-named codes are adopted and incorporated as if fully set out at length herein, and a copy of the codes are on file in the office of the clerk of the council. 
(Code 1958,  13-1; Ord. No. 7128, 2-12-80; Ord. No. 7272, 4-28-81; Ord. No. 7944, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 9069, 5-9-89; Ord. No. 9500, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 9797, 4-28-98; Ord. No. 11,161, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11,607, 8-25-15) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference,  2-15. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, R.S. 33:1368 et seq. 
Sec. 15-17. - Definitions. 
    Except where the contexts in the above-named publications clearly provide to the contrary, the following rules shall apply: Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the above-named publications, it shall be held to mean the City of Monroe, Louisiana; whenever the words "chief of the bureau of fire prevention" are used in the above-named publications, they shall be held to mean the fire marshal; and whenever the term "corporate counsel" is used in the above-named publications, it shall be held to mean the city attorney. 
(Code 1958,  13-2; Ord. No. 9069, 5-9-89) 
Sec. 15-18. - Bureau of fire prevention. 
(a)  The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the bureau of fire prevention in the fire department of the city, which bureau is hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision of the fire chief. 
(b)  The chief (or fire marshal) in charge of the bureau of fire prevention shall be appointed by the chief of the fire department subject to approval by the mayor and the municipal fire and police civil service board. 
(c)  The chief may detail such members of the fire department as deputy fire marshal as shall from time to time be necessary. 
(Code 1958,  13-6) 
Sec. 15-19. - Amendments. 
(a)  Section 16.75f of the Fire Prevention Code of 1976, as adopted herein, is amended as follows: 
f.  Special Type Dispensers. 
(1)  The dispensing of Class I liquids at a service station available and open to the public by persons other than the service station attendant, shall be allowed, provided there is at least one qualified attendant on duty while the station is open to the public. The attendant's primary function shall be to supervise, observe and control the dispensing of Class I liquids while said liquids are being dispensed. It shall be the responsibility of the attendant to prevent the dispensing of Class I liquids into portable containers not in compliance with Section 16.73e, control sources of ignition, and immediately handle accidental spills and fire extinguishers if needed. 
(b)  Section 28.1 of the Fire Prevention Code of 1976, as adopted hereinabove, is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  By changing subsection (a) to read as follows: 
"a.  Permit Required. No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire or rubbish fire or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained without a permit or other proper authorization. During construction or demolition of buildings or structures no waste materials or rubbish shall be disposed of by burning." 
(2)  By deleting subsection (b). 
(3)  By relettering subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (b) and (c) respectively. 
(Code 1958,  13-4) 
Sec. 15-20. - Permits for new materials, processes, or occupancies. 
    The council, the fire chief, and the chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify, after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials, processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those now enumerated in the Fire Prevention Code. The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office, and distribute copies thereof to interested persons. 
(Code 1958,  13-7) 
Sec. 15-21. - Modifications. 
    The chief of the bureau of fire prevention shall have power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided, the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the chief of the bureau of fire prevention thereon shall be entered upon the records of the department and a signed copy shall be furnished the applicant. 
(Code 1958,  13-3) 
Sec. 15-22. - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire chief shall disapprove an application or refuse to grant a license or permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of such code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may appeal from the decision of the chief of the fire department to the council within thirty (30) days from the date of such decision. 
(Code 1958,  13-8) 
Sec. 15-23. - Violations. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code hereby adopted or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the city council, the chief of the fire department, the chief of the fire prevention bureau, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten (10) days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1958,  13-5) 
Chapter 16 - GARBAGE AND TRASH[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public works department,  4-06. 
Cross reference- Litter, Ch. 21; trash at Forsyth Park West,  25-19. 
State Law reference- Louisiana Solid Waste Management and Resource Recovery Law, R.S. 30: 2151 et seq.; litter control, R.S. 30:2521 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Use of former city dump. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump any trash, garbage and refuse at any site that was once designated as a "city dump". "No dumping" signs shall be erected at any site that was once designated as a "city dump". 
(Ord. No. 7169, 9-23-80) 
Secs. 16-2-16-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL REFUSE COLLECTION SERVICE 

Sec. 16-16. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Municipal Refuse Collection Service Ordinance of the City of Monroe, Louisiana." 
(Code 1958,  14-1) 
Sec. 16-17. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. 
    Litter is garbage, refuse or rubbish, as defined herein or as more fully defined in section 21-2 of this Code. 
    Producer is the person, which accumulates refuse within the limits of the city. For the purposes hereof, shopping centers, office buildings and multifamily dwelling complexes shall be considered as single producers. 
    Refuse is all putrescible and nonputrescible waste, solid waste except body waste, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, leaves, grass cuttings, dead animals, and solid market and industrial waste. 
(Code 1958,  14-1.1; Ord. No. 7251, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 10,814, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 16-18. - Storage. 
    No producer shall place any refuse in any street, alley, boulevard or other public place or upon any private property, whether owned by such producer or not, within the city unless it be in proper containers for collection and approved by the public works director. 
    Every residence or commercial business in the city which has applied for sewer or water service and/or is actually doing business or where persons are residing in a residence/building owned or leased by such persons, or is being leased by another shall have a container or other form of collection which is approved by the director of public works. 
    All commercial(including apartment complexes) shall place their garbage receptacles within the confines of their premises at locations to be approved by the department of public works and, if necessary, behind an enclosure, the size to be determined by the public works director in conjunction with the city code enforcement division. Failure to get approval shall be a violation of this chapter subject to additional collection remedies listed in section 16-20(e). 
(Code 1958,  14-1.2; Ord. No. 7731, 9-25-84; Ord. No. 10,814, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 16-19. - Residential, apartment and small business collections. 
    The following provisions shall be applicable to residential, apartment, and small business refuse collection. 
(1)  The person having authority to control the disposal of refuse collection in any household, apartment, or small business producing less than two (2) cubic yards of refuse per week shall cause all refuse (garbage) collection to be placed only in those receptacles supplied by the city. 
(2)  The city shall retain ownership of all containers which are provided for refuse (garbage) collection. Said containers shall not be removed from the premises. In the event a user changes residence location, he shall notify the city of such address change, and the city will pick up the container from that location. 
(3)  Any container or part thereof provided by the city which becomes lost or stolen shall be replaced by the city and shall be paid for by the users to which the container is assigned. Containers which are damaged through no fault of the city shall be replaced by the city and paid for by the user to which the container is assigned. Garbage pickup service will be suspended until such time a lost, stolen or damaged container is replaced and paid for. 
(4)  It shall be the responsibility of the user to which a container is assigned to maintain his container in a clean, healthy manner, free of obnoxious odors, maggots, insect and rodents, or in any other condition which may render them unhealthy to the environment or the neighborhood. It shall further be the responsibility of the user to which a container is assigned to keep said container in good repair at all times. 
(5)  Receptacles provided by the city shall be placed in the area between the sidewalk and the curb or in an accessible place as near to the street as possible. Containers shall not be placed at the curbside before 4:00 p.m. on the day prior to collection and shall be removed by nightfall on the day of collection. Containers shall also be placed at curbside on the street which the residence using the container fronts on. If this regulation is not adhered to, there will be no refuse pickup for that residence in violation hereof. Exceptions to the above requirements may be granted at the discretion of the public works director for persons with physical limitations which prevent placement of the garbage receptacles at the curb, provided such exception is in writing and provided such exception is approved. 
(6)  Users having containers or receptacles supplied with lid snaps must keep the lid snaps secured and in place at all times. Failure to adhere to this regulation will carry a fine of seven dollars and fifty cents ($7.50). 
(7)  Items of refuse that cannot be placed in receptacles provided by the city include poisons, acids, caustic explosives or other dangerous materials, any type of construction materials, paint, paint thinner, kerosene, gasoline, oil or oil filters. In addition, the following nonexclusive items shall not be placed for either trash or garbage collection under any circumstance: furniture (including mattresses), any televisions, stereos, electrical appliances or plumbing fixtures. 
(8)  Leaves and grass cuttings will be picked up by a separate and different truck. Such leaves and grass must be put in bagged containers and placed within six (6) feet of the pavement at the normal location for containers used in garbage pickup and never near a tree, telephone pole, signpost or other obstruction. Tree limbs shall be neatly stacked and shall not exceed four (4) feet in length or six (6) inches in diameter and each limb shall weigh no more than fifty (50) pounds. All other yard waste including vines and small limbs shall be placed in bagged containers. Any items in violation of this section will not be collected by the city and will subject the violator to the additional collection fee set forth in subsection 16-20(e). 
(9)  The city will only pick up trees in residential and commercial areas in situations where they have fallen due to an act of disaster which endangers public health and welfare of the city's citizens. Violations of this section after one warning shall be punishable by a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) plus court costs, said fine shall not be subject to suspension or probation. (Warning by the public works department.) 
(10)  Any other violations of this subsection not carrying a specific fine mentioned above will subject the user of a container to a fine of fifteen dollars ($15.00). 
(11)  There shall be no dumping of any garbage or trash on any public right-of-way, median or boulevard. Any such violation shall subject the violator to in collection/noncompliance fee charged herein or any other civil or criminal penalty allowed by law. 
(Code 1958,  14-1.3(b); Ord. No. 7251, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 7731, 9-25-84; Ord. No. 10,814, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 16-20. - Collection charges. 
(a)  There is hereby levied a service charge to defray the expense of the collection and disposal of all residential refuse, garbage and trash to be assessed and collected promptly from each residence in the city in the amount of fifteen dollars ($15.00) per month per receptacle supplied by the city or approved substitute; provided however that for those residences in which the head of the household is sixty-five (65) years or older, the service charge shall be nine dollars ($9.00) per month per receptacle. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) above, for those residences in which the head of the household is sixty-five (65) years or older and is certified in the SSI Program, the Medi-Caid Program, or the Food Stamp Program (or their successors), the service charge shall be six dollars ($6.00) per month per receptacle. 
(c)  In addition to the service charge set forth in subsections (a) and (b) above, there is hereby levied a rental fee to be assessed and collected promptly from each residence in the city in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per month per receptacle supplied by the city. 
(d)  All refuse, garbage and trash accumulated in the city by persons, exclusive of residential producers, in quantities of two (2) cubic yards or less a week, shall be collect, conveyed and disposed of by the city, its agents or representatives. There is levied a service charge to defray the expenses of the collection and disposal of such refuse, garbage and trash to be assessed and collected promptly from each such customer receiving service from the city in the amount of twenty-two dollars ($22.00) per receptacle. 
(e)  In addition to any other provision for violation set forth in chapter 21 of this Code, there shall be an additional collection/non compliance fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per residence and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for businesses under the following circumstances, with the collection fee continuing to double for each seven-day period for which the violation is not cured by the resident or business: 
(1)  A violation occurs of the provisions contained herein and/or chapter 21 of this Code. 
a.  The fee charged herein shall be charged to the owner of the residence, the resident or the person under whose name the application for utility services appears for residences or the owner, occupant or person/entity under whose name the application for utility services appears for commercial services; and/or 
b.  The lessor of an apartment complex or residence whose lessees have failed to comply with the provisions of this chapter or those contained in chapter 21 of this Code. Lessor shall include, but not be limited to the resident apartment manager unit or the on unit premises being used as a rental office; and/or 
c.  The owner and/or landlord of property who has allowed or caused personal items from an eviction proceeding or event to be placed at the curbside without the items being placed in containers as set forth in section 16-18 of this chapter. In addition to the collection/noncompliance fee set forth in section 16-20(e) of this chapter, a violation of this provision shall subject the owner/landlord premises where the violation occurs to the inability for water/sewer service until the fee has been paid in full. 
(Code 1958,  14-1.3; Ord. No. 7172, 9-23-80; Ord. No. 9017, 5-12-88; Ord. No. 9822, 7-28-98; Ord. No. 9830, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 10,407, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 10,814, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 16-21. - Collection by producer. 
    All refuse, garbage and trash accumulated in the city by persons in quantities in excess of two (2) cubic yards per week, shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the producer, his agents or representatives. The city shall not act as the agent or representative of said producer for such purposes and shall not collect refuse, garbage and trash from such producer unless it is necessary to do so in order to protect the public health and safety of the citizens of the city. In such event, the city shall charge the producer for such service at a rate of not less than fifteen dollars ($15.00) per cubic yard of refuse, garbage and trash so collected. All collection under this provision shall be disposed of weekly and any additional charge collected because of a violation of this chapter shall be charged directly to premises through the name of the person/entity who has applied for water, sewage and/or garbage collection services. 
(Code 1958,  14-1.4; Ord. No. 9017, 5-12-88; Ord. No. 10,407, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 10,814, 6-24-08) 
Sec. 16-22. - Collection by actual producer and outside collectors. 
(a)  The actual producers of refuse or the owners of premises upon which refuse is accumulated who desire personally to collect and dispose of such refuse, who have been approved by the director of public works, and persons who desire to dispose of waste material not included in the definition of refuse, and collectors of refuse from outside of the city who desire to haul over the streets of the city shall use a watertight vehicle provided with tight cover and so operated as to prevent offensive odors escaping therefrom or refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled during collection or transit. Any violation in the hauling of such refuse shall cause the violating vehicle to be stopped and not permitted to move forward until the violation has been cured to the approval of the director of public works or a law enforcement official. 
(b)  Disposal of refuse by persons so permitted under the preceding paragraph shall be made outside the city limits unless otherwise specifically authorized by the public works director, who shall also have the authority to make other reasonable regulations concerning individual collection and disposal and relating to the hauling of refuse over city streets for outside collectors. 
(Code 1958,  14-1.5; Ord. No. 10,814, 6-24-08) 
Chapter 17 - GAS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; theft of utility services,  12-97; fire prevention and protection, Ch. 15; housing code,  19-16 et seq.; plumbing, Ch. 27; permit to break streets,  31-21. 
State Law reference- Building codes, R.S. 33:4771 et seq.; state uniform construction code, R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq. 

Sec. 17-1. - Standards adopted. 
(a)  There is hereby adopted by the City of Monroe, Louisiana, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of gas piping and gas appliances and equipment within the City of Monroe, Louisiana, the Standard Gas Code-1997 edition, prepared by the Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. 
(b)  This code is adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set out at length herein, except such portions as may be in conflict with federal, state, or local law, or which may be specifically deleted and shall be controlling for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy, location and maintenance of gas piping and gas appliances and equipment with the City of Monroe, Louisiana. Copies of this code shall be on file in the office of the clerk of the city council of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(Code 1958,  22-42; Ord. No. 9257, 11-26-91; Ord. No. 9501, 1-24-95; Ord. No. 9803, 5-12-98) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference,  2-15. 
State Law reference- Building codes, R.S. 33:4771 et seq.; state uniform construction code, R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq.; adoption by reference authorized, R.S. 33:1368 et seq. 
Sec. 17-2. - Unsafe structures. 
    In any instance in which the planning and urban development director finds that natural gas equipment or fixtures in any premises are in such condition that the health or the safety of the general public or the occupants of the premises, is in danger, it shall be authorized to cause such premises to be immediately vacated and to remain so vacated until the condition or conditions creating the danger are corrected and such danger to the general public or occupants of the premises eliminated. Any person who refuses to obey such an order to vacate premises which the inspector has found to be in dangerous condition as set forth above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958,  22-35) 
Sec. 17-3. - Gas permit and fees. 
(a)  No gas piping shall be constructed, reconstructed or repaired within the city, until a permit to do such work shall have first been obtained from the planning and urban development director. The permit application shall be filed on blanks furnished by the planning and urban development director in triplicate, one of which is to be issued to the person applying for the permit, one to the gas company supplying the gas, and one to be retained by the director. 
(b)  For inspection of piping in one building or structure serving not more than fifteen (15) outlets, the plumbing inspector shall charge and collect from the person applying for such inspection the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). 
(c)  Where more than one inspection is required for any reason the director shall charge an additional fee of three dollars ($3.00) each additional inspection, such fee to be turned over to the director of administration. 
(d)  For inspection of floor furnaces, wall furnaces, central heating boilers and furnaces, suspended type unit heaters, duct and attic furnaces, or any other gas fired heating appliance other than a space heater, the director shall charge and collect from the person applying for such inspection the sum of three dollars ($3.00) for each such fixture. 
(e)  For medical gas piping a minimum fee of seventy dollars ($70.00) shall be charged. 
(Code 1958,  22-39; Ord. No. 7252, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 10,197, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 10,470, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 11,610, 9-8-15) 
Sec. 17-4. - Inspections, certificates; tests. 
(a)  When gas house piping has been installed in a building or structure, whether the same be new construction, repairs or extensions, the same must be inspected and tested in the presence of the planning and urban development director and a certificate of inspection issued as herein provided and an inspection tag attached to such piping by such official. 
(b)  When the system of piping and all extensions thereto have been completed and all openings firmly closed, the person installing such piping shall make the test above provided, and if the piping is found tight, shall make application for test to the planning and urban development director. Upon such application the director will inspect the piping and witness the test, and if the piping is found tight and the work done is in accordance with the provisions of this article, then the director shall issue and deliver a certificate in the following form: 
GAS INSPECTION CERTIFICATE No. _____ 
    This is to certify that I have inspected and witnessed the test of the gas piping in _____ 
Building No. _______, ___________ Street, and certify that the same is installed in compliance with City Ordinance. 
_____
Inspector 
Date: ________, 19 _______ . 
 By  _____ 
Gas Fitter 
    Any additional gas piping or outlets installed, after the above certificate has been issued, must be reported for inspection and test in the same manner as pipe originally installed. 
(Code 1958,  22-40) 
Sec. 17-5. - Deciding controversies. 
    The planning and urban development director shall decide all controversies which may arise under this article, and in so doing shall be subject to the control and direction of the council and the attorney. 
(Code 1958,  22-41) 
Chapter 18 - HEALTH AND SANITATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ambulances, Ch. 5; animals and fowl, Ch. 6; plumbing code, Ch. 27; sewers and drains, Ch. 30; water, Ch. 36. 

Sec. 18-1. - State Sanitary Code adopted. 
    The city hereby adopts the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana as prepared and promulgated by the Louisiana State Board of Health in accordance with Act 79 of 1921, as amended, insofar as the same is applicable and does not conflict with the provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1958,  15-1) 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, R.S. 13:1368 et seq.; Sanitary Code, R.S. 40:11. 
Chapter 18.5 - HISTORICAL PRESERVATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,357, adopted Oct. 14, 2003, amended Ch. 18.5 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 18.5 pertained to the same subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 10,219, adopted May 28, 2002; and Ord. No. 10,288, adopted Feb. 11, 2003. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; drainage and flood control, Ch. 13; planning and development, Ch. 26; zoning, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Historic preservation, R.S. 25:731 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18.5-1. - Creation and delineation of historical districts. 
    The following described three (3) historical districts, to be known as "The Don Juan Filhiol Historical District", "The Henry Bry Historical District" and "The Louis Alexander de Breard Historical District" are hereby created: 
(1)  Don Juan Filhiol Historic District: Beginning at the intersection of Telemaque Street and St. John Street: thence northwesterly along St. John to Oak street; thence northeasterly along Oak Street to Catalpa Street; thence northwesterly along Catalpa to Wood Street; thence northeasterly along Wood Street to South 6 th Street; thence northwesterly along South 6 th Street to DeSiard Street; thence easterly along the Illinois Central Railroad Track to the intersection with the southwesterly extended centerline of Grammont Street; thence northeasterly along said extension and Grammont Street to South 11 th Street; thence northwesterly along South 11 th Street to the intersection of Elysian Fields Road at the southwest corner of the Congregation B'Nai Israel Cemetery; thence easterly down Elysian Fields Road along the southern line of said Cemetery to the intersection of Grammont Street; thence northeasterly along Grammont street to a point even with the southeast corner of the Cemetery; thence northwesterly along the east edge of the Cemetery to the northeast corner of the Cemetery; thence southwesterly along the northern edge of the Cemetery to the northwest corner of the Cemetery and the intersection of Manassas Street; thence northerly along Manassas Street to DeSiard Street; thence northeasterly along DeSiard Street for a distance of approximately 465 feet to a point extended to the centerline of DeSiard where a common property line exist between east 24 feet, Lot 3 and all Lot 5, Filhiol's Second Addition and Lot in Lot 7, frontage 25 feet on north side DeSiard Street, depth 140 feet, Filhiol's Second or Guinea Addition; thence northwesterly along this property line and the property line common to Lot 4 in Filhiol's Second or Guinea Addition, frontage 60 feet on Adams, depth 140 feet and Lot 6, Filhiol's Second or Guinea Addition to the centerline of Adams Street; thence southwesterly along Adam Street to North 6 th Street; thence northwesterly along North 6 th Street to Washington Street; thence southwesterly along Washington Street to Walnut Street; thence northwesterly along Walnut Street to Arkansas Street; thence southwesterly along Arkansas Street to the Centerline of the Ouachita River; thence continuing along the Centerline of the Ouachita River in a southerly direct to a point in the river corresponding to an intersection with Telemaque Street; thence in a northeasterly direction back to the origination point at the intersection of Telemaque Street and St. John Street; containing 172 acres, more or less. The historic district designated above shall include all structures, houses, or other buildings facing any of the streets on the perimeter of the area. Note that all boundary lines along the designated traffic routes/streams run down the centerlines of said traffic routes/streams. 
(2)  Henry Bry Historical District. Beginning at the intersection of the St. John Street and Bry Street; thence northeasterly along St. John Street to thence southwesterly along Mulberry Street and continuing along a projection to the centerline of the Ouachita River; thence southeasterly along the centerline of the Ouachita River to the intersection with a southwesterly extended centerline of Orange Drive; thence northeasterly along said extension and continuing along Orange Drive to the Missouri Pacific Railroad Tracks; thence northerly along said railroad to Holly Street; then southwesterly along Holly Street to a point 200 feet east of Jackson Street; thence northwesterly along Texas Avenue to Jackson Street; thence northwesterly along a line measure 200 feet easterly and parallel to Jackson Street to Texas Avenue; thence southwesterly along Texas Avenue to Jackson Street; thence northwesterly along Jackson Street to Bry Street; thence southwesterly along Bry Street to St. John Street containing 74 acres, more or less. The historical district designated above shall include all structures, houses, or other buildings facing any of the streets on the perimeter of the area. 
(3)  Louis Alexander De Breard Historical District. Beginning at the intersection of Bres Avenue thence northeasterly along the centerline of Bres Avenue to the intersection with the extension line of the rear lot line of lot 6, Block 78, D. A. Breard Senior Addition; thence southeasterly along said lot line extension a distance of 30 feet to a point on the south right-of-way line of Bres Avenue, thence continue southeasterly along said line and the west lot line of lot 5 of said block to the southwest corner of said lot 5; thence northeasterly along the south line of said lot 5 and extension line of said lot to the southwest corner of lot 8, Block 79, D. A. Breard Senior Addition a distance of 181 feet more or less; thence continue northeasterly along the south lot line of said lot 8 a distance of 159.75 feet to southeast corner of lot 8; thence northwesterly along the east lot line of said lot 8, a distance of 71.5 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence northeasterly along the north lot line of lot 5 of said block and its extension line, a distance of 145.75 feet, more or less, to the centerline of North 3 rd Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline a distance of 221.01 feet, more or less, to the intersection with the extension line of the north line of lot 1, Block 109 D. A. Breard Senior Addition; thence northeasterly along said extension line a distance of 190.08 feet, more or less, to the southeast corner of said lot; thence northwesterly along the east lot extension line of lot 4 of said block to the centerline of Hudson Lane a distance of 119.51 feet, more or less; then northeasterly along said centerline a distance of 72.92 feet, more or less, to the intersection of an extension line of the west lot line of a lot in Square 3, Hudson's First Addition fronting 87 feet on the north side of the Hudson Lane and 111.52 feet on the west side of North 4 th Street; thence northwesterly along said extension line and the west lot line of said lot and the west lot of line a lot fronting 48.16 feet along North Street lot Square 3, of said addition a distance of 189.68 feet, more or less, to the northwest corner of said lot; thence southwesterly along the south lot line of a lot in said square beginning 159.68 feet north of Hudson Lane and fronting 135 feet along the west side of North 4 th Street, a distance of 83.18 feet more or less, to the southwest corner of said lot; thence northeasterly along the west line of said lot and the east line of a lot in Square 7, Stubbs Place Addition, fronting 70 feet on the east side of North 3 rd Street and having a depth of 150 feet, a distance of 205 feet, more of less, to the northeast corner of said lot with a depth of 150 feet, thence northwesterly along an extension line and the north lot line of a lot in said square fronting 70 feet on the west side North 4 th Street and having a depth of 150 feet, a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to the centerline of North 4 th Street; thence northwesterly along said centerline a distance of 29.98 feet, more or less, to the intersection with the extension line of the north line of lot 5 of the resubdivision of the west half of Square 9, Stubbs Place Addition; thence northeasterly along said extension line and the north lot line of said lot a distance of 180 feet, more or less, to the northeast corner of said lot; thence southeasterly along the east lot lines of lots 5 and 6 of the subdivisions of the west half of Square 9, Stubbs Place Addition and along the west lot line of two adjacent lots each fronting 50 feet, along North 4 th Street and each having a depth of 150 feet, in square 4, Hudson First Addition, a distance of 200 feet, more or less, to the southwest corner of a lot fronting 50 feet, along North 5 th Street and being 194.75 feet north of the north right-of-way line of Hudson Lane; thence northeasterly along the south lot line of said lot and its extension line to the intersection with the centerline of North 5 th Street, a distance of 180 feet; more or less,; thence southeasterly along said centerline a distance of 224.75 feet, more or less to the intersection with the centerline Hudson Lane; thence northeasterly along the centerline of Hudson Lane to the intersection with the centerline of North 6 th Street, a distance of 360 feet, more or less, thence northwesterly along the centerline of North 6 th Street to the intersection to the centerline of Stubbs Avenue, a distance of 643.3 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the intersection with the extension line of the east lot line of lot 5, Square 14, Stubbs Place Addition; a distance of 280 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said extension line and east lot of said lot a distance of 173 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence southwesterly along the north lot lines of lots 4 and 5, of said square to the northwest corner to lot 4 of said square a distance of 100 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along the extension line of east lot line and the east lot line of lot 8, of said square a distance of 79.89 feet, more or less, to the northeast corner of said lot; thence southwesterly north lot line and its extension line to the intersection with the centerline of North 6 th Street a distance of 180 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along the centerline of Roselawn Avenue a distance of 251.65 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along the along said to the intersection with the centerline of Roselawn Avenue to the intersection with the centerline of North 7 th Street a distance of 361.24 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North 7 th Street to the intersection with the extension line of the south lot line of lot 1, Square 15, Cooper and James Addition, a distance of 197.01 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along said extension line and the south lot lines of lots 1, 2, and 3, and the west 54.24 feet of lot 4, Square 16, of said addition a distance of 264.24 feet, more or less, to the intersection with a point being 5.76 feet southwest of the southeast corner of lot 4 of said square; thence northwesterly along a line parallel to and 5.76 feet west of the west lot line of lot 5 of said square and its extension line to the intersection with the centerline of Auburn Avenue a distance of 176.84 feet, more or less; thence southwesterly along said centerline to the intersection with the extension line of the east lot line of lot 3, Square 24, Cooper and James Addition for a distance of 54.24 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said extension line, the east lot line of said lot, the extension line of the east lot line of a lot being 120 feet east of the east right-of-way line of North 7 th Street and fronting 60 feet on the south side of Glenmar Avenue having a depth of 144.3 feet, more or less, the east lot line of said lot, the extension line of said lot to the intersection with the centerline of Glenmar Avenue a distance of 373.6 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the intersection with the centerline of North 8 th Street a distance of 157.24 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along the centerline of North 8 th Street to the intersection with the centerline of the south line of a lot in lot 2, Square 32, D. A. Breard Junior Home Addition fronting 144.31 feet on the west side of North 8 th Street and having a depth of 140.24 feet a distance of 164.31 feet, more or less; thence southwesterly along said extension line, the south line of said described lot and the lot adjacent to and west of said described lot to the southwest corner of the aforementioned adjacent lot a distance of 270 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along the west lot line of the aforementioned adjacent lot and its extension line to the intersection with the centerline of Erin Avenue a distance of 176.89 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the intersection with the extension line of the east lot line of a lot in Square 39, D. A. Breard Junior Home Addition fronting 95 feet on the north side of Erin Avenue and having a depth of 144.40 feet on the east said of North 7 th Street; thence northwesterly along said extension line and the east lot line of said lot a distance of 176.89 feet. more or less, to the northeast corner of said lot; thence southwesterly along the north line and the extension line of the north line of said lot to the intersection with the centerline of North 7 th Street a distance of 125 feet, more or less, thence northwesterly along said centerline to the intersection with the centerline of Rochelle Avenue a distance of 196.9 feet more or less; thence southwesterly along said centerline to the intersection with the extension line to the east lot line of lot 4 Square 45, Sidney Kahn's resubdivision of Block 45 of D.A. Breard Junior Home Addition a distance of 90.0 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said extension line and the east lot line of said lot a distance of 153.18 feet, more or less, to the northeast corner of said lot; thence southwesterly along the north lot lines of lot 4 and the east 20 feet of lot 3 and 4 of said square to a point being the southeast corner of lot 7, Square 20, resubdivision of Squares 20, 21, 27-29, Hudson's Riverside Addition; thence northwesterly along the east lot line of said lot to the northeast corner of said lot a distance of 50 feet, more or less; thence southwesterly along the north line of said lot and its extension line to the intersection to the centerline of North 6 th Street a distance of 187.5 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said centerline a distance of 475 feet, more or less to the intersection with the extension line of the north lot line of lot 7, Square 21, Hudson's Riverside Addition; thence northeasterly along said extension line and north lot lines of lots 7-12 of said square and the extension line of the north lot line of lot 12 of said square to the intersection with the centerline of North 7 th Street a distance of 375 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the intersection with the extension line of lot 12, Square 22, Hudson's Riverside Addition a distance of 375 feet, more or less; thence southwesterly along said extension line and north lot lines of lots 7-12 of said square the extension line of the north lot line of lot 7 of said square to the intersection of the centerline of North 6 th Street a distance of 375 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the intersection with the centerline of Hilton Street a distance of 225 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the intersection with the centerline of Floyd Martin Street a distance of 750 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the intersection with the centerline of Forsythe Avenue a distance of 762.5 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along said centerline to the intersection with the centerline of North 10 th Street a distance of 750 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said centerline to the intersection with the extension line of the south property line of a parcel of land owned and operate by the City of Monroe, as the City of Monroe Water treatment plant; thence turn 90 degrees left and proceed southwesterly along said extension line and the south parcel line of said parcel to the southwest corner of said parcel a distance of 600 feet, more or less; thence turn 90 degrees right and proceed northeasterly along the west property line of said parcel to the intersection with a point on the south property line of a parcel of land owned and operated by Entergy Services Inc. as an electric power plant, a distance of 400 feet, more or less; thence turn 90 degrees to the left and proceed southwesterly along the south line of said property to the southwest corner of said property a distance of 100 feet, more or less; thence turn to the right 90 degrees and proceed northwesterly along the west property line and the extension line a distance of 330 feet, more or less, to the centerline of Park Avenue; thence proceed northwesterly along said centerline a distance of 160 feet, more or less, to the intersection with the extension line of the east lot line of a lot described as the west half of lots 15 and 16, Square 7, Riverside Heights Addition, thence northwesterly along said extension line and the east lot line of said lot a distance of 130 feet to the northeast corner of said lot; thence southwesterly along the north line of said lot and the north line of lot 10, Square 7, of said addition to the intersection with the east line of the following described lot: the west half of lots 9-11, Square 7, Hudson Riverside Addition fronting 71.5 feet on the north side of Park Avenue and having a depth of 150 feet; a distance of 159 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along said lot line to the intersection with the north lot line of lot 9 of said square, a distance of 50 feet, more or less; thence northeasterly along the north lot line of said lot to the intersection with the northeast corner of lot 9 of said square a distance of 71.5 feet, more or less; thence northwesterly along the east lot lines of lots 7 and 8, Square 7, Riverside Heights Addition, a distance of 100 feet to the northeast corner of lot 7 of said square; thence southwesterly along the north line of said lot and its extension line an extension of 180 feet to the intersection with the centerline of Maple Street; thence turn 90 degrees to the right and proceed northwesterly along the centerline of Maple Street to the intersection with the centerline of McKinley Street, thence southwesterly along the centerline of McKinley Street and its extension line to the intersection with the centerline of the Ouachita River a distance 1,955 feet, more or less; thence southerly, and southeasterly along the centerline of the Ouachita River to the intersection with the southwesterly extended centerline of Bres Avenue; and the point of beginning containing 479.1 acres, more or less. The historical district designated above shall include all structures, houses, or other buildings facing any of the streets of the perimeter of the area. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 11,799, 9-12-17) 
Sec. 18.5-2. - Subdivision for plans for exterior changes to commission; certificate required. 
(a)  No private building, structure, or edifice, including fences, boundary walls, signs, light fixtures, steps, paving or other appurtenant fixtures shall be erected, altered, restored, moved, or demolished within any historical district until after application for a certificate of appropriateness as to the exterior architectural features has been submitted to and approved by the commission. 
(b)  If earthworks of historical or archaeological importance exist in any historical district, there shall be no excavating or moving of earth, rock, or subsoil without a certificate of appropriateness from the commission. 
(c)  The style, scale, material, size, and location of outdoor advertising signs and billposters within historical districts shall be under the control of the commission. 
(d)  The commission shall consider interior arrangement or use but shall consider the relationship of the exterior of the buildings, structures, and edifices concerned with all others in the district to avoid incongruity and promote harmony therewith. 
(e)  The commission shall adhere to seek and compatibility of structures in the districts in terms of size, texture, scale, and site plan. 
(f)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to repairs of damaged structures or buildings including fences or boundary walls which were damaged as a result of fire, flood, windstorm, ice storm, earthquake or other unforeseen cause. The restoration must involve the use of similar construction materials. The design and outward appearance must remain the same as it was before the damage event. If design and/or materials are different, then such changes and action must be brought before the commission prior to initiating the action. 
(g)  Demolition which has been ordered by the Monroe City Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not require the approval of nor the issuance of a certificate from the commission; however, the commission shall receive prior reasonable notice of condemnation proceedings pending before the council. 
(h)  The commission shall make no review, approval, disapproval, or recommendation until the commission has adopted the rules, regulations, policies, procedures, or standards as set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03; Ord. No. 11,550, 3-24-15) 
State Law reference- Certificates of appropriateness, R.S. 25:738. 
Sec. 18.5-3. - Certificates of appropriateness. 
(a)  The owner and/or contractor, prior to initiating any works described in subsections 18.5-2(a), (b), or (c) shall submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness accompanied by reasonable plans and specifications of the work to the commission to the manner set forth in Article II of this chapter. 
(b)  The commission shall hear and pass upon any application, giving consideration to the factors set forth herein within thirty (30) days of the date it is received by the commission. The commission shall report, in writing, to the building inspector within ten (10) days of the hearing and consideration of the application, its recommendations on the permit application, including such changes or modifications as may be reasonably necessary to comply with the requirements of this chapter. The commission shall attach the application the application and all documents therewith to its report and recommendation. Evidence of the approval shall be in the form of a certificate of appropriateness. A copy of the report and recommendation shall be promptly sent to the applicant. Failure to respond within the ten-day period herein shall be deemed a recommendation of approval. The commission shall keep a record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness and of all its actions under this chapter. 
(c)  No building or demolition permit shall be issued by the building inspector who affects a site or structure in any historic district without a certificate of appropriateness, except as otherwise permitted by subsections 18.5-2(f) and (g). 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
State Law reference- Certificates of appropriateness, R.S. 25:738. 
Sec. 18.5-4. - Same-Criteria. 
    The criteria to be used by the commission in making recommendations shall be as follows: 
(1)  To the extend that is economically feasible, efforts to provide compatible uses of buildings requiring minimal building, building site, or environmental alterations shall be encouraged; 
(2)  Removal, destruction, or alteration of original characteristics or unique architectural features or a building should be discouraged; 
(3)  In the rehabilitation of historic buildings, the use of material matching or compatible with those already used on the building as to composition, design, color, texture, and other visible qualities shall be encouraged; 
(4)  Contemporary design in new construction and in alterations and addition should not be discouraged when such alterations and additions do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural material; 
(5)  Demolition of a building or buildings of historical significance should be avoided if the commission can demonstrate that it is economically feasible to preserve the building; 
(6)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all private property in the districts established herein, including all buildings, structures, areas, sites, and their adjuncts and appurtenances, and insofar as they constitute part of the entirety or "tout ensemble" of the historic district; and 
(7)  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to buildings, structures, areas, sites, public ways, or property, including any adjuncts or appurtenances thereto, owned, under the custody of, or under the responsibility of any governmental agency of local, state, or federal government within the historic district. However, any such agency shall seek the advice of the commission prior to initiating any substantial change, modification, renovation, restoration, construction, or demolition, except as provided in subsections 18.5-2(f) and (g). 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-5. - Same-Action thereon. 
(a)  If the commission recommends approval of the application, and if such application and intended work shall inform to all other regulations, codes, ordinances, and laws of the city, the building inspector shall promptly issue a permit for such work and indicate on said permit the extent and nature of the work to be performed thereunder. 
(b)  If the commission recommends disapproval of the application, the building inspector shall within five (5) days of receiving such disapproval, forward notice of the action along with the written report of the city council, which shall give written notice to the applicant and to the commission within ten (10) days of receipt of the report from the building inspector. The council shall then consider and hear the matter in open session, giving the applicant, the commission, and all interested parties an opportunity to be heard under the rules established by the council, and shall approve or disapprove the application. Said hearing shall be held not less then ten (10) days nor more than forty-five (45) days from the date notice of the hearing is given to the applicant. 
(c)  Any other person aggrieved by any decision of the commission shall have a right to apply in writing to the council from reversal of modification thereof. The mayor or the chairman of the council to have the right to state all further until the council considers the decision. The council shall give written notice within ten (10) days of the receipt of the written application for reversal or modification. The council shall then consider and hear the matter in open session, giving the applicant, the commission, and all interested parties an opportunity to be heard under the rules established by the council and approve or disapprove the application. Said hearing shall be held not less than ten (10) days, nor more then forty-five (45) days from the date notice of the hearing is given to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-6. - Variances. 
(a)  Where, by reason of topographical conditions, irregularly shaped lots, or because of unique circumstances applicable solely to a particular applicant, strict enforcement of any criteria would result in serious undue hardship peculiarly affecting said applicant, the commission may vary of modify adherence to this chapter, provided always that its requirements insure harmony with the general purposes hereof, and will not adversely affect a historic district as a whole or any designated landmark. 
(b)  The commission shall also have the authority appear before and recommend to any governing agency, board, commission, or council any variance from any ordinance or regulation affecting requirements for requirements for renovation or restoration of any structure within the historic districts, when the requested variance meets the conditions set forth in subsection 18.5-6(a), and does not jeopardize the public safety. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
State Law reference- Variances, R.S. 25:739. 
Sec. 18.5-7. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by any decision of the council affecting any historic any historic district shall have the right to appeal within thirty (30) days from the date of said decision in any court of competent jurisdiction under the usual rules of procedure governing same, with the right to stay orders and injunctive relief as provided under R.S. 25:741 B. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
State Law reference- Appeals, R.S. 25:740. 
Sec. 18.5-8. - Stopping work commenced without a permit. 
(a)  The building inspector shall promptly stop any work subject to the provisions of this chapter which is not authorized by an approved permit therefore and shall promptly bring such matter to the office of the city attorney for appropriate legal action to enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The commission shall have the right institute suit in any other court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any unlawful violations of the provisions of this chapter or of any of the rules, regulations, or standards adopted in conformity with it. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-9. - Penalties; continuing violations. 
    Anyone violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) for each violation. Each day that any such violation shall continue shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-10. - Definitions. 
    Exterior architectural features shall include but not be limited to the color, composition, architectural style, general design, and texture of the building material, and the type of style of all roofs, windows, doors, and light fixtures. 
    Historic or historical building is defined herein as a contributing element to the Federal Downtown Monroe Historic District in the National Register or Historic Places Inventory-Nomination Form for the district, a copy of which is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council of the City of Monroe, or a building otherwise listed on the National Register of Historic Places. No additional structures shall be designated as historic or historical building without the owner's consent. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Secs. 18.5-11-18.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Historic district commissions, R.S. 25:736 et seq. 

Sec. 18.5-26. - Established. 
    There is hereby created and established the Monroe Heritage Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-27. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of the commission shall be to promote the educational, cultural, economical, and general welfare of the public by the preservation of the buildings, monuments structures, sites and area of historic interest or importance; to promote and improve property values; and to foster the economic development of the areas affected. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-28. - Recommendation and appointment of members. 
    The commission shall consist of seven (7) members, to be appointed by the mayor, subject to confirmation by the city council, who shall be residents of the City of Monroe, with the following qualifications: 
(a)  One architect licensed by the state to be a member of an to be nominated by the Monroe Chapter of the American Institute of Architects. 
(b)  One owner of an historical building within the designated historical districts or the successor thereto. 
(c)  One business owner in the historical district to be a member of an nominated by the Monroe Downtown Development Authority. 
(d)  Four (4) residents of the city to be nominated by members of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-29. - Terms; vacancies; recall. 
(a)  The members of the commission shall be appointed as follows: Two (2) members of an initial term of two (2) years; two (2) members for an initial term of three (3) years; three (3) members for an initial of four (4) years. Whenever the term of any member expires, his/her successor shall be appointed for a four-year term. The members may serve consecutive terms. 
(b)  In the event that a vacancy occurs prior to the end of a member's term, a successor shall be appointed to serve the remainder of that term in the same manner as the original member was appointed. 
(c)  Any member may be recalled at any time by a majority vote of council for gross inefficiency, fraud, or neglect, after an opening hearing upon ten (10) days' notice specifying the complaint involved. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-30. - Staff; committees. 
(a)  The commission shall annually select a chairman from among its members by majority vote. The chairman may appoint from among its members various committees with such powers and duties as the commission may have and prescribe. 
(b)  The city planner shall serve as the executive director of the commission. He/she shall receive and date applications for permits prepare, with the advice and consent of the chairman, the agendas for the meetings of the commission; set and convene meetings of the commission so that there is not a lapse of more than thirty (30) days between the submission of an application and its consideration by the commission; serve as an advisor to the commission; and forward the recommendations of the commission to the building inspector. 
(c)  The office of the city attorney shall serve as an ex officio attorney for the commission. 
(d)  With the mayor's approval, the commission may select such other existing city employees to assist the commission as may be necessary to carry out the purposes for which it was created and established. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-31. - Additional authority of the commission. 
    The commission shall have the authority to: 
(a)  Recommend any site, location, area, structure, building, or monument within the city to the council as historic and worthy of preservation, whether within or outside of the confines of the historical districts; 
(b)  Recommend appropriate legislation for the preservation for any site, location, area, structure, building, or monument of historic importance and for the improvement of the historical districts; 
(c)  Make application, with the approval of the council, for state and/or federal funds when appropriate; 
(d)  Apply for the historic designation of a site, location, area, structure, building, or monument with the consent of the owner(s) of a site, location, area, structure, building, or monument; 
(e)  Make periodic reports to the council; 
(f)  Provide information to property and other involving preservation and promotion of the districts. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Sec. 18.5-32. - Meetings; bylaws. 
(a)  The commission shall as often as is necessary to carry out its duties, but not less than once each quarter. Special meetings shall be held upon the call of the chairman of the commission or of the executive director. Special meetings shall also be held upon the written request of at least two (2) members. The presence of four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. 
(b)  The commission shall make such bylaws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures, and standards as it may deem necessary for the conduct of its affairs, not inconsistent with the laws of the city and of the State of Louisiana. All such bylaws, rules, regulations, policies, procedures, standards, and any amendments thereto shall be approved. 
(Ord. No. 10,357, 10-14-03) 
Chapter 19 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; electricity, Ch. 14; plumbing code, Ch. 27; gas, Ch. 17; zoning, Ch. 37. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 19-1-19-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOUSING CODE 

Sec. 19-16. - Adopted. 
    The 1973 edition of the Southern Standard Housing Code is hereby adopted and incorporated herein as fully as if set out at length. A copy of said 1973 edition of the Southern Standard Housing Code is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1958,  6-20) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference,  2-15. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference, R.S. 33:1368 et seq. 
Sec. 19-17. - Penalties. 
    Anyone who is found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter, including the provisions of the Southern Standard Housing Code as adopted herein, shall be fined not less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) per offense. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 7568, 7-26-83) 
Chapter 19.5 - LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 19.5-1. - Intent. 
    The intent of the landscaping requirements stated herein are as follows: 
(a)  To aid in stabilizing the environment's ecological balance by contribution to the processes of air movement, air purification, oxygen regeneration, groundwater recharge, and stormwater runoff control; while at the same time aiding in noise, glare, heat, and dust abatement; 
(b)  To provide visual buffering between land uses of differing character; 
(c)  To enhance the beautification and quality of life of the metropolitan area; 
(d)  To protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; 
(e)  To safeguard and enhance property values and to protect public and private investment; 
(f)  To assist in providing adequate light, and air and in preventing overcrowding of land; 
(g)  To encourage innovation and quality in landscape and architectural design; and 
(h)  To enhance the pedestrian character of the city streetscape. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-2. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buffer planting area: The unpaved area of land located between the property line and building or vehicular use area, designated for the preservation and placement of plant materials. 
    Caliper: The diameter of a tree trunk measured six (6) inches above ground level. If a tree is of a multitrunk variety, the caliper of the tree is the average caliper of all its trunks. 
    Canopy tree: A species of a tree which normally bears crown foliage no lower than six (6) feet above ground level upon maturity. 
    Ground cover: Natural mulch or plants of species which normally reach a height of less than three (3) feet upon maturity, installed in such a manner so as to form a continuous cover over the ground. 
    Large tree: A tree of a species which normally reaches a height of thirty (30) feet or more upon maturity. 
    Nonpermeable coverage: Coverage with nonpermeable pavement or any surface lacking the ability for air and water to pass through to the root zone of plants. 
    Permeable coverage: Any surface with the ability for air and water to pass through to the root zone of plants. 
    Sight safety triangle: The triangle at either side of an accessway or public right-of-way with sides of a specific length each along the public right-of-way and/or accessway. Refer to section 19.5-7(c) for specific lengths. 
    Small tree: A tree of a species which normally reaches a height of less than thirty (30) feet upon maturity. 
    Temporary certificate of occupancy: This certificate allows for a structure to be used and occupied for a specified time period until a certificate of occupancy is officially approved. 
    Visibility at intersections: On a corner building site in any district in which a front yard is required, no fence, wall, hedge, or other structure or plant more than three (3) feet in height shall be erected, placed or maintained within the triangular area formed by the intersecting street rights-of-way (property lines) and a straight line connecting such street rights-of-way (property lines) at point twenty (20) feet from the point of intersection measured along such street rights-of-way (property lines). 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-3. - Administration. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any real property having street frontage with zoning classifications designated by the Monroe Planning Commission which involve any new construction of commercial, governmental, industrial, multifamily of three (3) or more units, religious, educational and conditional uses as deemed necessary and appropriate by the Monroe Planning Commission. 
(b)  Single-family and two-family residences shall be exempt from these requirements. 
(c)  The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the development of lots on property subdivided before Chapter 19.5, Landscaping, came into effect where the minimum requirements of this chapter cannot be met due to property size or configuration. The unbuilt site area must be fully utilized, if possible, for landscape purposes to satisfy the intent of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 10,920, 4-28-09) 
Sec. 19.5-4. - Existing developed areas. 
(a)  Unless otherwise noted, all property designated in section 19.5-3 with existing paved ground surface areas on the effective date of this ordinance shall not be required to conform with the requirements of this chapter, unless construction or expansion of improvements on the property requiring a building permit is undertaken that: 
(1)  Increases the number of stories in a building on the property; 
(2)  Increases by more than twenty (20) per cent or twenty thousand (20,000) square feet, whichever is less, the combined floor areas of all buildings on the property; or 
(3)  Increases the nonpermeable coverage on the property by more than three thousand (3,000) square feet or ten (10) parking spaces. 
(b)  No structure shall be required to be altered or moved, except during construction, to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  Existing developed areas designated section 19.5-3 which are not undergoing construction or expansion activities are encouraged, although not legally obligated, to meet the landscaping requirements as stated in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-5. - Landscape plan submission. 
    A landscape plan must be submitted, in conjunction with the required site plan, to the planning and zoning division or the Monroe Planning Commission with the application for a building permit for work on the property. In addition, a landscape plan must be submitted as part of the required site plan review by the Monroe Planning Commission. The landscape plan can either be a separate print or be included on the required site plan print. The minimum information required on the landscape plan shall include: 
(a)  Locations and dimensions of the proposed landscaping strips adjacent to the public right-of-way including a description and location of the trees and plant materials to be placed within the landscaping strip; 
(b)  Locations and dimensions of the proposed landscape areas within the parking area including a description and location of the trees and plant materials to be placed within the landscape areas; 
(c)  Locations and calipers of existing healthy trees to be retained and counted as part of the landscaping requirements; 
(d)  An indication of how existing healthy trees proposed to be retained will be protected from damage during construction; and 
(e)  Compliance with visibility at intersections requirements. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97; Ord. No. 10,920, 4-28-09) 
Sec. 19.5-6. - Alternative compliance. 
    A landscape plan which is alternative to strict compliance with the various landscaping requirements of this chapter may be reviewed by the planning and zoning division and approved by the Monroe City Council if this plan achieves the intent and general landscaped open space ratio of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-7. - Street frontage requirements. 
(a)  For all land under the jurisdiction of this section, there shall be a minimum of a five-foot landscaping strip abutting the public right-of-way running parallel with the street line, exclusive of driveways and access ways at points of ingress and egress to and from the property. Where the acreage falls within twenty (20) and fifty (50) acres, a ten-foot landscaping strip shall be required. Where the acreage exceeds fifty (50) acres, a fifteen-foot landscaping strip shall be required. 
(b)  The minimum width of a nonresidential accessway to an off-street parking or other vehicular use area shall be twenty (20) feet for two-way vehicular movement and twelve (12) feet for one-way movement. The maximum width for an accessway shall be thirty (30) feet for two-way vehicular movement except along major traffic routes of which the maximum width shall be thirty-five (35) feet and twenty-four (24) feet for one-way movement. The minimum width of a multifamily residential accessway shall be fifteen (15) feet and the maximum width shall be twenty-four (24) feet. For street frontage up to seventy-five (75) feet no more than two (2) one-way or one two-way accessways will be permitted. For each additional seventy-five (75) feet of frontage, two (2) additional one-way or one additional two-way accessways may be permitted. 
(c)  The line of sight safety triangle at either side of an accessway intersecting with a public street shall be not less than ten (10) feet in length along the accessway and public street right-of-way. The line of sight safety triangle at the junction of two (2) public streets shall be not less than twenty (20) along each public street right-of-way. This line of sight safety triangle must be essentially clear of obstructions above the height of three (3) feet above grade to allow for vehicular visibility. 
(d)  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of plant materials from each of the following categories: 
(1)  Grasses/ground covers/vines. 
(2)  Shrubs/hedges. 
(3)  Trees. 
Grasses and ground covers alone shall not constitute adequate landscaping. 
(e)  There shall be at least one large tree for every sixty (60) lineal feet of the required landscaping strip, or one small tree for every thirty (30) lineal feet of the required landscaping strip. 
(f)  As part of the trees required, any existing tree with a twelve-inch or greater caliper that is retained within the required front yard as defined by zoning ordinances or landscape strip shall be counted as two (2) trees in satisfying the above requirement. 
(g)  The requirements for trees in the front yard shall be waived, on a tree-for-tree basis, if the adjacent public right-of-way, excluding medians, contains existing street trees. 
(h)  Landscaping the adjacent right-of-way shall be permitted subject to approval by the city engineer. Credit for up to fifty (50) per cent of the minimum street frontage landscaping area requirements shall be allotted for landscaping the public right-of-way. The preceding statement shall apply only to those areas where the five-foot landscaping strip is required. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-8. - Off-street surface parking facility requirements. 
(a)  In addition to the street frontage landscaping requirement, a minimum of twenty (20) square feet of landscape area shall be provided for each required off-street parking space. Such landscaping shall be located within the paved portion of the parking lot and/or within twenty (20) feet immediately adjacent to the paved portion of the parking lot or any buffer area. 
(b)  Landscaping shall consist of a combination of lawn grasses, ground covers, shrubs, trees, and nonliving durable material such as brick, stone, rocks, pavers, etc. Eighty (80) per cent of such material shall be living. Grasses and ground covers alone shall not constitute adequate landscaping. 
(c)  A minimum of one large or small tree for each twelve (12) required parking spaces shall be required in the off-street parking area. 
(d)  These landscaped areas shall be, to the extent possible, evenly distributed to effectively relieve the monotony of large paved areas but not interfere with the orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. Location can be adjusted to accommodate existing trees or other natural features as long as the total off-street parking area landscaping requirements are met. 
(e)  All landscaped areas, except grass areas, shall be protected from vehicular encroachment by concrete curbs, wheel stops, or other permanent barriers, and should be raised. 
(f)  As part of the tree requirements, any existing tree with a twelve-inch or greater caliper that is retained within the parking lot shall be counted as two (2) trees in satisfying the above requirement, subject to the following: (i) if such existing tree(s) later dies or is removed, two (2) trees shall be required to be planted; and (ii) permeable coverage shall be maintained to the extent of the crown of the existing tree at the original elevation. 
(g)  A reduction of two (2) feet, measured from the concrete curb or other permanent barrier, shall be allowed in the computation of the depth of parking spaces contiguous to the perimeter landscaping strips and/or interior planting area. In such event, this reduction shall not be considered as a reduction of the landscaped area. 
(h)  Storage areas containing three (3) or more refuse, garbage or rubbish containers or one or more dumpsters shall be screened on all sides with a six-foot high seventy (70) per cent sight obscuring screen of living or one hundred (100) per cent sight obscuring screen of nonliving landscape material. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-9. - Acceptable landscape materials. 
(a)  Large trees shall have a minimum caliper of two (2) inches or a minimum height of ten (10) feet at the time of planting, depending on the standard measuring techniques for the species. 
(b)  Small trees shall have a minimum height of six (6) feet at the time of planting. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, height is measured from the top of the root ball or if the plant is in a container, from the soil level in the container. 
(d)  In satisfying the landscaping requirements of this division, the use of high quality, hardy and drought-tolerant plant materials is recommended and encouraged. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-10. - Technical assistance. 
    The staff of the planning and zoning division will provide, when applicable, assistance to property owners in applying the requirements of this chapter to their respective site plans. It is further recommended that property owners consult with landscape nurseries, landscape architects, architects, engineers, etc., regarding the development of landscape plans and appropriate plant materials. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-11. - Installation and maintenance. 
(a)  Tree limbs, shrubs, and other planting shall be installed and maintained in compliance with the Monroe City Code. 
(b)  The property owner shall be responsible for watering and maintaining all installed landscaping in a healthy, neat, and orderly condition, replacing plants and trees when necessary, and keeping the area free of refuse and debris. Tree limbs and other planting shall be maintained so as not to create an obstruction to a driver's visibility and/or pedestrian movement. 
(c)  Ground covers, including wildflowers, which are used to satisfy the requirements of this division, are not considered grasses and thus shall not be subject to the city's grass height limitation requirements. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Sec. 19.5-12. - Enforcement. 
    No certificate of occupancy shall be approved before completion of landscaping except as follows: If due to the seasonal nature of plant materials, landscaping has not been completed at the time that a certificate of occupancy could be granted, and such certificate is requested, the planning and zoning division may grant a temporary certificate of occupancy to the owner or his agent, which will specify an eight-month time limitation for completion of the landscaping requirements of this chapter. Any violation of this section shall result in a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day until completion of the approved landscaping. All other violations of this chapter shall be subject to the general penalty provisions contained in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 9739, 10-14-97) 
Chapter 20 - LICENSES AND TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Department of administration,  4-03. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverage licenses,  4-2 et seq.; ambulance permits and license required,  5-2; fee on gasoline wholesalers at airport,  7-51; airline rental charge,  7-71 et seq.; bicycle registration,  8-21 et seq.; restrictions on carnivals, circuses, etc., located near residence or school,  12-227; electrical contractors,  14-121 et seq.; peddlers, transit merchants, etc., Ch. 25.5; plumbers,  27-61 et seq.; permits for septic tank cleaners,  30-8; arborist's license,  34-17 et seq., vehicles for hire, Ch. 35. 
State Law reference- Local taxation generally, R.S. 33:2621 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Privilege tax on fortune-tellers. 
    Any person engaged in fortune-telling shall pay to the city a privilege tax of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per annum. 
(Code 1958,  10-33) 
Sec. 20-2. - Penalty for nonpayment of municipal taxes. 
    Upon municipal taxes not paid and delinquent thirty (30) days after the date upon which the tax is due, there shall be an interest penalty of one and one-quarter (1.25) per cent per month on the amount of tax due, which shall be collected by the city, together with and in the same manner as the tax. 
(Ord. No. 7455, 11-9-82) 
State Law reference- Penalty for nonpayment of tax, R.S. 33:2746. 
Secs. 20-3-20-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Former Art. II, occupational licenses, was deleted as being superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 8005, adopted May 26, 1987. Former Art. II contained  20-21-20-27 which derived from Ord. No. 7118, adopted Dec. 11, 1979, and Ord. No. 7455, adopted Nov. 9, 1982. Codification of  1-3 and 7-15 of Ord. No. 8005 as  20-21-20-32, respectively, was at the discretion of the editor. Sections 4-6 of the ordinance, pertaining to effective date (Jan. 1, 1988), conflict and severability, were omitted from codification. 
State Law reference- Local occupational license taxes, R.S. 47:341 et seq. 

Sec. 20-21. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied an occupational license tax for the year 1988 and for each subsequent year upon each person pursuing and conducting any business, trade, calling, profession or vocation, within the corporate limits of the city subject to license under the Louisiana Constitution and laws of the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  1, 5-26-87) 
State Law reference- Tax authorized, R.S. 47:341. 
Sec. 20-22. - Amount. 
    The amount of license tax levied in each case is hereby fixed, determined and ordained to be the same as that fixed, levied and collectable by the governing authority under, and shall be granted in accordance with the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes, Title 47, sections 341 through 363, inclusive, as amended, and all other applicable laws, all of which for all purposes of this article are made a part hereof by reference as if written herein in extension. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  2, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-23. - Peddlers license. 
    All peddlers, defined by Louisiana Revised Statute 47:342(5), shall obtain a license costing one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
(Ord. No. 8005,  3, 5-26-87) 
Cross reference- Peddlers, transient merchants, etc., Ch. 25.5. 
Sec. 20-24. - Manner of enforcement. 
    The director of administration or any other officer whose duty it shall be to receive and collect the license taxes due to the city may enforce the collection of any and all taxes due within the same time and in the manner that is now or may hereafter be provided for the collection of occupational license taxes. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  7, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-25. - Taxpayers required to keep records. 
    Each person shall keep a reasonable record of his or their gross receipts, capital, sales, premium, commissions and earnings. This record shall be kept separately for each place of business, and shall be subject to examination and inspection by the director of administration or his duly authorized assistants or by an authorized accountant appointed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  8, 5-26-87) 
State Law reference- Required records, R.S. 47:349. 
Sec. 20-26. - Applications for licenses. 
(a)  Contents. Every person subject to a license tax levied by this article shall apply to the director of administration for a license before the same becomes delinquent, as provided in this article. The application shall state all facts necessary to determine the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(b)  Audit and inspection of records. If the director of administration is not satisfied with the facts set forth in the application, or for any reason desires to audit the books and records of the taxpayer, the director, or any of his authorized assistants, may audit and inspect all records of the taxpayer that would have any bearing upon the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(c)  Who may sign. Where an individual is an applicant for a license required by this article, the application must be signed by him; where a partnership or an association of persons, by a member of the firm; and where a corporation, by the proper officer thereof. 
(d)  Intentional false statements; misdemeanor; fine. Any intentional false statement under this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and any persons convicted thereof shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  9, 5-26-87) 
State Law reference- License applications, R.S. 47:350. 
Sec. 20-27. - Failure to pay tax; judgment prohibiting further pursuit or business. 
    Failure to pay the tax levied by this article shall, ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent, and the director of administration is hereby vested with authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the delinquent taxpayer to show cause in not less than two (2) or more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, why the delinquent taxpayer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of the business under this article. This rule may be tried out of term and in chamber, and shall always be tried by preference. If the rule is made absolute, the order therein rendered shall be considered a judgement in favor of the city prohibiting the taxpayer from the further pursuit of the business until such time as he has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs, and every violation of the injunction shall be considered a contempt of court, and according to law. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  10, 5-26-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 47:351. 
Sec. 20-28. - Posting of license, penalty. 
    Each person, association of persons, business firm or corporation required to take out a license under this article, shall be required to post the same in a conspicuous place, in his or their place of business, under penalty of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), recoverable by the director of administration before any court of competent jurisdiction, and it shall be the duty of the director to visit in person, and ascertain that the provisions of this section are strictly carried out. 
(Ord. No. 8005, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-29. - Evidence of payment of license. 
    The only legal evidence that a license has been paid shall be the appropriate form of license issued by the director of administration and no receipt issued by the director of administration, in place of the license itself, shall be valid, and this clause shall be construed to prevent the director of administration from issuing a receipt in lieu of the appropriate form to any person, association of persons, or business corporation, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to exclude oral evidence of lost or destroyed license. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  12, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-30. - Tax collector to keep on file sworn statements. 
    The director of administration shall prepare and keep a record on file of all statements made under oath of all persons, associations of persons, business firms or corporations who may apply for license to pursue any trade, profession, vocation calling or business under this article. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  13, 5-26-87) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 47:353. 
Sec. 20-31. - Oath of taxpayers. 
    The director of administration, charged with the collection of the taxes herein provided, shall be empowered and required to administer an oath to any person, president or proper official or agent of any association of persons, business firm or corporation, applying for license under this article, and the director of administration, or any notary public, or other officer of the city, empowered to administer oaths, who does not administer the oath in person to the applicant shall be subject to a fine of not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. When the oath is taken before the director, no charge shall be made for same. Any false swearing as to the gross receipts of any person, or persons, or corporations through their president or property officer or agent applying for license, shall constitute the crime of perjury, to be punished as directed by existing criminal laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  14, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-32. - Interest and costs. 
    All unpaid licenses shall bear interest at the rate of two (2) per cent per month from the first day of March and, in addition, said delinquent shall pay the additional sum of ten (10) per cent of the aggregate amount of license, interest and penalties due by said delinquent as attorneys fees to the city attorney in whose hands the director of administration has placed the same for collection, and the payment of said license, interest, penalties, attorney's fees and costs on property, movable or immovable of the delinquent owing the license and said director of administration shall collect said license, interest, penalties, attorney's fee and costs in the manner prescribed by existing law. 
(Ord. No. 8005,  15, 5-26-87) 
Secs. 20-33-20-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND USE TAX[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7486,  1-14, enacted new sales tax provisions which had been approved at a special election held Jan. 15, 1983. The basic organization of the new ordinance is the same as the existing provisions of this article; although in some cases the existing provisions have been renumbered. The following table gives the former section number, prior to its amendment by Ord. No. 7486, along with the new section number: 
Former Section 
Number New Section 
Number Former Section 
Number New Section 
Number 20-43-20-48 20-44-20-49 20-61-20-63 Repealed 20-49-20-52 20-51-20-54 20-240-20-245 20-241-20-246 20-53-20-60 20-56-20-63 20-246 Repealed  
State Law reference- Uniform Local Sales Tax Code, R.S. 47:337.1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Sales tax definitions, R.S. 47:301. 

Sec. 20-41. - Scope. 
    As used in this article the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this division, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
(Code 1958,  21A-1; Ord. No. 7486,  1, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-42. - Agricultural commodity. 
    "Agricultural commodity" shall mean horticultural, viticultural, poultry, farm and range products and livestock and livestock products. 
(Code 1958,  21A-2; Ord. No. 7486,  1.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-43. - Authority. 
    "Authority" shall mean the City of Monroe, State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 7486,  1.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-44. - Business. 
    "Business" shall include any activity engaged in by any person or caused to be engaged in by him with the object of gain, benefit, or advantage, either direct or indirect. The term "business" shall not be construed in this article to include the occasional and isolated sales or transactions by a person who does not hold himself out as engaged in business. 
(Code 1958,  21A-3; Ord. No. 7486,  1.03, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-45. - Collector. 
    "Collector" shall mean and include the clerk of the authority or his duly authorized assistant or assistants or such other person or persons, agency or instrumentality designated by the governing body to handle and accomplish the collection, enforcement and administration of sales and use of taxes on behalf of the authority. 
(Code 1958,  21A-5; Ord. No. 7486,  1.04, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-46. - Cost price. 
    "Cost price" shall mean the actual cost of the article of tangible personal property without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, transportation charges or any other expenses whatsoever. In the case of tangible personal property which has acquired a Louisiana situs and is thereafter transported outside the city, for repairs performed outside the city, and is thereafter returned to the city, the cost price shall be deemed to be the actual cost of any parts and/or material used in performing such repairs, if applicable labor charges are separately stated on the invoice. If applicable labor charges are not separately stated on the invoice, it shall be presumed the cost price is the total charge reflected on the invoice. 
(Code 1958,  21A-6; Ord. No. 7486,  1.05, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-47. - Dealer. 
    "Dealer" shall include every person who: 
(1)  Manufactures or produces tangible personal property from any state, or other political subdivision of this state, or foreign country, for sale at retail, for use or consumption, or distribution, or for storage to be used or consumed in this authority; 
(2)  Imports, or causes to be imported, tangible personal property from any state, or other political subdivision of this state, or foreign country, for sale at retail, for use or consumption, or distribution, or storage to be used or consumed in this authority; 
(3)  Sells at retail, or who offers to sell at retail, or who has in his possession for sale at retail, or for use, or consumption, or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in this authority, tangible personal property; 
(4)  Has sold at retail, or used or consumed, or distributed or stored for use or consumption in this authority, tangible personal property and who cannot prove that the tax levied by this article has been paid on the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, or the storage of said tangible personal property; 
(5)  Leases or rents tangible personal property for a consideration, permitting the use or possession of such property without transferring title thereto; 
(6)  Is the lessee or rentee of tangible personal property and who pays to the owner of such property a consideration for the use or possession of such property without acquiring title thereto; 
(7)  Sells or furnishes any of the services subject to tax under this article or purchases or receives any of the services subject to tax under this article; 
(8)  Is engaging in business in the authority; or 
(9)  Sells at retail any tangible personal property to a vending machine operator for resale through coin-operated vending machines. 
(Code 1958,  21A-7; Ord. No. 7486,  1.06, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-48. - Distraint or distrain. 
    "Distraint" or "distrain" shall mean the right to levy upon and seize and sell, or the levying upon or seizing and selling, any property or rights to property of the delinquent dealer by the officer charged with the collection of the tax for the purpose of satisfying any tax, interest or penalties due under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-8; Ord. No. 7486,  1.07, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-49. - Engaging in business in the authority. 
    "Engaging in business in the authority" shall mean and include any of the following methods of transacting business: Maintaining, directly, indirectly or through a subsidiary, an office, distribution house, sales house, warehouse or other place of business or by having an agent, salesman, solicitor or employee operating within the authority under the authority of the seller or its subsidiary, irrespective of whether such place of business, agent, salesman, solicitor or employee is located in the authority permanently or temporarily, or whether such seller or subsidiary is qualified to do business in the authority; or by having within the authority any choses in or causes of action, or any property, or any liens on property, or any indebtedness due it in the authority, protected by the laws and courts of the authority. 
(Code 1958,  21A-9; Ord. No. 7486,  1.08, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-50. - Governing body. 
    "Governing body" shall mean and include the city council of the authority. 
(Ord. No. 7486,  1.09, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-51. - Gross sales. 
    "Gross sales" shall mean the sum total of all retail sales of tangible personal property, as hereinafter provided and defined, and sales of services without any deductions whatsoever of any kind or character, except as provided in this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-10; Ord. No. 7486,  1.10, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-52. - Hotel. 
    "Hotel" shall mean and include any establishment engaged in the business of furnishing sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins to transient guests where such establishment consists of six (6) or more sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins at a single business location. 
(Code 1958,  21A-11; Ord. No. 7486,  1.11, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-53. - Lease or rental. 
    "Lease or rental" shall mean the leasing or renting of tangible personal property and the possession or use thereof by the lessee or rentee for a consideration, without transfer of the title of such property. 
(Code 1958,  21A-12; Ord. No. 7486,  1.12, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-54. - New article. 
    "New article" shall mean the original stock-in-trade of the dealer and shall not be limited to newly manufactured articles. The original stock or article, whether it be a used article or not, shall be subject to the tax. 
(Code 1958,  21A-13; Ord. No. 7486,  1.13, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-55. - Parish. 
    "Parish" shall mean the Parish of Ouachita, State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 7486,  1.14, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-56. - Person. 
    "Person" shall include any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, the state, any parish, city, municipality, state or public board, public commission or public or semi-public corporation, political subdivision, district or instrumentality or other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
(Code 1958,  21A-14; Ord. No. 7486,  1.15, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-57. - Purchaser. 
    "Purchaser" shall mean any person who acquires or receives any tangible personal property or the privilege of using any tangible personal property or receives any services pursuant to a transaction subject to taxes under this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-15; Ord. No. 7486,  1.16, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-58. - Retail sale or sale at retail. 
    "Retail sale" or "sale at retail" shall mean a sale to a consumer or to any person for any purpose other than for resale in the form of tangible personal property, as hereinafter set forth, and shall mean and include all such transactions as the collector, upon investigation, finds to be in lieu of sales; provided, that sales for resale must be made in strict compliance with the rules and regulations issued by the collector. Any dealer making a sale for resale, which is not in strict compliance with the rules and regulations, shall himself be liable for payment of the tax. (The sale of tangible personal property to a dealer who purchases said property for resale through coin-operated vending machines shall be considered a "sale at retail." The subsequent resale of the property by the dealer through coin-operated vending machines shall also be considered a "sale at retail." The term "sale at retail" does not include sales of materials for further processing into articles of tangible personal property for sale at retail, nor does it include an isolated or occasional sale of tangible personal property by a person not engaged in such business, except the isolated or occasional sale of vehicles, which are hereby defined to be sales at retail and as such are subject to the tax.) 
(Code 1958,  21A-16; Ord. No. 7486,  1.17, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-59. - Retailer. 
    "Retailer" shall mean and include every person engaged in the business of making sales at retail or for distribution, or use or consumption, or storage to be used or consumed in the authority or any person rendering services taxable hereunder. 
(Code 1958,  21A-17; Ord. No. 7486,  1.18, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-60. - Sale. 
    "Sale" shall mean any transfer of title or possession, or both, exchange, barter, lease or rental, conditional or otherwise, in any manner or by any means whatsoever of tangible personal property, for a consideration, and includes the fabrication of tangible personal property for consumers who furnish, either directly or indirectly, the materials used in fabrication work, and the furnishing, preparing or serving, for a consideration, of any tangible personal property, consumed on the premises of the person furnishing, preparing or serving such tangible personal property. A transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred but the seller retains title as security for the payment of the price shall be deemed a sale. 
    The term "sale" shall also include the "sales of services," which means and includes the following: 
(1)  The furnishing of sleeping rooms, cottages or cabins by hotels; 
(2)  The sale of admissions to places of amusement, to athletic entertainment other than that of schools, colleges and universities, and recreational events, and the furnishing, for dues, fees or other consideration, of the privilege of access to clubs or the privilege of having access to or the use of amusement, entertainment, athletic or recreational facilities, but shall not include membership fees or dues of nonprofit, civic organizations; 
(3)  The furnishing of storage or parking privileges by auto hotels and parking lots and trailer parks; 
(4)  The furnishing of printing or overprinting, lithographic, multilith, blueprinting, photostating or other similar services of reproducing written or graphic matter; 
(5)  The furnishing of laundry, cleaning, pressing and dyeing services, including by way of extension and not of limitation, the cleaning and renovation of clothing, furs, furniture, carpets and rugs, and the furnishing of storage space for clothing, furs and rugs; 
(6)  The furnishing of cold storage space and the furnishing of the service of preparing tangible personal property for cold storage, where such service is incidental to the operation of storage facilities; 
(7)  The furnishing of repairs to tangible personal property, including by way of illustration and not of limitation, the repair and servicing of automobiles and other vehicles, electrical and mechanical appliances and equipment, watches, jewelry, refrigerators, radios, shoes and office appliances and equipment. 
(Code 1958,  21A-18; Ord. No. 7486,  1.19, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-61. - Sales price. 
    "Sales price" shall mean the total amount for which tangible personal property is sold, including any services, except services for financing, that are a part of the sale valued in money, whether paid in money or otherwise, and includes the cost of materials used, labor or service costs, except costs for financing which shall not exceed the legal interest rate and a service charge not to exceed six (6) per cent of the amount financed, and losses; provided that cash discounts allowed and taken on sales shall not be included, nor shall the sales price include the amount charged for labor or services rendered in installing, applying, remodeling or repairing property sold. 
(Code 1958,  21A-19; Ord. No. 7486,  1.20, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-62. - Storage. 
    "Storage" shall mean and include any keeping or retention in the authority of tangible personal property for use or consumption in the authority or for any purpose other than for sale at retail in the regular course of business. 
(Code 1958,  21A-20; Ord. No. 7486,  1.21, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-63. - Tangible personal property. 
    "Tangible personal property" shall mean and include personal property which may be seen, weighed, measured, felt or touched, or is in any other manner perceptible to the senses. The term "tangible personal property" shall not include stocks, bonds, notes, or other obligations or securities. Tangible personal property shall also include computer software. 
(Code 1958,  21A-21; Ord. No. 7486,  1.22, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-64. - Use. 
    "Use" shall mean and include the exercise of any rights or power over tangible personal property incident to the ownership thereof, except that it shall not include the sale at retail of that property in the regular course of business. 
(Code 1958,  21A-25; Ord. No. 7486,  1.23, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-65. - Use tax. 
    "Use tax" shall include the use, the consumption, the distribution and the storage for use or consumption, as herein defined. 
(Code 1958,  21A-26; Ord. No. 7486,  1.24, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-66-20-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - IMPOSITION OF TAX[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Local tax levies, R.S. 47:337.3 et seq. 

Sec. 20-76. - Levied. 
    There is hereby levied from and after February 1, 1983, for the purposes stated in the proposition set forth in the preamble to Ord. No. 7486 (the ordinance from which this article is derived), a tax upon the sale at retail, the use, the lease or rental, the consumption and storage for use or consumption of tangible personal property and on sales of services within the authority as defined herein; and the levy of such tax shall be as follows: 
(1)  At the rate of one and one-half (1.5) per cent of the sales price of each item or article of tangible personal property when sold at retail in the authority, the tax to be computed on gross sales for the purpose of remitting the amount of tax due the governing body, and to include each and every retail sale. 
(2)  At the rate of one and one-half (1.5) per cent of the cost price of each item or article of tangible personal property when the same is not sold, but is used, consumed, distributed or stored for use or consumption in the authority, provided there shall be no duplication of the tax. 
(3)  At the rate of one and one-half (1.5) per cent of the gross proceeds derived from the lease or rental of tangible personal property, as defined herein, where the lease or rental of such property is an established business or part of an established business, or the same is incidental or germane to the business. 
(4)  At the rate of one and one-half (1.5) per cent of the monthly lease or rental price paid by lessee or rentee, or contracted or agreed to be paid by lessee or rentee, to the owner of the tangible personal property. 
(5)  At the rate of one and one-half (1.5) per cent of the gross proceeds derived from the sale of services, as defined herein. 
(Code 1958,  21A-31; Ord. No. 7486,  2.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-77. - Special regulations relating to rental property. 
    Sales or use taxes paid to this governing body on the purchase of new motor trucks and new motor tractors licensed and registered for twelve thousand (12,000) pounds or more, under the provisions of section 462 of title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (R.S. 47:462), new trailers and new semitrailers licensed and registered for sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds or more under the provisions of said section for rental may be deducted as a credit against the tax due on the rental of that item of property so that no tax is payable on rental income until the tax paid on the purchase price has been exceeded. The sales tax paid to another authority or taxing authority in the state, or in an authority in a state other than Louisiana on the purchase price of property is not deductible from the tax subsequently due on the rental of such property in the authority. Property imported by the lessee for use in the authority that has been previously used by him in another authority is not subject to any tax on the value when imported, but is only subject to the tax that applies on rental payments. 
    If the tax on rental payments fails to exceed the credits for sales or use tax paid, no refund is due the purchaser. 
    A dealer in the authority who ordinarily purchases personal property for sale and who withdraws a piece of property from stock for rental is not liable for a sales or use tax on the purchase price of the property when withdrawn from stock. Such person is liable only for the tax applicable on the rental payments. 
    Any sales tax paid on any maintenance or operation expenses of a rental business is not deductible as a credit against the tax due on rental income; such expenses are part of the cost of doing business and do not constitute a part of the cost of the identical property being rented. 
(Code 1958,  21A-32; Ord. No. 7486,  2.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-78. - Collection and payment generally. 
    The tax shall be collected from the dealer, as defined herein, and paid at the time and in the manner hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1958,  21A-33; Ord. No. 7486,  2.03, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-79. - Tax to be in addition to all other taxes. 
    The tax so levied is and shall be in addition to all other taxes, whether levied in the form of sales, excise, or license, privilege or property taxes levied by any other ordinance or resolution of the governing body. 
(Code 1958,  21A-34; Ord. No. 7486,  2.04, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-80. - Tax schedule. 
    The dealer shall collect the tax levied by this article, together with all other applicable sales and use taxes, in accordance with the integrated bracket schedule or schedules prepared and furnished by the state collector of revenue under the authority of section 304 of title 47 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950 (R.S. 47:304). Such schedule or schedules shall include, in addition to the tax hereby levied pursuant to the election held on January 15, 1983, all sales taxes levied by the state, a one and one-half (1.5) per cent sales tax levied by the authority and a one-half (0.5) per cent sales tax levied by the school board of the authority. The dealer will remit that portion of such total taxes representing the tax levied by this article to the collector. Copies of said integrated bracket schedules are available to dealers on request to the authority or the collector. 
(Code 1958,  21A-35; Ord. No. 7486,  2.05, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-81. - Collection in name of city by collector. 
    The collection of the tax herein levied shall be made in the name of the authority by the collector. 
(Code 1958,  21A-36; Ord. No. 7486,  2.06, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-82-20-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - EXEMPTIONS AND EXCLUSIONS FROM TAX[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Exemptions, R.S. 47:337.9 et seq. 

Sec. 20-91. - Exempt tangible personal property. 
    The taxes imposed by this article shall not apply to transactions involving the following tangible personal property: 
(1)  The gross proceeds derived from the sale in the authority of livestock, poultry and other farm products direct from the farm, provided that such sales are made directly by the producers. When sales of livestock, poultry and other farm products are made to consumers by any person other than a producer, they are not exempted from the tax imposed by this article; however, every agricultural commodity sold by any person, other than a producer, to any other person who purchases not for direct consumption but for the purpose of acquiring raw products for use or for sale in the process of preparing, finishing or manufacturing such agricultural commodity for the ultimate retail consumer trade, shall be exempted from any and all provisions of this article, including payment of the tax applicable to the sale, storage, use, transfer or any other utilization of or handling thereof, except when such agricultural commodity is actually sold as a marketable or finished product to the ultimate consumer, and in no case shall more than one tax be exacted. 
(2)  The "use tax" shall not apply to livestock and livestock products, to poultry and poultry products, to farm, range and agricultural products when produced by the farmer and used by him and members of his family. 
(3)  Where a part of the purchase price is represented by an article traded in, the sales tax is payable on the total purchase price less the market value of the article traded in. 
(4)  The sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage to be used or consumed in the authority of the following tangible personal property is hereby specifically exempted from the tax imposed by this article: Gasoline, steam, water (not including mineral water or carbonated water or any water put up in bottles, jugs or containers, all to which are not exempted), electric power or energy, newspapers, fertilizer and containers used for farm products when sold directly to the farmer, natural gas, fuel oil and coal when used for boiler fuel, new trucks, new automobiles and new aircraft withdrawn from stock by factory-authorized new truck, new automobile and new aircraft dealers, with the approval of the state collector of revenue, and titled in the dealer's name for use as demonstrators, and the sale of prescription drugs under the pharmaceutical vendor program of title XIX of the Social Security Act as administered by the Department of Health and Human Resources of the State of Louisiana. 
(5)  Reserved. 
(6)  The sales of materials and supplies to the owners or operators of ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or interstate coastwise commerce, where such materials and supplies are loaded upon the ship or vessel for use or consumption in the maintenance and operation thereof; nor to repair services performed upon ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or in interstate coastwise commerce; nor to the materials and supplies used in such repairs where such materials and supplies enter into and become a component part of such ships or vessels; nor to laundry services performed for the owners or operators of such ships or vessels operating exclusively in foreign or interstate coastwise commerce, where the laundered articles are to be used in the course of the operation of such ships or vessels. 
    The provisions of this subsection do not apply to drilling equipment used for oil exploitation or production unless such equipment is built for exclusive use outside the boundaries of the state and is removed forthwith from the state upon completion. 
(7)  The sale at retail of seeds for use in the planting of any kind of crops. 
(8)  The sale of casing, drill pipe and tubing in the authority for use offshore beyond the territorial limits of the state for the production of oil, gas, sulphur and other minerals, or vessels leased for such purposes or for the providing of services to those engaged in such production. 
(9)  The sale or use of any materials, supplies or products for use in connection with any phase of the construction of the Toledo Bend Dam project on the Sabine River. 
(10)  The sale of admission tickets by Little Theater organizations. 
(11)  The sale of admission tickets by domestic nonprofit corporations or by any other domestic nonprofit organization known as a symphony organization or a society or organization engaged in the presentation of musical performances; provided that this exemption shall not apply to performances given by out-of-state or nonresident symphony companies, nor to any performance intended to yield a profit to the promoters thereof. 
(12)  The amount paid by the operator of a motion picture theater to a distributing agency for use of films or photoplay. 
(13)  The sale at retail of pesticides used for agricultural purposes, including particularly but not by way of limitation, insecticides, herbicides and fungicides. 
(14)  The sale at retail of tangible personal property purchased within the authority for use exclusively beyond the territorial limits of the authority. If tangible personal property purchased tax free under the provisions of this section is later brought into the authority for use herein, the property shall be subject to the use tax as of the time it is brought into the authority for use herein, subject to the credit provided in section 20-123 of this Code. 
    If the first use of tangible personal property purchased in the authority for use beyond the territorial limits of the authority occurs in a municipality or parish of this state or in a municipality or county in a state other than Louisiana which imposes a sales or use tax, the exemption provided herein shall apply only if: 
a.  The purchaser is properly registered for sales and use tax purposes in a city or parish in this state or in a city or county in a state other than Louisiana, wherein such tangible personal property is used, and regularly reports and pays sales and use tax in such other city or parish in this state or in a city or county in a state other than Louisiana; and 
b.  The city or parish in this state or the city or county in a state other than Louisiana in which the first use occurs grants on a reciprocal basis a similar exemption on purchases within that city or parish in this state or city or county in a state other than Louisiana for use in the authority; and 
c.  The purchaser obtains from the collector a certificate authorizing him to make the nontaxable purchases authorized under this section. 
(15)  The amounts paid by radio and television broadcasters for the right to exhibit or broadcast copyrighted material and the use of film, video or audio tapes, records or any other means supplied by licensors thereof in connection with such exhibition or broadcast. 
(16)  The purchase or rental by private individuals of machines, parts therefor and materials and supplies which a physician has prescribed for home rental dialysis. 
(17)  No new or additional sales or use tax shall be applicable to sales of materials or services involved in lump sum or unit price construction contracts entered into and reduced to writing prior to the effective date of this article [February 1, 1983] or to sales or services involved in such contracts entered into and reduced to writing within ninety (90) days thereafter, if such contracts involve contractual obligations undertaken prior to such effective date and were computed and bid on the basis of sales taxes at the rates effective and existing prior to such effective date. 
(18)  Purchases of equipment used in fire fighting by bona fide organized public volunteer fire departments. 
(19)  The sale of admissions to entertainment events furnished by recognized domestic nonprofit charitable, educational and religious organizations when the entire proceeds from such sales, except for necessary expenses in connection with the entertainment events, are used for the purposes for which the organizations furnishing the events were organized. 
(20)  Sales of tangible personal property at, or admission charges for, events sponsored by domestic, civic, educational, historical, charitable, fraternal or religious organizations, which are nonprofit, when the entire proceeds, except for the necessary expense connected therewith, are used for educational, charitable, religious or historical restoration purposes. 
    The exemption provided herein shall not apply to any event intended to yield a profit to the promoter or to any individual contracted to provide services or equipment, or both, for the event. 
    This section shall not be construed to exempt regular commercial ventures of any type such as bookstores, restaurants, gift shops, commercial flea markets and similar activities that are sponsored by organizations qualifying hereunder which are in competition with retail merchants. 
    This section shall not be construed to exempt any organization or activity from the payment of sales or use taxes otherwise required by law to be made on purchases made by these organizations. 
    Such exemption shall be available pursuant to regulations prescribed by the collector. 
(21)  Sales or purchases made by blind persons in the conduct of a business which is exempt from license taxes by R.S. 46:305.17. 
(22)  Necessary fees incurred in connection with the installation and service of cable television. Such exemption shall not apply to the purchases made by any cable television system but shall only apply to funds collected from the subscriber for regular service, installation and repairs. 
(23)  Income on receipts from any coin-operated washing or drying machine in a commercial laundromat as defined in R.S. 46:371 through R.S. 46:373. 
(24)  Purchases of airline equipment, airplane parts and airplanes of any commuter airline domiciled in the state as defined in R.S. 46:305.21. 
(25)  Sales of monetized bullion having a total value of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more. For purposes of this section, "monetized bullion" means coins or other forms of money manufactured from gold, silver or other metals, and heretofore, now, or hereafter used as a medium of exchange under the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign nation. 
(26)  A parish retail dealer who ordinarily purchases for resale equipment of a type not subject to titling under Louisiana Revised Statutes title 32, such equipment having a dealer's cost of not less than three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per unit, and such equipment being: 
a.  Mobile, motorized self-propelled farm equipment and attachments thereto; 
b.  Mobile, motorized earth-moving equipment and attachments thereto; and/or 
c.  Mobile, motorized self-propelled construction equipment and attachments thereto; 
and who withdraws an item of such equipment from inventory, for rental, as a method for promoting sales, shall be exempt from the payment of sales or use tax on the purchase price of the property when withdrawn from inventory for such rental. The dealer shall be liable for the tax levied on the rental income, and a sales tax upon any ultimate sale of said item. 
(27)  The leasing of those vessels for use off shore beyond the territorial limits of the state for the production of oil, gas, sulphur and other minerals, or for the providing of services to those engaged in such production. 
(28)  The furnishing of vehicles by a dealer in new vehicles when such vehicles are withdrawn from inventory and furnished to a secondary school, college or public school board on a free loan basis for exclusive use in a driver education program accredited by the Louisiana Department of Education. 
(29)  The purchase of airplane equipment, airplane parts and airplanes of any commuter airline domiciled in the state. A commuter airline is defined as any airline transporting passengers and/or freight on a regularly scheduled basis, with a minimum of twenty (20) flights per week, whose schedule is published in the Official Airline Guide but which has been exempted from the general rate and route regulations of the Civil Aeronautics Board under the provisions of section 298.11 of subpart B of part 298 of chapter II of title 14 of the Code of Federal Regulations promulgated under the authority of sections 1324 and 1386 of title 49 of the United States Code. A commuter airline is further defined as any airline having ticket counters that are staffed at airports it serves, a reservations office operating at least twelve (12) hours a day, seven (7) days a week and interline ticket and baggage agreements through the Air Traffic Conference of America. 
(30)  To the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage for use or consumption of each item or article of tangible personal property by a sheltered workshop for the mentally retarded licensed by the department of health and human resources as a day developmental training center for the mentally retarded. 
(31)  The sale of computer software which is written, designed and installed for a specific purpose for a specific consumer and cannot be used by any other consumer for the same or any other purpose without substantial modifications. 
(Code 1958,  21A-41; Ord. No. 7486,  3.01, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-92. - Scope of tax. 
    It is not the intention of this article to levy a tax upon articles of tangible personal property imported into the authority or produced or manufactured in the authority for export; nor is it the intention of this article to levy a tax on a bona fide transaction in interstate commerce. It is, however, the intention of this article to levy a tax on the sale at retail, the use, the consumption, the distribution, and the storage to be used or consumed in the authority of tangible personal property after it has come to rest in the authority and has become a part of the mass of property in the authority. 
(Code 1958,  21A-42; Ord. No. 7486,  3.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-93. - Tax not extraterritorial. 
    No tax shall be due under this article on the sale of any goods or personal tangible property delivered or services performed outside the limits of the authority. 
(Code 1958,  21A-43; Ord. No. 7486,  3.03, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-94-20-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - COLLECTION OF TAX BY DEALERS 

Sec. 20-101. - Collection from purchaser or consumer. 
    The tax levied by this article shall be collected by the dealer from the purchaser or consumer, except as provided for collection of the tax on motor vehicles in section 20-106 of this Code. The dealer shall have the same right in respect to collecting the tax from the purchaser, or in respect to nonpayment of the tax by the purchaser, as if the tax were a part of the purchase price of the property, or charges for services, and payable at the time of the sale; provided, however, that the governing body shall be joined as a party plaintiff in any action or proceeding brought by the dealer to collect the tax. 
(Code 1958,  21A-46; Ord. No. 7486,  4.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-102. - Collection by dealer located outside authority. 
    Every dealer located outside the authority making sales of tangible personal property for distribution, storage, use or other consumption in the authority shall, at the time of making sales, collect the tax imposed by this article from the purchaser. 
(Code 1958,  21A-47; Ord. No. 7486,  4.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-103. - Tax to constitute part of purchase price. 
    The dealer shall, as far as practicable, add the exact amount of the tax imposed under this article, or the average equivalent thereof, to the sale price or charge, which shall be a debt from the purchaser or consumer to the dealer, until paid, and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as other debts. Any dealer who neglects, fails or refuses to collect the tax herein provided shall be liable for and pay the tax himself. 
(Code 1958,  21A-48; Ord. No. 7486,  4.03, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-104. - Registration, certification of dealers. 
    In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and to collect all of the taxes imposed by this article, on or before February 1, 1983, or in the case of dealers commencing business after February 1, 1983, or opening new places of business after such date, within three (3) days after such commencement or opening, every dealer purchasing or importing tangible personal property for resale shall file with the collector a certificate of registration in a form prescribed by him. The collector shall, within five (5) days after such registration, issue without charge to each dealer who purchases or imports for resale a certificate of authority empowering such dealer to collect the tax from the purchaser, and the duplicates therefor, for each additional place of business of such dealer. Each certificate or duplicate shall state the place of business to which it is applicable. Such certificate of authority shall be prominently displayed in all places of business of the dealer. A dealer who has no regular place of doing business shall attach such certificate to his cart, stand, truck or other merchandising device. Such certificate shall be nonassignable and nontransferable and shall be surrendered immediately to the collector upon the dealer's ceasing to do business at the place therein named. 
(Code 1958,  21A-49; Ord. No. 7486,  4.04, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-105. - Manufacturers, wholesalers, jobbers and suppliers; collection duties. 
    A manufacturer, wholesale dealer, jobber or supplier shall refuse to accept a certificate that any property upon which a tax is imposed by this article is purchased for resale, and shall collect the tax imposed by this article, unless the purchaser shall have filed a certificate of registration and received a certificate of authority to collect the tax imposed by this article; however, the payment of the tax by such purchaser shall not relieve the purchaser of the duty herein imposed upon such purchaser to collect the tax upon any resale made by him; but such purchaser who shall thereafter file a certificate of registration and receive a certificate of authority to collect the tax may, upon application therefor, receive a refund of the taxes paid by him upon property thereafter resold by him, and upon the receipts from which he shall have collected and paid over to the governing body the tax herein imposed. 
(Code 1958,  21A-50; Ord. No. 7846,  4.05, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-106. - Collection of tax on vehicles. 
    The tax imposed by this article upon the sale or use of any motor vehicle, automobile, motorcycle, truck, truck-tractor, trailer, semi-trailer, motor bus, house trailer, or any other vehicle subject to the Louisiana Vehicle Registration License Tax of the State of Louisiana shall be collected as provided in this section. 
(1)  The tax levied by this article on any such vehicle shall be paid to the vehicle commissioner as the agent of the collector of revenue of the state at the time of application for a certificate of title or vehicle registration license, and no certificate of title or vehicle registration license shall be issued until the tax has been paid. 
a.  The tax levied by this article on the sale of any such vehicle shall be due at the time registration or any transfer of registration is required by the Vehicle Registration License Tax Law of the State of Louisiana (R.S. 47:451 et seq.). 
b.  The tax levied by this article on the use of any such vehicle in this authority shall be due at the time first registration in this authority is required by the Vehicle Registration License Tax Law (R.S. 47:451 et seq.). 
(2)  Every vendor of such a vehicle shall furnish to the purchaser at the time of sale a sworn statement showing the serial number, motor number, type, year and model of the vehicle sold, the total sales price, any allowance for and description of any vehicle taken in trade, and the total cash difference paid or to be paid by the purchaser between the vehicle purchased and traded in and the sales or use tax to be paid, along with such other information as may be required. All labor, parts, accessories and other equipment which are attached to the vehicle at the time of the sale and which are included in the sale price are to be considered a part of the vehicle. 
(3)  It is not the intention of this section to grant an exemption from the tax levied by this article to any sale, use, item or transaction which has heretofore been taxable; and this section shall not be construed as so doing. It is the intention of this section to transfer the collection of the sales and use tax on vehicles from the vendor to the vehicle commissioner as agent for the collector of revenue of the state and to provide a method of collection of the tax directly from the vendee or user by the vehicle commissioner as agent for the collector of revenue in accordance with an agreement by and between the collector of revenue or the vehicle commissioner as agent therefor and the governing body, the execution of which agreement is hereby authorized. Said tax so collected for the collector of revenue shall be paid to the governing body and sent to the collector as soon as possible, and in any event at least once each month, all in accordance with the agreement. 
(4)  The provision contained in section 20-58 of this Code which excludes isolated or occasional sales from the definition of a sale at retail is not to apply to the sale of vehicles which are the subject of this section. Isolated or occasional sales of vehicles are hereby defined to be sales at retail and as such are subject to the tax. 
(5)  The tax levied by this article shall not be due on vehicles furnished by a dealer in new vehicles when withdrawn from inventory and furnished to a secondary school, college or public school board on a free loan basis for exclusive use in a driver education program accredited by the Louisiana Department of Education. 
(Code 1958,  21A-51; Ord. No. 7486,  4.06, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-107. - Offering to absorb tax prohibited; tax to be stated separately. 
    A person engaged in any business taxable under this article shall not advertise or hold out to the public, in any manner, directly or indirectly, that he will absorb all or any part of the tax, or that he will relieve the purchaser from the payment of all or any part of the tax. The dealer shall state and collect the tax separately from the price paid by the purchaser, but his failure to do so shall not be available as a defense to the purchaser in any proceedings brought under this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-52; Ord. No. 7486,  4.07, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-108. - Excess collections. 
    Where the tax collected for any period is in excess of one per cent, the total collected must be paid over to the collector, less the commission to be allowed the dealer as hereinafter set forth. 
(Code 1958,  21A-53; Ord. No. 7486,  4.08, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-109. - Direct payment by purchaser to governing body; when required. 
    Where the purchaser has failed to pay and a dealer has failed to collect a tax upon a sale, as imposed by this article, then in addition to all other rights, obligations and remedies provided, such tax shall be payable by the purchaser directly to the governing body; and it shall be the duty of this purchaser to file a return thereof with the collector and to pay the tax imposed thereon to the governing body within fifteen (15) days after such sale was made or rendered. 
(Code 1958,  21A-54; Ord. No. 7486,  4.09, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-110. - Compensation of dealers for tax collection. 
    For the purpose of compensating the dealer in accounting for and remitting the lax levied by this article, each dealer shall be allowed one per cent of the amount of tax due and accounted for and remitted to the collector in the form of a deduction in submitting his report and paying the amount due by him if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Code 1958,  21A-55; Ord. No. 7486,  4.10, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9070, 5-23-89) 
Secs. 20-111-20-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - COLLECTION OF TAX FROM DEALER 

Sec. 20-121. - Collection by collector. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall be collectible by the collector on behalf of the governing body from all persons engaged as dealers. 
(1)  The collector is duly authorized and empowered to carry into effect the provisions of this article and in pursuance thereof to make and enforce such rules as he may deem necessary. Such regulations when promulgated shall have the full force and effect of law. Promulgation shall be accomplished by publication at least one time in the official journal of the authority. 
(2)  The collector may employ such personnel, including legal counsel on a fee or salary basis, as are necessary to assist in the collection of the taxes imposed hereunder. 
(3)  Any duly authorized representative or deputy of the collector, when acting under his authority and direction, shall have the same power as is conferred upon the collector by this article. 
(4)  The collector may conduct hearings and administer oaths, and examine under oath, any dealer and the directors, officers, agents and employees of any dealer, and any other witness, relative to the business of such dealer in respect to any matter incident to the administration of this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-61; Ord. No. 7486,  4.06, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-122. - Tax on personal property imported and used by dealer. 
    On all tangible personal property imported or caused to be imported, from other states or other political subdivisions of this state, or any foreign country, and used by him, the dealer shall pay the tax imposed by this article on all articles of tangible personal property so imported and used, the same as if the articles had been sold at retail for use or consumption in this authority. For the purpose of this article, use or consumption, or distribution, or storage to be used or consumed in the authority of tangible personal property shall each be equivalent to a sale at retail; and the tax shall thereupon immediately be levied and be collected in the manner provided herein, provided there shall be no duplication of the tax in any event. 
(Code 1958,  21A-62; Ord. No. 7486,  5.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-123. - Tax credit. 
    A credit against the use tax imposed by this article shall be granted to taxpayers who have paid a similar tax upon the sale or use of the same tangible personal property in another city or parish in this state, or city or county in a state other than Louisiana based on the sales/use tax rate of the authority in which the tax was paid applied to the fair market value or cost, whichever is less, of the same tangible personal property. The credit provided herein shall be granted only in the case where the city or parish in this state, or the city or county in a state other than Louisiana to which a similar tax has been paid grants a similar credit as provided herein. The proof of payment of the similar tax to another city or parish in this state, or to a city or county in a state other than Louisiana shall be made according to rules and regulations promulgated by the collector. In no event shall the credit be greater than the tax imposed by this governing body upon the tangible personal property which is the subject of the use tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-63; Ord. No. 7486,  5.03, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Secs. 20-124-20-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - RETURNS AND PAYMENT OF TAX 

Sec. 20-131. - Tax payable monthly. 
    The tax levied under this article shall be due and payable by all dealers monthly on the first day of the month. 
(Code 1958,  21A-68; Ord. No. 7486,  6.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-132. - Returns; filing date. 
    For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable under this article, it shall be the duty of all dealers on or before the twentieth day of the month following the month in which this tax shall become effective to transmit to the collector, upon forms prescribed, prepared and furnished by him, returns showing the gross sales, purchases, gross proceeds from lease or rental, gross payments for lease or rental, gross proceeds derived from sales of services, or gross payment for services, as the case may be, arising from all taxable transactions during the preceding calendar month or during the part of the preceding calendar month, running from February 1, 1983, to the end of such month. Thereafter, like returns shall be prepared and transmitted to the collector by all dealers, on or before the twentieth day of each month, for the preceding calendar month. Said returns shall show such further information as the collector may require to enable him to correctly compute and collect the tax herein levied. Such returns shall be signed by the dealer filing the same; and his signature thereon shall constitute a warranty on the part of the dealer that he has read and examined the returns and that, to the best of his knowledge and belief, the same are true, correct and complete. Every dealer at the time of making the return required hereunder shall compute and remit to the governing body the required tax due for the preceding calendar month. 
(Code 1958,  21A-69; Ord. No. 7486,  6.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-133. - Tax to be remitted with return. 
    At the time of transmitting the return required hereunder to the collector, the dealer shall remit to the governing body therewith the amount of the tax due under the applicable provisions of this article; and failure to so remit such tax shall cause the tax to become delinquent. 
    All taxes, interest and penalties imposed under this article shall be paid to the governing body in the form of remittance required by the collector. 
(Code 1958,  21A-70; Ord. No. 7486,  6.03, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-134. - Gross proceeds from rental of personal property; returns; tax payment. 
    Gross proceeds from rentals or leases of tangible personal property where the lease or rental is part of a regularly established business, or the same is incidental or germane thereto, shall be reported and the tax shall be paid with respect thereto in accordance with such rules and regulations as the collector may prescribe. 
(Code 1958,  21A-71; Ord. No. 7486,  6.04, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-135. - Extension of time for filing returns. 
    The collector, for good cause, may extend for not to exceed thirty (30) days the time for making any returns required under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-72; Ord. No. 7486,  6.05, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-136. - Dealer declared agent of taxing authority. 
    For the purpose of collecting and remitting to this governing body the tax imposed by this article, the dealer is hereby declared to be the agent of this governing body. 
(Code 1958,  21A-73; Ord. No. 7486,  6.06, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-137-20-145. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - RECORDS AND INSPECTION THEREOF 

Sec. 20-146. - Dealer required to keep and preserve records. 
    It shall be the duty of eery dealer to make a report and pay any tax under this article, to keep and preserve suitable records of the sales or purchases or sales of services, as the case may be, taxable under this article, and such other books of account as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder, and other information as may be required by the collector; and it shall be the duty of every such dealer moreover, to keep and preserve, for a period of three (3) years, all invoices and other records of goods, wares and merchandise or other subjects of taxation under this article; and all such books, invoices and other records shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours, by the collector or any of his duly authorized agents. Such records shall be made available to the collector or his duly authorized agent at the dealer's place of business located within the jurisdictional boundaries of this authority. If the dealer does not maintain an office, warehouse, distribution center or other facility within the jurisdictional boundaries of this authority, the dealer shall make any and all records available to the collector or his duly authorized agent at the operations center of the collector. If the dealer fails to perform in this respect, all travel and associated out-of-pocket expenses shall be the responsibility, and become a liability, of the dealer. 
(Code 1958,  21A-76; Ord. No. 7486,  7.01, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-147. - Dealer; records to be kept for three years; inspection by collector. 
    Each dealer shall secure, maintain and keep, for a period of three (3) years, a complete record of sales of services and tangible personal property received, used, sold at retail, distributed or stored, leased or rented within this authority by said dealer, together with invoices, bills of lading, and other pertinent records and papers as may be required by the collector for the reasonable administration of this article; and all such records shall be open for inspection to the collector at all reasonable hours. 
(Code 1958,  21A-77; Ord. No. 7486,  7.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-148. - Wholesale dealer's and jobber's records; inspection. 
    In order to aid in the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article, and to collect all of the tax imposed by this article, all wholesale dealers and jobbers in this authority are hereby required to keep a record of all sales of tangible personal property made in this authority, whether such sales be for cash or on terms of credit. The record required to be kept by all wholesale dealers and jobbers shall contain and include the name and address of the purchaser, the date of the purchase, the article or articles purchased and the price at which the article is sold to the purchaser. These records shall be open to inspection of the collector or his duly authorized assistants or deputies at all reasonable hours. 
(Code 1958,  21A-78; Ord. No. 7486,  7.03, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-149. - Examination and investigation of dealer's records by collector. 
    For the purpose of administering this article, the collector, whenever he deems it expedient, may make or cause to be made by an employee of the department or division engaged in the administration of this article, an examination or investigation of the place of business, if any, the tangible personal property, and the books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts, and documents of any dealer. It shall be the duty of every dealer and every director, official, agent, or employee of every dealer, to exhibit to the collector or to any such employee of his department or division charged with the collection of the tax imposed by this article, hereafter referred to as "deputy", the tangible personal property and all of the books, records, papers, vouchers, accounts, and documents of the dealer and to facilitate any such examination or investigation as far as it may be in his or their power so to do. 
(Code 1958,  21A-79; Ord. No. 7486,  7.04, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-150. - Transportation companies; examination of records by collector. 
    For the purpose of enforcing the collection of the tax levied by this article, the collector is hereby specifically authorized and empowered to examine, at all reasonable hours, the books, records and other documents of all transportation companies, agencies or firms operating in this authority, whether said companies, agencies or firms conduct their business by truck, rail, water, airplane or otherwise, in order to determine what dealers, as provided in this article, are importing or are otherwise shipping articles of tangible personal property which are liable for said tax. 
(Code 1958,  21A-80; Ord. No. 7486,  7.05, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-151. - Collector's record of official acts; authentication. 
    The collector shall keep a record of all of his official acts and shall preserve copies of all rules, decisions and orders made by him or by any deputy of his department in charge of the collection of the tax imposed by this article. Copies of such rules, decisions or orders and of any paper or papers filed in any office maintained by him in the administration of this article may be authenticated under his official signature and when so authenticated, shall be evidence in all courts of the state of the same weight and force as the original thereof. 
(Code 1958,  21A-81; Ord. No. 7486,  7.06, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-152. - Collector's records considered confidential and privileged; inspection limited. 
    The records and files of the collector respecting the administration of this article shall be considered confidential and privileged and neither the collector nor any employee engaged in the administration thereof or charged with the custody of any such records or files shall divulge or disclose any information obtained from such records or files or from any examination or inspection of the premises or property of any dealer. Neither the collector nor any employee engaged in such administration or charged with the custody of any such records or files shall be required to produce any of them for the inspection of any person or for use in any action or proceeding except: 
(a)  In an action or proceeding under the provisions of this article; and, 
(b)  When the records or files or the facts shown thereby are directly involved in such action or proceeding. 
(Code 1958,  21A-82; Ord. No. 7486,  7.07, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-153. - Permissible use of collector's records. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to prevent: 
(1)  The delivery to a dealer or his duly authorized representative of a copy of any return, report or other paper filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article; 
(2)  The publication of statistics so classified as to prevent the identification of any return or report and the items thereof; 
(3)  The inspection by the legal representative of the governing body of the returns, reports or files relating to the claim of any dealer who shall have brought an action to review or set aside any tax imposed under this article or against whom an action or proceeding has been instituted in accordance with the provisions hereof; 
(4)  The examination of the records and files by the collector or by his duly authorized agents; or 
(5)  The furnishing, in the discretion of the collector, of any information disclosed by the records or files to any official person or body of any other state or of the United States who shall be concerned with the administration of any similar tax by the state or the United States. 
(Code 1958,  21A-83; Ord. No. 7486,  7.08, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-154-20-160. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - IMPORTED GOODS 

Sec. 20-161. - Permits to import goods. 
    In order to prevent the illegal importation into this authority of tangible personal property which is subject to the tax, and to strengthen and make more effective the manner and method of enforcing payment of the tax imposed by this article, the collector is hereby authorized and empowered to put into operation a system of permits whereby any person, or dealer, may import tangible personal property by truck, automobile or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having said truck, automobile or other means of transportation seized and subject to legal proceedings for its forfeiture. Such system of permits shall require the person, or dealer, who desires to import tangible personal property into this authority, which property is subject to the tax imposed by this article, to apply to the collector or his assistant for a permit stating the kind of vehicle to be used, the name of the driver, the license number of the vehicle, the kind or character of tangible personal property to be imported, the date, the name and address of the consignee, and such other information as the collector may deem proper or necessary. Such permits shall be free of cost to the applicant and may be obtained at the office of the collector. 
(Code 1958,  21A-91; Ord. No. 7486,  8.01, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-162-20-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - COLLECTION REMEDIES 

Sec. 20-171. - Tangible personal property presumed to be for sale at retail, etc. 
    For the purpose of the enforcement of this article, and the collection of the tax levied hereunder, it is presumed that all tangible personal property, subject to the provisions of this article, imported into the authority or held in the authority by any dealer is to be sold at retail, used or consumed, or stored for use or consumption in the authority, or leased or rented within the authority, and is subject to the tax herein levied; provided, that such presumption shall be prima facie only, and subject to proof furnished to the collector. 
(Code 1958,  21A-94; Ord. No. 7486,  9.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-172. - Failure to pay tax when due; immediate tax delinquency; court action to prohibit dealer from doing business, etc. 
    Failure to pay any tax due as provided in this article shall, ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause said tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent; and the governing body is hereby vested with authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the dealer, to show cause in not less than two (2) or more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, after the service thereof, which may be tried out of term and in chambers, and shall always be tried by preference, why said dealer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of business as a dealer; and in case said rule is made absolute, the order thereon rendered shall be considered a judgment in favor of the governing body, prohibiting such dealer from further pursuit of said business until such time as he has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs; and every violation of the injunction shall be considered as a contempt of court and punished according to law. 
(Code 1958,  21A-95; Ord. No. 7486,  9.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-173. - Interest, penalty and attorney's fee collectible if tax not paid when due. 
    If the amount of tax due by the dealer is not paid on or before the twentieth day of the month next following the month for which the tax is due, there shall be collected, with said tax, interest upon the unpaid amount, at the rate of one and one-quarter (11/4) per cent per month, or fractional part thereof, to be computed from the first day of the month next following the month for which the tax is due until it is paid; and in addition to the interest that may be so due there shall also be collected a penalty equivalent to five (5) per cent for each thirty (30) days, or fraction thereof, of delinquency, not to exceed twenty-five (25) per cent in aggregate, of the tax due, when such tax is not paid within thirty (30) days of the date the tax first becomes due and payable, and in the event of suit, attorneys' fees at the rate of ten (10) per cent of the aggregate of tax, interest and penalty. 
(Code 1958,  21A-96; Ord. No. 7455, 11-9-82; Ord. No. 7486,  9.03, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 7509,  1, 4-26-83) 
Sec. 20-174. - Estimation; assessment of tax by collector; presumption of correctness; collection; special penalty. 
    In the event any dealer fails to make a report and pay the tax as provided in this article, or in case the dealer makes a grossly incorrect report, or a report that is false or fraudulent, it shall be the duty of the collector to make an estimate for the taxable period of the retail sales, or sales of services, of such dealer, or of the gross proceeds from rentals or leases of tangible personal property by the dealer, and an estimate of the cost price of all articles of tangible personal property imported by the dealer for use or consumption or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in the authority, and assess and collect the tax and interest, plus penalty, if such have accrued, on the basis of such assessment, which shall be considered prima facie correct; and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the dealer. In the event such estimate and assessment requires an examination of books, records or documents, or an audit thereof, then the collector shall add to the assessment the cost of such examination, together with any penalties accruing thereon. Such costs and penalties when collected shall be placed to the account of the "sales tax fund" in the same manner as are the taxes collected under this article. 
    If any dealer fails to make any returns required by this article or makes an incorrect return, and the circumstances indicate willful negligence or intentional disregard of rules and regulations, but no intent to defraud, there shall be imposed, in addition to any other penalties provided herein, a specific penalty of five (5) per cent of the tax or deficiency found to be due, or ten dollars ($10.00), whichever is the greater. This specific penalty shall be an obligation to be collected and accounted for in the same manner as if it were a part of the tax due and can be enforced either in a separate action or in the same action for the collection of the tax. 
(Code 1958,  21A-97; Ord. No. 7486,  9.04, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-175. - Final return of dealer selling or quitting business; delinquent taxes to be withheld from purchase price; personal liability of purchaser. 
    If any dealer liable for any tax, interest or penalty hereunder shall sell out his business or stock of goods or shall quit the business, he shall make a final return and payment within fifteen (15) days after the date of selling or quitting business. His successor, successors, or assign, if any, shall withhold sufficient of the purchase money to cover the amount of such taxes, interest and penalties due and unpaid until such time as the former owner shall produce a receipt from the collector showing that they have been paid, or a certificate stating that no taxes, interest, or penalties are due. If the purchaser of a business or stock of goods shall fail to withhold purchase money as provided, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the taxes, interest and penalties accrued and unpaid on account of the operation of the business by any former owner, owners, or assignors. 
(Code 1958,  21A-98; Ord. No. 7486,  9.05, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-176. - Notice to creditors, holders of personal property, etc. of delinquent dealer; transfer, etc. of property; returns to collector. 
    In the event that any dealer is delinquent in the payment of the tax herein provided for, the collector may give notice of the amount of such delinquency by registered mail to all persons having in their possession or under their control, any credits or other personal property belonging to such dealer, or owing any debts to such dealer at the time of receipt by them of such notice and thereafter any person so notified shall neither transfer nor make any other disposition of such credits, other personal property, or debts until the collector shall have consented to a transfer or disposition, or until thirty (30) days shall have elapsed from and after the receipt of such notice. All persons so notified must, within five (5) days after receipt of such notice, advise the collector of any and all such credits, other personal property, or debts, in their possession, under their control or owing by them, as the case may be. In any event, all taxes due the authority under this section shall ultimately be the responsibility of any owner, partner, shareholder, officer or director of the dealer, and all such owners, partners, shareholders, officers or directors shall be jointly and separately liable for such taxes. 
(Code 1958,  21A-99; Ord. No. 7486,  9.06, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-177. - Collector authorized to ascertain true cost of imported goods in certain cases; assessment and collection of tax; presumptions. 
    In the event the dealer has imported tangible personal property and he fails to produce an invoice showing the cost price of the articles which are subject to tax, or the invoice does not reflect the true or actual cost price, then the collector shall ascertain, in any manner feasible, the true cost price and assess and collect the tax with interest, plus penalties, if such have accrued, on the true cost price as assessed by him. The assessment so made shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden shall be on the dealer to show the contrary. 
(Code 1958,  21A-100; Ord. No. 7486,  9.07, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-178. - Collector's authority to fix rentals; collection of tax, etc. 
    In the case of the lease or rental of tangible personal property, if the consideration given or reported by the dealer does not, in the judgment of the collector represent the true or actual consideration, then the collector is authorized to fix the same and collect the tax thereon for the governing body in the same manner as provided in section 20-177 of this Code, with interest plus penalties, if such have accrued. 
(Code 1958,  21A-101; Ord. No. 7486,  9.08, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-179. - Legal remedy of collector when transportation companies refuse examination of books and records. 
    In the event any transportation company, agency, or firm shall refuse to permit examination of its books, records, and other documents by the collector, the collector may proceed by rule, in term or in chambers, in any court of competent jurisdiction and require said transportation company, agency or firm to show cause why the collector should not be permitted to examine its books, records or other documents, and in case said rule be made obsolete, the same shall be considered a judgment of the court and every violation of said judgment as a contempt thereof and punished according to law. 
(Code 1958,  21A-102; Ord. No. 7486,  9.09, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-180. - Hearings before collector; notice to dealer. 
    If any dealer subject to make and file a return required by any of the provisions of this article, fails to render such return within the time required, or renders a return which is false or fraudulent, in that it contains statements which differ from the true gross sales, purchases, leases, or rentals, or other transactions, taxable under this article, or otherwise fails to comply with the provisions of this article, for the taxable period for which said return is made, the collector shall give such dealer fifteen (15) days' notice, in writing, requiring such dealer to appear before him, or his assistant, with such books, records and papers as he may require, relating to the business of such dealer, for such taxable period; and said collector may require such dealer, or the agents or employees of such dealer, to give testimony or to answer interrogatories, under oath administered by the collector or his assistants, respecting the sale at retail, the use, or consumption or distribution, in the authority, or lease or rental of tangible personal property or other transactions, subject to tax, or the failure to make report thereof, as provided in this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-103; Ord. No. 7486,  9.10, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-181. - Collector authorized to apply to court for order requiring dealer to file return, etc. 
    If any dealer fails to make a return, or refuses to permit an examination of his, the dealer's books, records, or papers, or to appear and answer questions within the scope of such investigation relating to the sale, use, consumption, distribution, storage, lease or rental of tangible personal property, or sale of services, the collector may apply to any court of competent jurisdiction, for an order requiring such dealer to make such return, or requiring the dealer, or his agents or employees, to appear and answer any such questions or permit such examinations, and the court or any judge thereof, shall thereupon issue an order, upon such reasonable notice as shall be prescribed therein, to be served upon said dealer or the agents or employees of such dealer directing him or them to so appear and testify, and to produce such books, records, and papers as may be required. Any person, or any member of any firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, or corporation, or any agent or employee thereof, failing to comply with any such order shall be guilty of contempt, and shall be punished as provided by law in cases of contempt. 
(Code 1958,  21A-104; Ord. No. 7486,  9.11, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-182. - Importation of taxable personalty without permit construed as attempt to evade tax; seizure of vehicle and property. 
    The importation into the authority of tangible personal property which is subject to tax, by truck, automobile or other means of transportation other than a common carrier, without having first obtained a permit as described in section 20-161 of this Code (if the tax imposed by this article on said tangible personal property has not been paid) shall be construed as an attempt to evade payment of the tax and the same is hereby prohibited; and the truck, automobile or means of transportation other than a common carrier and the taxable property may be seized by the governing body in order to secure the same as evidence in a trial; and the same shall be subject to forfeiture and sale in the manner provided for in this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-105; Ord. No. 7486,  9.12, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-183. - Attachment of taxable property; penalties. 
    The failure of any dealer who imports tangible personal property from outside the authority into the authority for use or consumption or distribution or storage to be used or consumed in this authority, or who imports for lease or rental any tangible personal property subject to the provisions of this article, to pay any tax, interest, penalties or costs under this article, shall ipso facto make the said tax, interest, penalties and costs delinquent and shall be construed as an attempt to avoid the payment of same, which shall be sufficient grounds for attachment of such tangible personal property wherever the same may be located or found, whether said delinquent dealer be a resident or nonresident of the authority, and whether said tangible personal property is in the possession of said delinquent dealer or in the possession of other persons, firms, corporations or associations of persons; provided, that it is the intention of this article to prevent the disposition of the tangible personal property in order to ensure payment of the tax imposed by this article, together with interest, penalties and costs; and authority to attach is hereby specifically authorized and granted to the governing body. 
    In addition to the penalties prescribed in this section and section 20-182 of this Code, any person, or dealer, who shall violate the provisions thereof, upon conviction shall be punished by a fine in the sum of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or imprisonment in jail for a period of not more than ninety (90) days or by both such fine and imprisonment, in the discretion of the court. And, each importation or shipment by truck, automobile, or other means of transportation, other than a common carrier, found to be in violation of the provisions of these sections shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Code 1958,  21A-106; Ord. No. 7486,  9.13, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-184. - Personal liability of dealers; lien created; priority status; proceeds of judgment. 
    The liability of any person, or dealer, arising from any tax, interest and penalty, or any of them, imposed by this article, from the time they are due, shall be a personal debt of such person, or dealer, to the governing body, recoverable in any court of competent jurisdiction in an action at law by the governing body. Such debts, whether sued upon or not, shall be a lien on all the property of such delinquent person, or dealer, except as against an innocent purchaser for value without notice in the actual course of business, and shall have preference in any distribution of the assets of the person, or dealer, whether in bankruptcy, insolvency or otherwise. The proceeds of any judgment or order obtained hereunder shall be paid to the governing body. 
(Code 1958,  21A-107; Ord. No. 7486,  9.14, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-185. - Authority to require bonds or other security. 
    The governing body may require a bond or other security satisfactory to the collector for the payment of any taxes, fees, interests and penalties, or any of them, imposed pursuant to this article when he shall find that the collection thereof may be prejudiced without such security. 
(Code 1958,  21A-108; Ord. No. 7486,  9.15, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-186. - Collector authorized to estimate and assess tax within three years from date due; notice of assessment. 
    If any person, or dealer, shall fail to make a return or report as required by this article, the collector, within three (3) years after the last day on which the omitted report could have been filed without penalty, may make an estimate of the amount of taxes such person, or dealer, is liable to pay under the terms of this article, from any information he is able to conveniently obtain, and according to such estimate so made by him, assess the taxes, fees, penalties and interest due the governing body from such person, or dealer; give notice of such assessment to such person, or dealer; and must make demand upon him for payment, or otherwise the claim shall prescribe. 
(Code 1958,  21A-109; Ord. No. 7486,  9.16, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-187. - Examination, audit of tax returns; additional assessments; demand for payment. 
    After a return or report is filed under the provisions of this article, the collector shall cause to be examined and make such further audit or investigation as he may deem necessary, and if therefrom, he shall determine that there is a deficiency with respect to the payment of any tax due under this article, he shall assess the additional amount of tax, and any penalties and interest, or either of them due the governing body from such person, or dealer, and make demand upon him for payment. 
(Code 1958,  21A-110; Ord. No. 7486,  9.17, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-188. - Arbitrary assessment when collection jeopardized; payment dates of certain assessments. 
    If the collector finds that any person, or dealer, liable for the payment of any tax under this article designs quickly to depart from the authority or to remove therefrom his or its property, subject to any lien under the provisions of this article, or to discontinue business, or to do any other act tending to prejudice or render wholly, or partly ineffectual any proceedings that might be instituted to collect such tax, whereby it shall have become important that such proceedings be instituted without delay, the collector may make an arbitrary assessment as herein provided, whether or not any return or report is then due by law, and may proceed under such arbitrary assessment to collect the tax, or demand security for it, and thereafter shall cause notice of such findings to be given to such dealer, together with a demand for an immediate return or report, and immediate payment of such tax. 
    All taxes, penalties and interest assessed pursuant to the provisions of sections 20-185 through 20-187 of this Code shall be paid within fifteen (15) days after notice and demand shall have been mailed to the dealer liable therefor by the governing body. If such taxes, penalties and interest so assessed shall not be paid within such fifteen (15) days, there shall be added to the amount assessed, in addition to interest as hereinbefore provided, and any other penalties provided by this article, a sum equivalent to five (5) per cent of the tax. 
(Code 1958,  21A-111; Ord. No. 7486,  9.18, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-189. - Collection by distraint and sale. 
    If any dealer against whom taxes have been assessed under the provisions of this article shall refuse or neglect to pay such taxes within the time prescribed in this article, it shall be lawful for the collector, or his duly authorized representative who is charged with the enforcement of collection of such taxes, to enforce collection of such taxes, together with such interest and other additional amounts as are added by law, by distraint and sale of property or rights to property belonging to the delinquent dealer. 
(Code 1958,  21A-112; Ord. No. 7486,  9.19, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-190. - Personal liability of dealer for uncollected taxes. 
    Any dealer who shall neglect, fail or refuse to collect the tax as provided in division 4 of this article, upon any, every and all retail sales made by him, or his agent, or employee, which is subject to tax, shall be liable for and pay the tax himself. 
(Code 1958,  21A-113; Ord. No. 7486,  9.20, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-191. - Penalty for failure to file return, keep records, allow inspection. 
    For any one of the following violations, in addition to being liable for the other penalties provided herein, the party named shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction be punished by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisonment in jail for not more than three (3) months, or both, in the discretion of the court: 
(1)  Any person who as a purchaser is obligated to report and pay the tax imposed upon any purchase made by him under division 4 of this article, and who fails, neglects, and refuses to file a return thereof with the collector and pay the tax imposed thereon, within the time stated after such sale is made; 
(2)  Any dealer who shall fail, neglect or refuse to collect the tax as provided in division 4 of this article, whether by himself or through his agents or employees; 
(3)  Any dealer violating the provisions of sections 20-175 and 20-176 of this Code; 
(4)  Any dealer who fails to permit an inspection of records by the collector as provided in section 20-146 of this Code; 
(5)  Any wholesale dealer or jobber in the authority who fails to keep records, or fails to permit an inspection thereof by the collector as provided in section 20-148 of this chapter; 
(6)  Any dealer, wholesale dealer or jobber who violates the provisions of sections 20-104 and 20-105 of this chapter; 
(7)  Any dealer who violates the provisions of section 20-147 of this chapter; 
(8)  Any dealer failing or refusing to furnish any return as provided in division 6 of this article, or failing or refusing to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the collector; 
(9)  Any dealer required to make, render, sign or verify any return, as provided in division 6 of this article, who makes a false or fraudulent return, with intent to evade a tax hereby levied; 
(10)  The president, executive officers, managers and directors of any corporation, who shall violate the provisions of section 20-192 of this Code; provided that such fine and imprisonment shall not prevent other action against the corporation as otherwise provided in this article for the recovery of the tax, interest and penalties that may be due; and 
(11)  Any person who shall violate any other provisions of this article, punishment for which is not otherwise herein provided. 
(Code 1958,  21A-114; Ord. No. 7486,  9.21, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-192. - Prohibited corporate action until taxes, interest, penalty, paid. 
    No corporation organized under the laws of this state shall hereafter be dissolved, or effect a merger, reorganization, or consolidation under any law of this state by the action of the stockholders or by the decree of any court until all taxes, fees, penalties and interest imposed on the corporation in accordance with the provisions of this article shall have been paid in full. No foreign corporation which has obtained authority from the state to transact business in the authority may surrender such authority and withdraw from this state until all taxes, fees, penalties, interest and other charges imposed upon said corporation in accordance with the provisions of this article shall have been fully paid. 
(Code 1958,  21A-115; Ord. No. 7468,  9.22, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-193. - Payment of interest, penalties. 
    Any person or dealer who shall fail to pay any tax levied by this article on or before the day when such tax shall be required by this article to be paid, shall pay in addition to the tax, interest on the tax at the rate specified in section 20-173 of this Code, for each month or fraction thereof that the tax remains unpaid, to be calculated from the date the tax was originally due to the date of actual payment. 
    In addition, such person or dealer shall pay the special penalty or penalties provided by this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-116; Ord. No. 7486,  9.23, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-194. - Penalties, interest deemed part of tax; authority to waive. 
    All penalties and interest imposed by this article shall be payable to and recoverable by the governing body in the same manner as if they were part of the tax imposed. If the failure to pay any such tax when due is explained to the satisfaction of the collector, he may remit or waive payment of the whole or any part of any penalty, and may remit and waive payment of any interest charge in excess of the rate of one per cent per month. 
(Code 1958,  21A-117; Ord. No. 7486,  9.24, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-195-20-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - REFUNDS AND REIMBURSEMENTS 

Sec. 20-206. - Tax credit to dealers for returned goods. 
    In the event purchases are returned to the dealer by the purchaser or consumer after the tax imposed by this article has been collected or charged to the account of the consumer or user, the dealer shall be entitled to reimbursement of the amount of tax so collected or charged by him, in the manner prescribed by the collector and in case the tax has not been remitted by the dealer to the governing body, the dealer may deduct the same in submitting his return. Upon receipt of a sworn statement of the dealer as to the gross amount of such refunds during the period covered by such sworn statement, which period shall not be longer than ninety (90) days, the governing body, through the collector, shall issue to the dealer an official credit memorandum equal to the net amount remitted by the dealer for such tax collected. Such memorandum shall be accepted by the governing body at full face value from the dealer to whom it is issued, in the remittance for subsequent taxes accrued under the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-121; Ord. No. 7486,  10.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-207. - Claim for refund. 
    If any dealer shall have given to the collector notice within the time provided in section 20-206 of this Code, such dealer thereafter at any time within two (2) years after the payment of any original or additional tax assessed against him, may file with the collector a claim under oath for refund, in such form as the collector may prescribe stating the grounds thereof. However, no claim for refund shall be required or permitted to be filed with respect to a tax paid, after protest has been filed with the collector as hereinafter provided, or after proceeding on appeal has been finally determined. 
(Code 1958,  21A-122; Ord. No. 7486,  10.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-208. - Overpayment of tax either credited against dealer's liability or refunded. 
    If, upon examination of such claim for refund, it shall be determined by the collector that there has been an overpayment of tax, the amount of such overpayment shall be credited against any liability of any dealer under this article, and if there be no such liability, the said dealer shall be entitled to a refund of the tax so overpaid. If the dealer requests interest to be accrued on such refund or credit, such interest shall be at the rate as applied by the Louisiana Department of Revenue and Taxation on similar refunds or credits. If the collector shall reject the claim for refund in whole or in part he shall make an order accordingly and serve notice upon such dealer. 
(Code 1958,  21A-123; Ord. No. 7486,  10.03, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-209. - Refund for erroneously or illegally collected taxes. 
    Where no question of fact or law is involved, and it appears from the records of the governing body that any moneys have been erroneously or illegally collected from any dealer, or have been paid by any dealer under a mistake of fact or law, the collector may, at any time within two (2) years of payment, upon making a record in writing of his reasons therefor, certify that any dealer is entitled to such refund; and thereupon the collector shall authorize the payment thereof from any appropriation available for such purposes. 
(Code 1958,  21A-124; Ord. No. 7486,  10.04, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-210. - Repayment to dealer of deposits. 
    When, to secure compliance with any of the provisions of this article, any moneys shall have been deposited with the governing body by any dealer, and shall have been paid over to the governing body and the collector shall be satisfied that such dealer has fully complied with all such provisions, the collector shall so certify and authorize repayment from any appropriations available for such purpose to such dealer of such moneys, or such part thereof as the collector shall certify has not been applied by him to the satisfaction of any indebtedness arising under this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-125; Ord. No. 7468,  10.05, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-211-20-220. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - REMEDIES OF THE DEALER 

Sec. 20-221. - Right of action created; procedure; amount of recovery. 
    A right of action is hereby created to afford a remedy at law for any dealer aggrieved by the provisions of this article, and in case of any such dealer resisting the payment of any amount found due, or the enforcement of any provisions of such laws in relation thereto, such dealer shall pay the amount found due by the collector and shall give the collector notice, at the time, of his intention to file suit for the recovery of the same; and upon receipt of such notice the amount so paid shall be segregated and held by the collector for a period of thirty (30) days; and if suit be filed within such time for recovery of such amount, such funds so segregated shall be further held, pending the outcome of such suit. If the dealer prevails, the collector shall refund the amount to the claimant, with interest at the rate of two (2) per cent per annum covering the period from the date the funds were received by the governing body to the date of refund. 
(Code 1958,  21A-130; Ord. No. 7468,  11.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-222. - Courts designated; service of process. 
    This section shall afford a legal remedy and right of action in any state, city or federal court having jurisdiction of the parties and subject matter, for a full and complete adjudication of any and all questions arising in the enforcement of this chapter, as to the legality of any tax accrued or accruing or the method of enforcement thereof. In such actions service shall be upon the collector. 
(Code 1958,  21A-131; Ord. No. 7486,  11.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-223. - Legal remedy for certain causes of action; effect of payment under protest. 
    This section shall be construed to provide a legal remedy in the state, city or federal courts, by action of law, in case such taxes are claimed to be an unlawful burden upon interstate commerce, or the collection thereof, in violation of any act of Congress or the United States Constitution, or in any case where jurisdiction is vested in any of the courts of the United States; provided that upon request of the dealer and upon proper showing by such dealer that the principle of law involved in an additional assessment is already pending before the courts for judicial determination, the dealer, upon agreement to abide by the decision of the courts, may pay the additional assessment under protest but need not file an additional suit. In such cases the tax so paid under protest shall be segregated and held by the collector until the question of law involved has been determined by the courts and shall then be disposed of as therein provided. 
(Code 1958,  21A-132; Ord. No. 7486,  11.03, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-224. - Grievance procedure. 
    If any dealer shall be aggrieved by any finding or assessment of the collector, he may within thirty (30) days of the receipt of notice of the assessment or finding, file a protest in writing, signed by him or his duly authorized agent, which shall be under oath and shall set forth the reasons therefor, and he may request a hearing. Thereafter, the collector shall grant a hearing to such dealer, if a hearing has been requested, and may make an order confirming, modifying or vacating any such finding or assessment. The filing of any such protest shall not abate any penalty for nonpayment nor shall it stay the right of the collector to collect the tax in any manner herein provided, unless the dealer shall furnish security of a kind and in an amount satisfactory to the collector. Appeals from the decision of the collector shall be direct to any state, city or federal court of competent jurisdiction as provided for in section 20-222 of this Code. 
(Code 1958,  21A-133; Ord. No. 7486,  11.04, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-225-20-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS 

Sec. 20-236. - Collector authorized to enforce article. 
    The collector is hereby authorized and empowered to carry into effect the provisions of this article and in pursuance thereof to make and enforce such rules as he may deem necessary in administering the provisions of this article and other policies or procedures established by this governing body. 
(Code 1958,  21A-136; Ord. No. 7486,  12.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-237. - Collector empowered to make rules and regulations. 
    The collector shall have the power to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this article or the laws and the constitution of this state or of the United States, for the enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the revenues and penalties imposed by this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-137; Ord. No. 7486,  12.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-238. - Forms for filing returns. 
    The collector shall design, prepare, print and make available to all dealers all necessary forms for filing returns, and instructions to ensure a full collection from dealers and an accounting for the taxes due; but failure of any dealer to secure such forms shall not relieve such dealer from the payment of said taxes at the time and in the manner herein provided. 
(Code 1958,  21A-138; Ord. No. 7486,  12.03, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-239. - Cost of preparation and distribution of forms etc. 
    The cost of preparing and distributing the report forms and paraphernalia for the collection of said tax, shall be borne by the collector. 
(Code 1958,  21A-139; Ord. No. 7486,  12.04, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-240. - Tax required on sale of tangible personal property prior to effective date of article. 
(a)  In any case where tangible personal property is sold at retail under a contract providing for such retail sale, made and entered into prior to the effective date of this article [February 1, 1983] and containing the sale price, and delivery is made after the effective date of this article, and such sale is taxable under this article, the seller shall add the tax imposed by this article to the sale price and collect it from the buyer. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall also apply where such tangible personal property is not sold but is used, consumed, distributed, stored, leased or rented, and where services taxable hereunder are contracted for before the effective date of this article except as provided in subsection 20-91(17) of this article. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to tangible personal property actually imported or caused to be imported into, or stored within, the territorial limits of the authority prior to the effective date of this article, if the tangible personal property is actually used or consumed by the person who imported and stored such tangible personal property. 
(Ord. No. 7486,  12.05, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-241. - Collector authorized to receive written oaths. 
    It shall be lawful for the collector, or any deputy by him duly designated, to receive the written oath of any person signing any application, deposition, statement or report required by the collector in the administration of this article. 
(Code 1958,  21A-140; Ord. No. 7486,  12.06, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-242. - Collector's authority to conduct hearings. 
    The collector, or any deputy by him duly designated, may conduct hearings and have administered and examined under oath any dealer and the directors, officers, agents and employees of any dealer, and any other witnesses, relative to the business of such dealer in respect to any matter incident to the administration of this article. Such examinations or hearings shall be at a time convenient to the dealer within fourteen (14) days after requested by the collector in writing. 
(Code 1958,  21A-141; Ord. No. 7486,  12.07, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-243. - Method of giving notice to dealers. 
    Any notice required to be given by the collector pursuant to this article may be given by personal service on the dealer for whom it is intended, or be mailed to the dealer for whom it is intended, addressed to such dealer at the address given in the last report filed by him pursuant to the provisions of this article, or if no report has been filed, then to such address as may be obtained. The mailing of such notice shall be presumptive evidence of its receipt by the dealer to whom it is addressed. 
(Code 1958,  21A-142; Ord. No. 7486,  12.08, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-244. - Collector's records; copies, authentication; fee. 
    The collector shall keep a record of all of the officials acts, and shall preserve copies of all rules, decisions and orders made by him and by any deputy of his department or division in charge of the collection of the tax imposed by this article. Copies of such rules, decisions, or orders and of any paper or papers filed in any office maintained by him in the administration of this article, may be authenticated under his official signature, and when so authenticated, shall be evidence in all courts of the state of the same weight and force as the original thereof. For authenticating any such copy, he shall be paid a fee to cover all reasonable costs and/or expenses which shall be deposited in the "Sales Tax Fund-1983." 
(Code 1958,  21A-143; Ord. No. 7486,  12.09, 2-8-83; Ord. No. 9409, 9-28-93) 
Sec. 20-245. - Preservation of dealer's legal remedies. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to deprive the dealer of any remedy in the review of any tax, or in any proceedings to collect the tax given such dealer by any other law, or to deprive the governing body of the authority of any remedy for the enforcement of this article through any procedure or remedies expressly provided in this article imposing the tax herein levied or any other law, nor shall this article be construed as repealing or altering any such laws, ordinances or resolutions. 
(Code 1958,  21A-144; Ord. No. 7486,  12.10, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-246. - Tax declared supplemental and additional to other taxes. 
    The tax levied herein is declared to be supplemental and in addition to all other taxes levied by and under the authority of the governing body of any kind or nature. 
(Code 1958,  21A-146; Ord. No. 7486,  12.12, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-247-20-260. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - DISPOSITION OF TAX PROCEEDS AND REVENUES 

Sec. 20-261. - Deposit of collections. 
    All taxes, revenues, funds, assessments, moneys, penalties, fees or other income which may be collected or come into possession of the collector as an agent of the governing body under any provision or provisions of this article shall be promptly deposited by the collector for the account of the governing body in a special fund designated "Sales Tax Fund-1983," which fund shall be established and maintained as sacred funds of the governing body; however, any amount which is paid under protest or which is subject to litigation may be transferred to another account established by the collector pending final determination of the protest or litigation. 
(Code 1958,  21A-151; Ord. No. 7486,  13.01, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-262. - Payment of costs and expenses. 
    Out of the funds so deposited in the "Sales Tax Fund-1983," the collector shall first pay all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses of collecting the tax levied hereby and administering the provisions of this article as well as the various administrative procedures established herein. 
(Code 1958,  21A-152; Ord. No. 7486,  13.02, 2-8-83) 
Sec. 20-263. - Disbursement of balances. 
    In compliance with the special election of January 15, 1983, authorizing said tax, after all reasonable and necessary costs and expenses of collection and administration of the tax have been paid as provided for in section 20-262 of this Code, the remaining balance of the sales tax proceeds shall be available for appropriation and expenditure by the governing body solely for the purposes designated in the proposition authorizing the levy of the tax, as approved by a majority of the qualified electors of the city voting at a special election held therein on January 15, 1983. 
(Code 1958,  21A-153; Ord. No. 7486,  13.03, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-264-20-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - COLLECTOR AS AGENT AND TRUSTEE FOR GOVERNING BODY 

Sec. 20-271. - Tax levied on behalf of governing body. 
    It is hereby recognized that the tax herein levied is being levied by and on behalf of the governing body as herein provided and that the collector is acting as agent for the governing body for the purpose of administration and collection of the tax. 
(Ord. No. 7486,  14.01, 2-8-83) 
Secs. 20-272-20-290. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSURANCE PREMIUM TAX[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 8008, adopted May 26, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1, 2, 6-13 as  20-291-20-300, comprising a new Art. IV, was at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Local insurance tax authorized, R.S. 22:833. 

Sec. 20-291. - Levied. 
(a)  Rates. There is hereby levied an insurance premium tax for the year 1988 and for each subsequent year upon insurers engaged in the business of issuing any form of insurance policy or contract, in the City of Monroe, which may now or hereafter be subject to the payment of any license tax for state purposes, all or authorized by section 1076 of Title 22 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, on risks located in this municipality, as follows: 
(1)  On any insurer engaged in the business of issuing life or accident or health insurance policies or other forms of contracts or obligations covering such risks, or issuing endowment or annuity policies or contracts, or other similar forms of contract obligations in consideration of the payment of a premium or other consideration for the issuance of such policies, contracts or obligations whether such insurer by operating in this state or through an agent or other representative or otherwise: ten dollars ($10.00) on gross annual premiums up to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) and an additional license thereafter of seventy dollars ($70.00) on each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, of gross annual premiums in excess of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). The maximum license on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any one insurer, shall not exceed twenty-one thousand dollars ($21,000.00). 
(2)  On any insurer, engaged in the business of issuing policies, contracts, or other forms of obligations covering the risk of fire, marine, transportation, surety, fidelity, indemnity, guaranty, worker's compensation, employers' liability, property damage, livestock, vehicle, automatic sprinkler, burglary or insurance business of any other kind whatsoever in this state, whether such insurer is operating in this state through agents or other representative or otherwise, shall be as allowed by the aforementioned statutes, viz: 
First class: When the gross receipts are not more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), the license shall be forty dollars ($40.00). 
Second class: When the gross receipts are more than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00), and not more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), the license shall be sixty dollars ($60.00). 
Third class: When the gross receipts are more than four thousand dollars ($4,000.00), and not more than six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the license shall be eighty dollars ($80.00). 
Fourth class: When the gross receipts exceed six thousand dollars ($6,000.00), the additional license thereafter shall be seventy dollars ($70.00) for each ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), or fraction thereof, in excess of six thousand dollars ($6,000.00). 
(b)  Maximum license tax. The maximum license tax on such businesses, payable to this municipality by any insurer, shall not exceed the maximum limit of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00), as provided for by Louisiana Revised Statutes 22:1076, above referred to; provided, that plate glass and steam boiler inspection insurers shall pay only one-third of the above rates provided in said subsection (a)(2); and provided further, that the amount of license payable to this municipality as fixed by this section, shall be one-third of the amount so fixed if the payer shall file a sworn statement with the annual report required by Louisiana Revised Statutes Title 22, Chapter 1, Part XXIII, showing that at least one-sixth of the total admitted assets of the payer, less assets in an amount equal to the reserves on its policies issued in foreign countries in which it is authorized to do business and which countries require an investment therein as a condition of doing business, is invested and maintained, either in bonds of the state, or in bonds of municipal, school, road or levee district, or other political subdivisions of this state or in mortgages on property located in this state, or in real property in this state which shall be requisite for the convenient accommodation of the transaction of its own business, or in policy loans, or other loans to residents of this state, or to corporations organized under the laws of this state and domiciled in this state, or in stock or homestead building or loan associations organized under the laws of this state, to the extent such stock is guaranteed or insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or other federal or state agency. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  1, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-292. - When due and payable; collection of delinquent accounts. 
    All license taxes levied herein shall be due and payable on January 1 of each year and all unpaid license taxes shall become delinquent on March 1. The collection of delinquent accounts shall be enforced in accordance with Louisiana Revised Statutes 47:1601 and 47:1602. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  2, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-293. - Taxpayers required to keep records. 
    Each person shall keep a reasonable record of its gross receipts. This record shall be kept separately for each place of business, and shall be subject to examination and inspection by the director of administration or his duly authorized assistants or by an authorized accountant appointed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  6, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-294. - Applications for licenses. 
(a)  Required; contents. Every person subject to a license tax levied by this article shall apply to the director of administration for a license before the same becomes delinquent, as provided in this article. The application shall state all facts necessary to determine the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(b)  Audit and inspection of records. If the director of administration is not satisfied with the facts set forth in the application, or for any reason desires to audit the books and records of the taxpayer, the director, or any of his authorized assistants, may audit and inspect all records of the taxpayer that would have any bearing upon the amount of taxes due under this article. 
(c)  Who may sign. Where an individual is an applicant for a license required by this article, the application must be signed by him; where a partnership or an association of persons, by a member of the firm, and where a corporation, by the proper officer thereof. 
(d)  Intentional false statement; fine. Any intentional false statement under this article shall constitute a misdemeanor and any persons convicted thereof shall be fined not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) or imprisoned for not more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  7, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-295. - Failure to pay tax; judgment prohibiting further pursuit or business. 
    Failure to pay the tax levied by this article, shall, ipso facto, without demand or putting in default, cause the tax, interest, penalties and costs to become immediately delinquent, and the director of administration is hereby vested with authority, on motion in a court of competent jurisdiction, to take a rule on the delinquent taxpayer to show cause in not less than two (2) or more than ten (10) days, exclusive of holidays, why the delinquent taxpayer should not be ordered to cease from further pursuit of the business under this article. This rule may be tried out of term and in chamber, and shall always be tried by preference. If the rule is made absolute, the order therein rendered shall be considered a judgment in favor of the city prohibiting the taxpayer from the further pursuit of the business until such time as he has paid the delinquent tax, interest, penalties and costs, and every violation of the injunction shall be considered a contempt of court, and according to law. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  8, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-296. - Posting of license. 
    Each person, association of persons, business firm or corporation required to take out a license under this article shall be required to post the same in a conspicuous place, in his or their place of business, under penalty of not less than ten dollars ($10.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), recoverable by the director of administration before any court of competent jurisdiction, and it shall be the duty of the director to visit in person, and ascertain that the provisions of this section are strictly carried out. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  9, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-297. - Evidence of payment of license. 
    The only legal evidence that a license has been paid shall be the appropriate form of license issued by the director of administration, and no receipt issued by the director of administration, in place of the license itself, shall be valid, and this clause shall be construed to prevent the director of administration from issuing a receipt in lieu of the appropriate form to any person, association of persons, or business corporation, provided that nothing herein contained shall be construed so as to exclude oral evidence of lost or destroyed license. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  10, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-298. - Tax collector to keep on file sworn statements. 
    The director of administration shall prepare and keep a record on file of all statements made under oath of all persons, associations of persons, business firms or corporations who may apply for license to pursue any trade, profession, vocation, calling or business under this article. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  11, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-299. - Oath of taxpayers. 
    The director of administration, charged with the collection of the taxes herein provided, shall be empowered and required to administer an oath to any person, president or proper official or agent of any association of persons, business firm or corporation, applying for license under this article, and the director of administration, or any notary public, or other officer of the city, empowered to administer oaths, who does not administer the oath in person to the applicant shall be subject to a fine of not less than thirty (30) days nor more than ninety (90) days, or both, in the discretion of the court. When the oath is taken before the director, no charge shall be made for same. Any false swearing as to the gross receipts of any person, or persons, or corporations through their president or proper officer or agent applying for license, shall constitute the crime of perjury, to be punished as directed by existing criminal laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 8006,  12, 5-26-87) 
Sec. 20-300. - Interest and costs for unpaid licenses. 
    All unpaid licenses shall bear interest at the rate of two (2) per cent per month from the first day of March and in addition, said delinquent shall pay the additional sum of ten (10) per cent of the aggregate amount of license, interest and penalties due by said delinquent as attorney's fees to the city attorney in whose hands the director of administration has placed the same for collection, and the payment of said license, interest, penalties, attorney's fees and costs on property, movable or immovable of the delinquent owing the license and said director of administration shall collect said license, interest, penalties, attorney's fee and costs in the manner prescribed by existing law. 
(Ord. No. 8008,  13, 5-26-87) 
Secs. 20-301-20-310. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALE LICENSE[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7992, adopted Apr. 28, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of  1-9 as  20-311-20-322, comprising a new Art. V, was at the discretion of the editor. 
State Law reference- Fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sales, R.S. 51:31 et seq. 

Sec. 20-311. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy, or fiduciary sale includes an insurance, mortgage, insolvent, assignee's, executor's, administrator's, receiver's, trustee's, removal or closing-out sale, a sale of damaged goods, or a sale in which a merchant advertises that he is disposing of all goods as a means of ceasing to do business. 
    Goods includes goods, wares and merchandise. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  1A, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-312. - Exemptions to article. 
    The provisions of this article shall not apply to sheriffs, constables, or other public or court officers, or to persons acting under the license, direction or authority of any court, state or federal, selling goods in the course of their official duties. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  1B, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-313. - Keeping of records; issuance of licenses. 
    The director of administration shall act as the authorized representative of the mayor for the keeping of the records and issuance of licenses of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  1B(1), 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-314. - License required. 
    Every person who advertises, represents or holds out that any sale of goods is a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale shall first obtain a license to conduct the sale from the director of administration. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  1C, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-315. - Application; supplemental license. 
(a)  Contents. Every person who desires a license shall make application to the director of administration in writing, under oath, showing all the facts in regard to the going-out-of-business, insurance, bankruptcy, mortgage, insolvency, assignment, administration, receivership, trusteeship or removal by reason of which the sale is to be conducted, or in regard to the closing out of his stock of goods or any particular line or part, with a statement as to the reason for the closing out, or in regard to the damage to the goods, and in regard to the sale which he proposes to conduct, the place and manner of conducting it, including an inventory of the goods to be sold, a statement, as far as possible, of the names of the persons from whom the goods were obtained, the date of the delivery of the goods to the person applying for the license, the place from which the goods were last taken, and all details necessary to identify fully the goods to be sold. The application shall also specify whether the applicant proposes to advertise or conduct the sale as a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale with a statement of the fiduciary relationship. 
(b)  Duration of sale; supplemental license. The application shall specify the proposed period of time over which the sale is to continue, which period shall not exceed three (3) months. If it appears, upon a sworn subsequent application to the director of administration at any time during the three-month period, that all of the goods, described and inventoried in the original application, have not been sold, and if the application is accompanied by an inventory of what remains, a supplemental license, granting authority to continue the sale for a further period of three (3) months, shall be issued by the director of administration upon the same terms and conditions as the original license. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  2, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-316. - Issuance; fee. 
    If the director of administration is satisfied from the application that the proposed sale is of the character which applicant desires to conduct and advertise, he shall issue a license, upon the payment of a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00), to the person applying, authorizing that person to advertise and conduct a sale of the particular kind mentioned in the application according to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  3, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-317. - Record of issuance or refusal; record of application; abstract. 
    The director of administration shall endorse upon the application the date of its filing, preserve it as a record of his office, make an abstract of the facts set forth in the application in a book, properly indexed and kept for that purpose, which abstract shall contain the name of the person asking for a license, the nature of the proposed sale, the place where the sale is to be conducted, its duration, the inventory value of the goods to be sold, and a general statement as to where the goods came from, and make in the book a notation as to the issuance or refusal of the license applied for, together with the date of issuance of refusal and endorse on the application the date that the license, as applied for, is granted or refused. The application and abstract shall be prima facie evidence of all statements contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  4, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-318. - Removal of goods; loss of identity. 
    The license required by this article shall be valid only for a sale of the goods inventoried and described in the application for the license, in the manner and at the time and place mentioned and set forth in the application. Any removal of the goods so inventoried and described in the application from the place of sale mentioned in the application, shall cause the goods to lose their identity as an insurance, bankrupt, mortgaged, insolvent's, assignee's, executor's, administrator's, receiver's or trustee's stock of goods, or a damaged stock of goods, and thereafter no license shall be issued for the conducting of a sale of any goods so removed from the place set forth and described in the application, under the provisions of this article, at any other place. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  5, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-319. - Prior purchase of additional goods for resale prohibited. 
    No person intending to conduct a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy, or fiduciary sale under the license shall order any goods for the purpose of selling and disposing of the same at the sale, and any unusual purchase and additions to the stock of goods within sixty (60) days prior to the filing of the application for license to conduct the sale mentioned, shall be presumptive evidence that the purchases and additions to stock were made in contemplation of the sale and for the purpose of selling the purchases and additions at the sale. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  6, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-320. - Additional goods not to be added during the sale; offense. 
(a)  No person carrying on or conducting a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale under this license shall, during the continuance of the sale, add any goods to the stock of goods described and inventoried in his original application, and no goods shall be sold at or during the sale, except the goods described and inventoried in such original application. 
(b)  Each and every addition of goods to the stock of goods described and inventoried in the application, and each sale of the goods not inventoried and described in the application shall constitute a separate offense under this article. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  7, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-321. - Compliance required; false advertising; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall advertise, represent or hold out any sale of goods to be a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary without having complied with the provision of this article. 
(b)  Whoever violates this section shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  8, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 20-322. - Violations; penalty. 
(a)  No person shall hold, conduct or carry on any sale of goods as a going-out-of-business, fire, bankruptcy or fiduciary sale contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than three (3) months nor more than six (6) months, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7992,  9, 4-28-87) 
Chapter 21 - LITTER[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,585, adopted Apr. 25, 2006, amended Ch. 21 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 21,  21-1-21-15, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Code 1958,  14-5 and 24-67, and Ord. No. 7278, adopted May 12, 1981. 
Cross reference- Dropping objects from aircraft,  7-29; garbage and trash, Ch. 16; nuisances, Ch. 24; trash and Forsyth Park West,  25-19. 

Sec. 21-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "City of Monroe Anti-litter Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely discretionary. 
    Authorized private receptacle is a litter storage and collection receptacle as required and authorized in the City of Monroe Code. 
    City is the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    Garbage is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Litter is garbage, refuse, and rubbish, as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. Litter is also any used or unconsumed substance or waste material which has been discarded, whether made of aluminum, glass, plastic, rubber, paper, or other natural or synthetic material, or any combination thereof, including, but not limited to, any bottle, jar or can, or any top, cap or detachable tab of any bottle, jar or can, any unlighted cigarette, cigar, match or any flaming or glowing material or any garbage, trash, 
    Park is a reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Person is any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company, organization of any kind or political subdivision of this state subject to municipal jurisdiction. 
    Private premises is any dwelling, house, building, or other structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant, or any commercial establishment, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging to or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building, commercial establishment or other structure. 
    Public place is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds, and buildings. 
    Receptacle is a container suitable for the depositing of litter. 
    Refuse is all solid wastes (except body wastes) liable to decay, spoil or become putrid or solid wastes not liable to decay, spoil or become putrid, including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes. 
    Rubbish is solid wastes not liable to decay, spoil or become putrid, consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery, property and similar materials. 
    Vehicle is every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Vessel is a watercraft. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-3. - Litter in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-4. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-5. - Sweeping or blowing litter into gutters prohibited. 
    Except when authorized by the city at specified times, no person shall sweep or blow into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-6. - Merchants' duty to keep sidewalks free of litter. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-7. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-8. - Removal of deposited material. 
(a)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any highway or upon any other public or private property without the consent of the owner thereof or into or on any waters of this city, from a vehicle, any waste paper, sweepings, ashes, household waste, glass, metal, refuse or rubbish, or any dangerous or detrimental substance shall immediately remove the same or cause it to be removed. 
(b)  Whenever any litter is thrown or discarded or allowed to fall from a vehicle or boat in violation of this chapter, the operator or owner, or both, of the motor vehicle or boat shall also be deemed to have violated this chapter. 
(c)  For the purposes of this section, a "person who permits to be dropped or thrown" from a vehicle any of the items described in subsection (a) shall include the driver of the vehicle and the registrant of any vehicle lawfully registered from which any of the items are dropped or thrown, either by the registrant or any person operating, in possession of or present within the vehicle with the permission of the registrant, regardless of the registrant's intent or lack of knowledge with respect to the disposal of such items in violation of this section where the registrant of the vehicle does not, with reasonable certainty, identify the driver of the vehicle at the time the violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-9. - Truck loads causing litter. 
    No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-10. - Dumping raw human waste prohibited. 
    Unless otherwise authorized by law or permit, it is unlawful for any person to dump raw human waste from any train, aircraft, motor vehicle or vessel/boat upon the public or private lands or waters of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-11. - Uncovered vehicles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in commercial or for-hire hauling to operate any truck or other vehicle within this city to transport merchandise, litter, trash, or garbage unless the vehicle is covered to prevent its contents from blowing, dropping, fall off or otherwise departing from the vehicle. In addition, any person operating his own truck or other vehicle to transport merchandise, litter, trash or garbage shall take reasonable steps to prevent its contents from blowing dropping, fall off, otherwise departing from the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-12. - Discarding certain items prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or cause to be placed any junk motor vehicle, old vehicle tire, or inoperative or abandoned household appliance, or part thereof, upon the right-of-way of any public highway, upon any other public or private property which he or she does not own, lease, rent or otherwise control unless it is at a permitted salvage yard, a permitted disposal site, or at the business establishment of a demolisher. Deposit of the aforementioned items on the owner's private property is also prohibited if they become a threat to the aesthetics, safety or public health of the community or become a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-13. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-14. - Litter in bodies of water. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, stream, or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-15. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-16. - Owner to maintain premises free of litter. 
    The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-17. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-18. - Posters and temporary signs. 
(a)  It is hereby declared unlawful for any person to drive any nails or tacks into utility poles, trees, fences, sign columns, or building walls. 
(b)  Campaign posters and other temporary notices or signs placed in rights-of-way, alleys, servitudes, on streets or other public property, whether freestanding or attached to existing structures, shall be considered litter. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-19. - Prima facie evidence against drivers. 
    If the throwing, dumping, or depositing of litter was done from a motor vehicle, except a motor bus, it shall be prima facie evidence that the throwing, dumping, or depositing was done by the driver of the motor vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-20. - Prima facie evidence against violator. 
    If the litter discarded can be identified with a person's name, it shall be prima facie evidence that the throwing, dumping, or depositing was done by the person whose name appears on the litter. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-21. - Rental property. 
    A landlord shall be responsible for any violation occurring at his rental property even when it is caused by his tenants. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-22. - Notice. 
    The city may erect signs containing pertinent portions of this chapter along its public highways, in parks, recreational areas and at other places where persons are to be informed of the existence and content of this law and the penalties for violating its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-23. - Enforcement. 
    This chapter shall be enforced by the city attorney's office, the code enforcement division, the Monroe Police Department, the public works department, the beautification division and the Monroe City Court. The named enforcement officers are empowered to issue citations to, or, if authorized, to arrest persons violating any provisions of this chapter. All enforcement officers, who are duly authorized, shall serve and execute all warrants, citations and other process issued by the courts in enforcing the provisions of this chapter. In addition, mailing by certified mail of such process to an alleged violator's last place of residence shall be deemed as personal service upon the person charged. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-24. - Disposition of litter citations. 
(a)  The original litter citation shall be signed by the issuing officer, or other duly qualified agent of the city, and shall be processed in accordance with this chapter and such other procedures as may be established and promulgated by the City of Monroe. 
(b)  A litter citation may be dismissed by the city attorney, or his designee, only upon his written statement for good cause shown, which statement shall be made a part of the disposition record thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-25. - Citation as legal demand and prima facie evidence. 
    The original litter citation or any true copy thereof shall constitute an ordinary business record of the city and prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-26. - Answering litter citation; failure to answer. 
(a)  A person to whom a litter citation has been issued under this chapter may answer to the same in the manner and within the delays indicated on the citation. An answer may take the form of: 
(1)  Admission of the violation with payment of the scheduled penalty; or 
(2)  Request for administrative review; or 
(3)  Appeal of administrative review findings. 
(b)  If the owner, his agent or the operator fails to appear on or prior to the court date, there shall be assessed additional delinquent penalties, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-27. - Failure to pay; civil action. 
    Whenever a person charged with a litter violation fails to pay his penalty, the city attorney, or his designee, may file a civil action against the accused violator in the Monroe City Court. Service of process and all other civil procedures and delays shall be followed as in other civil matters before the Monroe City Court. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-28. - Response to citation. 
    The person to whom a litter citation has been issued for a violation of this chapter shall discharge the summons within ten (10) days after the time such notice was issued by delivering or mailing the appropriate sum to the City of Monroe's Tax and Revenue Division at 316 Breard Street or at Post Office Box 123, Monroe, Louisiana 71210. Such payment may be made by cash, money order or personal, business or cashier's checks or credit cards and made payable to the City of Monroe. Payment of the penalty established herein shall operate as a final disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-29. - Citation challenges. 
(a)  Administrative review generally. 
(1)  If the alleged violator wishes to challenge the issued citation, he should request an administrative review, which is conducted by the city attorney, or his designee, who is well-versed in the City of Monroe Litter Code. Said request must be made within three (3) days of receipt of the citation. The purpose of this step is to screen out those citations where the alleged violator is clearly not liable for the citation. 
(2)  If administrative review is requested, the alleged violator will be required to post the penalty amount of his citation and a nonrefundable ten dollar ($10.00) processing fee prior to being scheduled for review. He must submit a written declaration to the city attorney or his designee. Request for administrative review forms will be available at the City of Monroe's Code Enforcement Division. The form must be completed and returned, along with a copy of the citation and any other applicable proof to the office of the City Attorney, Civil Division, at Post Office Box 123, Monroe, Louisiana 71210. Any documentation submitted with the administrative review request form will not be returned nor will copies be provided for the requestor. 
(3)  A self-addressed stamped envelope must also be included for notification of the finding of the review. An accused violator will be notified in writing of the finding(s) of the review. 
(4)  If the alleged violator is found not liable, then his penalty funds will be refunded. If the citation is upheld, the alleged violator may appeal the findings of the review to the Monroe City Court. If he chooses not to appeal, then the penalty amount previously posted will be forfeited. 
(5)  A litter citation may be dismissed if it is determined, after review, it was either factually incorrect or issued in error. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  The final step in the challenge process is an appeal to the civil division of the Monroe City Court. The appeal must be filed at least five (5) days after the findings of the administrative review are completed. 
(2)  The appellant will be responsible for paying any necessary filing fees for the appeal hearing. If he prevails, his posted penalty amount will be refunded. If the citation is upheld, the litter penalty will be forfeited. 
(3)  Litter penalties are to be remitted to the City of Monroe's Taxation and Revenue Division. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-30. - Failure to respond to citation. 
(a)  Any person guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise stated, shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) if paid within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the citation. However, any person guilty of violating the provisions of this section more than once in any day shall be subject to a fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation, if paid within ten (10) days. 
(b)  If said fine(s) is/are not paid within ten (10) days, then each violation will result in a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). This amount shall be paid within twenty (20) days from the date of receipt of the citation. 
(c)  Upon the lapse of twenty (20) days, and if payment has not been received by the city, a certified letter will be mailed to the person in violation, notifying said person of a fine increase of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each violation. 
(d)  If the person fails to pay the amount due, or fails to appear in court on or before the scheduled court date, a default judgment may be entered both for the sanction amount and any additional fees, including any imposed collection fees. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-31. - Judgment. 
(a)  Court finding of a litter violation is the same as a personal judgment; therefore, the court can issue garnishments to collect fines and costs. 
(b)  A person against whom a judgment has been rendered may be directed by the court to pick up and remove litter from public property or private property, or both, with prior permission of the legal owner. If the person has no other judgments against him for violation of this chapter, he may be ordered to pick up and remove litter for not less than eight (8) hours but not for more than sixteen (16) hours. Upon the rendering of a second judgment, the person may be ordered to pick up and remove litter for not less than sixteen (16) hours and not more than thirty-two (32) hours. Upon the third and subsequent judgments against said person, he may be ordered to pick up and remove litter for not less than forty (40) hours and not more than eighty (80) hours. The court shall schedule the time to be spent on such activities in such a manner that it does not interfere with the person's employment and does not interfere substantially with the person's family responsibilities or religious obligations. 
(c)  The court should also consider the person's infirmity, if any, or age or other circumstance which would create a hardship. 
Sec. 21-32. - Penalties for violations. 
(a)  Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall: 
(1)  Upon first conviction, be fined two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) and sentenced to serve eight (8) hours of community service in a litter abatement work program as approved by the court. 
(2)  Upon second conviction, be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00) and sentenced to serve sixteen (16) hours of community service in a litter abatement work program as approved by the court. 
(3)  Upon third or subsequent conviction, be fined one thousand, two hundred fifty dollars ($1,250.00), have his motor vehicle driver's license suspended for one year, and be sentenced to serve eighty (80) hours of community service in a litter abatement work program as approved by the court, or all or any combination of the penalties provided by this chapter. 
(b)  Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall pay special court costs of one hundred dollars ($100.00) in lieu of other costs of court and the special court costs shall be disbursed as follows: 
(1)  Twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the judicial expense fund for the Monroe City Court. 
(2)  Twenty dollars ($20.00) shall be paid to the office of the city prosecutor. 
(3)  Ten dollars ($10.00) shall be paid to the clerk of the Monroe City Court. 
(4)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the Keep Monroe Beautiful, Inc., Fund. 
(5)  Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid to the law enforcement agency that issued the citation. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-33. - Citation. 
    The person shall be cited for the offense by means of a citation, summons, or other means provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-34. - Liability. 
    A person may be found guilty or held liable and fined under this chapter although the commission of the offense did not occur in the presence of a law enforcement officer if the evidence presented to the court establishes that the defendant has committed the offense. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-35. - Occurrence. 
    For the purposes of this section, each occurrence shall constitute a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-36. - Additional penalties. 
    In addition to penalties otherwise provided, a person convicted or held liable under this chapter shall: 
(1)  Repair or restore property damaged by or pay damages for any damage arising out of the violation of this chapter. 
(2)  Pay all reasonable investigative expenses and costs to the investigative agency or agencies. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-37. - Exemptions. 
    Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary, this chapter shall not apply to any activity by persons owning or operating duly licensed commercial vehicles engaged in the collection and transportation of solid waste, construction, or demolition debris or wood waste, as such terms are defined by the rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental Quality, occurring in the course of servicing scheduled pickup routes pursuant to commercial or local government contracts or en route to an authorized pickup station, transfer station, or disposal facility. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-38. - Burden of proof. 
    In the criminal trial of a person charged with violating this chapter, the alleged violator has the burden of proving that he had the right or authority to dump the litter for which he has been cited. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-39. - Record of violations. 
    It shall be the duty of the City of Monroe Code Enforcement Division to keep account of all violations of the litter regulations contained in this chapter. There shall be shared efforts among the Code Enforcement Division, the Monroe Police Department, the Public Works Department and the Beautification Division of the city to ensure the accuracy of the records of litter violations. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-40. - Adopt-a-Spot Program. 
(a)  The Adopt-a-Spot Program, which has grown out of the "Keep America Beautiful" organization of the 1950's, may be implemented in the city as a leadership opportunity to systematically invite and recognize volunteers for helping the city enhance and maintain its natural beauty and cleanliness. 
(b)  The mayor, or his designee, is authorized to establish, administer and promote an "Adopt-a-Spot" Program, which is promoted by Keep Monroe Beautiful, Inc., whereby businesses and civic organizations agree to maintain certain designated city streets, intersections or designated locations in the city by removing litter, cutting weeds or similar activity for a designated time and under certain standards of participation, to provide for limitations on and/or waiver of liability in favor of the city, its employees, agencies and contractors, and otherwise providing for the establishment, operation and promotion of such voluntary program. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Sec. 21-41. - Severability. 
    If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof. 
(Ord. No. 10,585, 4-25-06) 
Chapter 21.5 - MARSHAL'S OFFICE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Police, Ch. 28. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 21.5-1-21.5-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PERSONNEL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Personnel system, App. A. 

Sec. 21.5-26. - Incentive pay program. 
(a)  The program herewith established shall be known as the "City Marshal Incentive Pay Program." 
(b)  The objective of the incentive pay program herein established is to raise the educational level of the officers of the city marshal's office in order to assure the continuance of a modern, efficient and effective office. 
(c)  All officers now or hereafter serving on active duty with, and as regular, full-time employees of the city marshal's office shall be eligible to participate in this program. Personnel employed primarily to perform purely clerical or nonenforcement duties, including but not necessarily restricted to the following types of duties or persons: Secretaries, filing clerks, office machine operators, switchboard operators, stenographers, and similar employees of the office shall not be eligible to participate in this program. 
(d)  The new incentive pay program shall commence May 1, 1984. This program shall include all current and new eligible employees of the office subsequent to its enactment, and shall thereafter progress in annual increments upon each anniversary of the employee's employment with the office, as follows: 
(1)  Upon his employment with the eligible office, an employee with one (1) year of college credits (thirty-two (32) semester hours) or more in an approved curriculum shall be paid fifty dollars ($50.00) per month above his base pay. 
(2)  Upon the first anniversary of his employment with the office, an eligible employee with two (2) years of college credits (sixty-four (64) semester hours) or more in an approved curriculum, shall be paid one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month above his base pay. 
(3)  Upon the second anniversary of his employment with the office, an eligible employee with a bachelor's degree in an approved curriculum shall be paid one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month above his base pay. 
(4)  Upon the third anniversary of his employment with the office, an eligible employee with a master's degree in an approved curriculum shall be paid two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month above his base pay. 
No eligible employee shall be paid more than one (1) of the above categories of incentive pay at the same time. All eligible employees who are now members or who are hereafter employed by the office shall be allowed credit, for purposes of computing incentive pay, for college work completed prior to the initiation of this program and for all college work completed prior to employment by the department if such college work otherwise meets the standards herein specified or authorized to be established by action of the city marshal. 
(e)  An employee must present to the city marshal a transcript from an accredited college which satisfactorily evidences the successful completion of the requisite college work to entitle him to the receipt of incentive pay. At any time that an employee has earned sufficient college credits to entitle him to the receipt of a higher rate of incentive pay, a new transcript must be presented to the city marshal. 
(f)  The college credits for which credit will be allowed in the incentive pay program must be in courses required in an accredited degree curriculum, other than the following degree curriculums: Education, home economics, library science, pharmacy, medical technology, music, and nursing. However, upon petition of an officer, the city marshal is hereby empowered to waive this requirement and allow credit for purposes of this program for one (1) or more courses in the above curriculums. 
(g)  College incentive pay shall be considered for the purposes of calculating pension and relief benefits. Deductions for pension and relief purposes shall be made from the incentive pay of all officers and the city shall appropriate said deductions as the employees' contribution to the pension and relief fund. 
(h)  The city marshal's office is hereby empowered to promulgate such rules as he may deem advisable to provide for proper administration of the city marshal's office incentive pay program so long as such rules do not conflict with the provisions of this section. Such rules may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions concerning what colleges shall be deemed accredited for purposes of this program, what college credits shall be accepted for purposes of this program, what courses shall be and/or shall not be accepted for purposes of this program. 
(i)  In the event any question should arise as to the interpretation of any provision of this section or of any rule promulgated under the authority of this section, the decision of the city attorney as to the correct interpretation thereof shall be final, subject only to the power of the mayor to overrule such decision. 
(Ord. No. 7691, 6-12-84) 
Cross reference- Police incentive pay program,  28-1. 
Sec. 21.5-27. - Supervisory personnel. 
(a)  Supervisors employed in the city marshal's office shall include those individuals who occupy the ranks of sergeant, lieutenant, captain and administrative assistant. There shall be only the above-named supervisory positions in the city marshal's office and there shall be no more than one position allocated for each of the above ranks or classifications at any one time. 
(b)  The salary (base pay) of the individuals employed in the city marshal's office as supervisors, i.e., sergeant, lieutenant, captain and administrative assistant shall be supplemented by the following provisions: 
(1)  Each supervisor of the office employed in the position, grade or class of sergeant shall receive an amount equal to one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month above his/her base pay. 
(2)  Each supervisor of the office employed in the position, grade or class of lieutenant shall receive an amount equal to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month above his/her base pay. 
(3)  Each supervisor of the office employed in the position, grade or class of administrative assistant shall receive an amount equal to one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month above his/her base pay. 
(4)  Each supervisor of the office employed in the position, grade or class of captain shall receive an amount equal to three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month above his/her base pay. 
(c)  The supplemental supervisory pay herein shall be considered for the purposes of calculating pension and relief benefits. 
(Ord. No. 7691, 6-12-84) 
Sec. 21.5-28. - Incentive and supplemental, pay changes. 
(a)  College incentive pay and supplemental supervisory pay shall not be considered as base salary for purposes of raises or other salary increases or adjustment. 
(b)  Any change in the amount of college incentive pay or supplemental supervisory pay established herein shall only be made by an amendment hereto. 
(Ord. No. 7691, 6-12-84) 
Chapter 22 - MONROE AIR-INDUSTRIAL PARK DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9685, adopted Apr. 8, 1997, amended Ch. 22 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Ch. 22 derived from the 1958 Code and Ord. No. 7336, adopted Dec. 8, 1981. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 22-1. - Established; description of property. 
    The following described property, situated at the Monroe Regional Airport, City of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, is hereby officially named as the Monroe Air-Industrial Park: 
    A certain tract or parcel of land situated in the Section 34, Township 18 North, Range 4 East and also being a portion of the property depicted on the "Survey of the Monroe Industrial Park" filed in Plat Book 15, page 113 of the Records of Ouachita Parish, Louisiana and being more particularly described as follows, to wit: 
Beginning at the southwest corner of the survey of the Monroe Industrial Park as per plat recorded in Plat Book 15, page 113, of the records of Ouachita Parish, Louisiana; thence North 8;deg; 26;min; 00;sec; East, along the west line of said survey of the Monroe Industrial Park, a distance of 6062.99 feet to the south right-of-way line of the Union Pacific Railroad; thence North 88;deg; 47;min; 42;sec; East, along the south right-of-way line of said Union Pacific Railroad, a distance of 5172.02 feet to the northeast corner of said survey of the Monroe Industrial Park; thence South 5;deg; 09;min; 00;sec; West along the east line of said survey of the Monroe Industrial Park and its projection thereof, (also being along the centerline of Airline Boulevard), a distance of 5030.98 feet to the easterly projection of the south lease line of Fiber Products Corporation; thence North 84;deg; 53;min; 18;sec; West, along the projection of and the south line of said Fiber Products lease, a distance of 1616.51 feet to the east right-of-way line of Kansas Lane as per the construction plans and monuments set for the "Kansas Lane Project (Millhaven Road to Central Avenue)", State Project No. S 742-06-15 and 742-06-17; thence southerly along the east right-of-way line of said Kansas Lane, the following courses: 
South 2;deg; 01;min; 36;sec; East West 171.70 feet; thence along a curve to the right (curve having a radius of 1209.56 feet, a chord bearing of South 13;deg; 09;min; 00;sec; West, a chord distance of 337.11 feet) an arc distance of 338.21 feet; thence South 17;deg; 56;min; 20;sec; West 103.60 feet; thence South 24;deg; 48;min; 48;sec; West 73.82 feet; thence along a curve to the left (curve having a radius of 1035.27 feet, a chord bearing of South 17;deg; 24;min; 53;sec; West, a chord distance of 267.73 feet) an arc distance of 268.48 feet; thence South 10;deg; 14;min; 36;sec; West 41.65 feet; thence South 5;deg; 42;min; 35;sec; West 200.05 feet; thence South 10;deg; 11;min; 46;sec; West 100.09 feet; thence South 3;deg; 37;min; 27;sec; West 221.09 feet; thence South 83;deg; 46;min; 06 ;sec; East 5.04 feet; thence South 11;deg; 32;min; 48;sec; West 94.74 feet to the north right-of-way line of the Kansas City Southern Railroad; thence North 84;deg; 47;min; 42;sec; West, along the north right-of-way line of Kansas City Southern Railroad, a distance of 3714.69 feet to the point of beginning. Containing a gross area of 709.75 acres, more or less. 
Less and Except 
That certain 12.96 acre tract or parcel of land conveyed to the Ouachita Parish School Board from the United States of America as described in Conveyance Book 428, page 315 of the Records of Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, and being shown on the survey of the Monroe Industrial Park filed in Plat Book 15, page 113 of the Records of Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
Leaving a net area of 696.79 acres in the Monroe Air-Industrial Park. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-2. - Scope. 
    The real property known as the Monroe Air-industrial Park which is, and shall be occupied subject to the conditions, covenants, restrictions, reservations and easements set forth herein in this article. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-3. - Purpose. 
    The Monroe Air-industrial Park shall be developed with the intentions and goals of fostering economic development, increasing public revenues, providing a positive environment for job creation, and improving the general quality of life for citizens in the Monroe and surrounding area, and in particular: 
(1)  To encourage the future growth and expansion of existing commercial and industrial ventures within the Northeast Louisiana Region; 
(2)  To attract and secure the relocation of new enterprise to the area and encourage private investment in the Monroe Air-Industrial Park; and 
(3)  To generate, provide for, and sustain an increased number of quality and stable jobs. 
    The park is subjected to the conditions, covenants, restrictions, reservations and easements herein declared: 
(1)  To insure proper use and appropriate development and improvement of each building site thereof; 
(2)  To protect the owners/occupants of building sites against such improper use of surrounding building sites as will depreciate the value of their property; 
(3)  To guard against the erection thereon of structures built of improper or unsuitable materials; 
(4)  To insure adequate and reasonable development of said property; 
(5)  To encourage the erection of attractive improvements thereon, with appropriate locations thereof on building sites; 
(6)  To prevent haphazard and inharmonious improvements of building sites; 
(7)  To secure and maintain proper setbacks from streets, and adequate open spaces between structures; and 
(8)  In general to provide adequately for a high type and quality of improvement on said property. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-4. - Use of property. 
(1)  Except as hereinafter expressly permitted, the building sites within the park shall be used for commercial, office space, retail, food and beverage, hospitality, industrial, manufacturing, fabricating, warehousing, or distribution purposes with related administrative offices as secondary use associated with another primary permitted use; and 
(2)  Building sites within the park shall be used for any business devoted primarily to the retail sale of consumer-type merchandise or services that have been expressly approved and authorized by the advisory board, and provided further, that the retail sale of food, beverage and other convenience items are offered for sale to the general public as long as they have been expressly approved and authorized by the advisory board. 
(3)  No industry or other business shall be established, maintained or permitted on any building site within the park which produces objectionable smoke, dust, noise, light, odor, vibration, or electrical disturbance or interference. Determination of whether an industry or business is objectionable for any of these reasons shall be at the discretion of the advisory board. 
(4)  No building site within the park shall be used for the manufacture, storage, distribution or sale of any materials or products which shall increase the insurance rates of the adjoining property, or for any purpose which constitutes a nuisance under the law of the State of Louisiana. 
(5)  No building site within the park shall be used for the discharge, storage or burial of any liquid, solid waste or airborne particulate matter, defined as hazardous by federal, state, parish or local law. 
(6)  No building site within the park shall be used for the drilling for and/or removal of oil, gas or other subterranean substances; the operation of junkyards; the dumping, disposal, incineration or reduction of garbage, sewage, offal, or dead animals; the smelting of ores; the refining or storage of petroleum products or other highly combustible materials; the manufacture or storage of explosives, the manufacture of acid; the manufacture of fertilizer. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97; Ord. No. 11,619, 11-10-15) 
Sec. 22-5. - Fines for noncompliance. 
    Noncompliance with any and all parts of this ordinance will result in fines of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) and no less than twenty-five (25) hours of community service, recommendations of which will be made by the advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Secs. 22-6-22-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - THE ADVISORY BOARD 

Sec. 22-16. - The advisory board established; appointments. 
    The advisory board for the Monroe Air-Industrial Park shall be established to oversee all development within the park boundaries according to the following conditions: 
(1)  The advisory board shall consist of fifteen (15) members, appointed by the mayor and approved by the city council. 
(2)  In making appointments, members shall be: 
a.  One representative from the Monroe City Attorney's Office. 
b.  One representative from the Monroe Department of Administration. 
c.  One representative from the Monroe Department of Engineering. 
d.  One representative from the Monroe City Planning Office. 
e.  One representative from the Monroe City Council. 
f.  One representative from the Monroe Regional Airport. 
g.  One representative from the Ouachita Enterprise Corporation. 
h.  One representative from the Monroe Chamber of Commerce. 
i.  One representative from the Northeast Louisiana African-American Chamber of Commerce. 
j.  One local realtor. 
k.  Two (2) owner/occupants from the Monroe Air-Industrial Park. 
l.  Three (3) representatives from the city at large. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97; Ord. No. 9710, 7-10-97) 
Sec. 22-17. - Membership; terms. 
(1)  Members of the board shall serve four-year terms, except that members of the first appointed board shall serve respectively as follows: three (3) members for one year; three (3) members for two (2) years; three (3) members for three (3) years; and four (4) members for four (4) years. 
(2)  All members shall serve without compensation. 
(3)  Members shall serve until successor is appointed. 
(4)  Any member may be recalled at any time by the mayor for gross inefficiency, fraud, absenteeism or study neglect. 
(5)  Vacancies shall be filled in the same manner as original appointments. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-18. - Officers; meetings; procedures. 
(1)  The board shall elect annually among its members a chairman, a vice-chairman, and such other officers as it may deem necessary. The chairman or, in his absence, the vice-chairman shall preside over meetings. 
(2)  No review, approval, disapproval, or recommendation shall be made by the board until it has adopted rules, regulations, policies, procedures, and standards following a public hearing. 
(3)  Said rules, regulations, policies and procedures shall be recorded and shall be made available to applicants and any other interested person. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-19. - Powers and duties of the advisory board. 
(1)  The advisory board shall recognize as its primary purpose the establishment and advocacy of standards criteria which supports the purposes of development within the Monroe Air-Industrial Park. 
(2)  The board shall develop specific guidelines for the design, implementation, and maintenance of a master plan for development for the park. 
(3)  The board shall review and rule on all applications and plans submitted for sale and/or land development within the park. The board shall determine appropriateness of all proposed uses. The board will use as guide and model the rules and conditions set forth in the Monroe Air-Industrial Park Development Ordinance and the master plan for development. 
(4)  The board shall make recommendations to the mayor and city council on any decisions which directly or indirectly affect the short and long term planning, development, use, appearance, maintenance, access, quality and integrity, or economic potential of the park, including the retention of specialists or consultants, and the appointment of citizen advisory committees or park occupant committees as may be required. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Secs. 22-20-22-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SALES AND LEASE POLICY 

Sec. 22-31. Policy on commission for realtors as brokers. 
    Any real estate broker licensed to conduct business within the State of Louisiana (broker) shall be eligible for a sales commission not to exceed seven (7) per cent computed on the gross purchase price for lands sold in the Monroe Air-Industrial Park located in Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, subject to the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Broker shall represent either the seller (City of Monroe) or the buyer and must register the prospect (buyer) with the city by forwarding a letter from the prospect (addressed to the city attorney) outlining and confirming the broker's participation with said prospect. To receive commission, broker and buyer must not be one in the same. All prospect names will be kept in confidence. 
(2)  A preliminary proposal for development of the property must first be reviewed and approved by the advisory board according to requirements set forth in section 22-32, before the sale is completed. To assure confidentiality, the name of the prospect need not appear on the proposal. 
(3)  The city shall approve all commission payments. The sale must be successfully closed and title of the land passed to the registered prospect. Commissions shall be paid at the time of closing. 
(4)  Any prospect registered with the city will remain registered unless the prospect notifies the city attorney in writing that the broker no longer represents said prospect. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-32. - Preliminary proposal. 
    Prior to the sale or lease of any property within the Monroe Air-Industrial Park, a preliminary proposal for development must be submitted to the Monroe Air-Industrial Park Advisory Board, P.O. Box 123, Monroe, Louisiana, 71210. Preliminary proposals should include, at a minimum: 
(1)  A written description of the character and scope of the enterprise, including sector of commerce served and marketing strategy. 
(2)  Number of employees, job classifications, the general wage scale, and skill levels required. 
(3)  Building type and square footage of the planned facility. 
(4)  The specific use of the property. 
(5)  A graphic conceptual site plan and schematic renderings of the proposed property improvements. 
(6)  An outline of infrastructure, utility, service, communication and any other requirements for development. 
(7)  A time line for property development, and if the development is planned in stages, the time schedule for each successive stage. 
(8)  A description of any future plans for expansion, refinement, redevelopment, property improvements, and any anticipated facility or employment changes. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-33. - Sales. 
(1)  The advisory board must recommend the sale of the property and it must be approved by city council. All sales shall be subject to the covenants, restrictions and conditions for the Monroe Air-Industrial Park and other policies established by the board. 
(2)  In the event the prospect does not make use of the property as set forth in the preliminary proposal for development, it is to be sold back to the city, and the purchase price paid by the city will be equal to seventy-five (75) per cent of the original purchase price. 
(3)  All option contracts shall have a time limitation of one year unless otherwise approved by the board. Cost for an option contract shall be one per cent per month of the purchase price of the building site, payable in advance and nonrefundable if the option is not exercised within the allotted time frame of the agreements. If an option is exercised, option costs shall apply to the purchase of the property. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-34. - Survey. 
    All boundary surveys for building sites in the Monroe Air-Industrial Park shall be provided by the city. Surveys for option contracts shall be paid when the execution of an option contract occurs. Cost for the survey shall be paid by the city. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Secs. 22-35-22-44. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CONSTRUCTION POLICY 

Sec. 22-45. - Construction review. 
    Prior to the commencement of construction of any improvements on a building site in the Monroe Air-Industrial Park, written approval for site development shall be provided by the advisory board along with a stamped engineering plat of the property to the City of Monroe Office of Planning and Zoning. 
    Two (2) complete sets of plans and specifications shall be submitted for site and construction review to the Monroe City Office of Planning and Zoning, 313 Breard Street, P.O. Box 123, Monroe, Louisiana, 71210. 
(1)  Plans and specifications submitted for review shall be finished in all respects and shall conform to the covenants, restrictions and conditions for the Monroe Air-Industrial Park and requirements set forth in the submission of plans, section 22-46. 
(2)  All improvements shall, as a minimum, comply with the construction standards of The Southern Standard Building Code (latest edition) or other applicable standards established by statute, regulation or other ordinance, and be approved where required by ordinance. 
(3)  Prior to the issuance of any building permit for improvements, as defined herein, for any building site in the park: 
a.  The building or other improvement plans, including elevations, specifications, and site plans showing the location of such improvements on the particular building site should be approved by the planning and zoning office; 
b.  Federal Aviation Administration, Form 7460-1, Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration, should be completed and filed with the Director's Office of the Monroe Regional Airport, 5400 Operations Road, Suite 200, Monroe, Louisiana, 71203. 
(4)  After commencement of construction of any improvements on any building site, the owner/occupant shall diligently pursue completion of the work to the end that the improvements shall not remain in a partly finished condition any longer than reasonably necessary for completion. All improvements shall be completed within eighteen (18) months after approval of plans by the planning and zoning office. 
(5)  During construction, the owner/occupant shall cause the building site to remain in a reasonably neat and orderly condition, preventing the accumulation of trash, and shall prevent runoff of surface water and soil from the building site onto adjacent property or streets. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-46. - Submission of plans. 
    All plans and specifications submitted shall include specific information as to construction materials, construction methods to be used and diagrams of the number, type and configuration of parking spaces necessary. 
    The objective of the Monroe Air-Industrial Park Covenants, restrictions, and conditions is to obtain consistency and quality in architectural design to protect and enhance values in the park. In order to maintain consistence, yet permit interest and variety and the use of new materials as they develop, all architectural designs, including those for alterations, additions or remodeling, are subject to review and approval by city planning and zoning. 
    Buildings should be considered as three-dimensional objects and attention should be given to the compatible treatment of all exterior surfaces. 
(1)  No improvement(s) shall be erected, placed or altered on any building site until the construction plans and specifications, and other requirements as may be required as to quality of workmanship and materials, harmony of external design with existing structures, as to location with respect to topography and finish grade elevation, and as to other such specifications as may be required. 
(2)  No building site improvement(s) shall be allowed until the office of planning and zoning approves the proposed plans and specifications as being in compliance with these covenants, restrictions and conditions. 
(3)  Plans should be at a scale clearly legible, and include, at a minimum: 
a.  Dimensioned site plans showing building footprint and any other structural improvements including fences, property and utility easements and rights-of-way, use areas including loading docks and trash collection, paved areas and landscaped open space, traffic circulation and parking. 
b.  Site elevations, in context, showing all improvements. 
c.  Building elevations. 
d.  Landscape plans with planting list. 
e.  Exterior building material specifications. 
(4)  Accompanying the plans should be a stamped drainage impact statement, reviewed and approved by the engineering department of the City of Monroe, 400 Lea Joyner Memorial Expressway, Monroe, Louisiana, 71201. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Secs. 22-47-22-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - COVENANTS, RESTRICTIONS AND CONDITIONS 

Sec. 22-58. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them below: 
    Accessory structure shall mean a detached subordinate building located on the same building site with the main building, the use of which is incidental to that of the main building. 
    Board shall mean the Monroe Air-Industrial Park advisory board. 
    Building setback line or lines shall mean the minimum distance which commercial or industrial buildings and accessory structures or any structures of any type or kind located above ground shall be set back from the property lines. 
    Building site shall mean any lot, or portion thereof, or two (2) or more contiguous lots or portions thereof or a parcel of land upon which a commercial or industrial building or buildings and appurtenant structures may be erected in conformance with the requirements of these covenants. 
    Grantor shall mean the City of Monroe, Louisiana, its successors and assigns, unless the contract indicates otherwise. 
    Improvements shall mean and include a commercial or industrial building or buildings, accessory structures appurtenant thereto, parking areas, driveways, loading areas, service areas, fences, masonry walls, hedges, lawns, mass plantings and other landscaping, site excavation, signage, transmission tower, and any structures of any type or kind located above ground. 
    Mobile building shall mean any covered portable structure consisting of a permanent chassis constructed on a skid form foundation and/or placed on concrete piers and anchored by tie-downs and which is to be used for the enclosure of persons, articles or chattels. 
    Park shall mean the Monroe Air-Industrial Park as hereinafter described. 
    Side building site line shall mean the boundary or property line dividing two (2) adjoining building sites. 
    Side corner building site line shall mean the boundary or property line dividing a property located at the intersection of two (2) streets from the side or subordinate street right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-59. - Type of construction. 
(1)  No building shall be erected within the park which is of wooden or frame construction. All structures shall be of attractive design and construction so as not to detract from the general appearance of the park as a whole. Walls fronting public streets should be finished with face brick, finished metal or other attractive trim material. 
(2)  All buildings shall be of permanent construction. No mobile buildings or other temporary structures shall be allowed, except for temporary purposes for a specified period of time, and only as approved by the advisory board. 
(3)  All utility lines shall be placed underground. Adequate lighting of appropriate intensities for building illumination, signage, parking lots and driveways shall be installed. Lighting shall be attractive in design to complement building site improvements. Light sources shall be hooded or controlled, and arranged so as to deflect light away from adjacent properties and public streets. Bare incandescent bulbs shall not be permitted in view of adjacent property or public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-60. - Building lines. 
(1)  No part of any building shall be constructed on any building site within the park closer than fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way of any street designated for public use. 
(2)  No building shall be constructed on any building site within the park closer than fifteen (15) feet to the rear or side building site lines. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-61. - Loading docks. 
(1)  Irrespective of the other requirements set forth in this article pertaining to building lines, no truck dock or loading space shall be constructed upon any building site within the park so that trucks, tractors, trailers or any combination thereof will, while either being maneuvered, or being loaded or unloaded, project beyond twenty (20) feet of any public street right-of-way. 
(2)  No loading docks shall be constructed on the front of any building within the park unless approved by the advisory board. The front of any building, for the purposes of this provision, is defined to mean any side of a building which faces a street designated for public use. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-62. - Parking. 
(1)  No parking shall be permitted upon any street designated for public use. 
(2)  Each occupant of a building site within the park shall provide approved off-street automobile parking facilities to be based generally, but not specifically, at the minimum rate of one parking space for each one and one-half (11/2) employees to be employed on the premises by the occupant thereof. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-63. - Open storage areas and fences. 
(1)  No goods, equipment, supplies or other materials shall be stored in the open upon any building site in the park except on the rear two-thirds ( 2/3 ) thereof, and then only when such open storage area is fenced with a screening fence at least six (6) feet in height, and of adequate height to screen storage from visibility. 
(2)  All fencing for screening, security or other purposes shall be attractive in appearance and shall be an all metal industrial type fence or galvanized or nonferrous material, or shall be of brick, masonry, or other material of nondeteriorating nature. No wood fence shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-64. - Landscaping. 
(1)  All open areas upon each building site within the park shall be attractively landscaped with lawn, trees and shrubs according to landscape plans first approved in writing by the advisory board. 
(2)  Street trees shall be included in the landscape plan along any public street, planted in a uniform line of regular and appropriate spacing, and should be of a long-lived variety native to north Louisiana. 
(3)  Massive areas of concrete or asphalt not used for vehicular access, circulation or maneuvering, including parking areas, should have internal areas of landscaping, spaced at appropriate intervals to provide visual relief, and should include trees. 
(4)  All visible building mechanical and service equipment, fences bordering public streets, and any other objectionable view shall be screened with a landscape planting, 
(5)  Provision should be made for the adequate watering of all landscaping. 
(6)  All areas shall be maintained in an attractive and well-kept condition. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-65. - Signage. 
(1)  No billboards or advertising signs, other than those identifying the name, products and business of the person or firm occupying a building site within the park shall be permitted. 
(2)  All signage shall be of professional design, with appropriate content, pleasing in appearance, of sound construction, and properly lighted. 
(3)  Without board consent, no sign shall exceed the height of ten (10) feet. Sign size should be appropriate in proportion to the building, and should be no larger than eighty (80) square feet. 
(4)  Signage shall not be erected in any public right-of-way. 
(5)  All signage shall be maintained in a neat and orderly fashion, and updated and painted regularly where appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-66. - General cleanliness and upkeep. 
(1)  Each building site shall be kept in a safe, clean, healthful and presentable condition at all times. 
(2)  All open trash collection areas shall be on the rear two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of the building site, fenced with a screening fence or combination of fence and landscape screening at least six (6) feet in height, and of adequate height to screen area from visibility. 
(3)  No occupant of a building site within the park shall maintain or operate an incinerator for disposing of trash and debris. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-67. - Applicability of other laws. 
(1)  Each occupant of a building site within the park shall, at all times, be subject to the laws of the United States, the State of Louisiana, and the ordinances of the City of Monroe, as well as the rules and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration or its successor agency concerning the use, occupancy and operations of the airport facility known as the Monroe Regional Airport. 
(2)  Each occupant of a building site within the park shall be subject to all of the ordinances of the City of Monroe, without limitation, but particularly including the building code, plumbing code, electrical code, sewer pretreatment code, and life safety code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-68. - Waiver or modification of article. 
    Any or all of the restrictions in this article may be waived or modified for any or all existing owner/occupants or for a new owner/occupant by a favorable vote of seventy-five (75) per cent in number of the owner/occupants occupying spaces within the park at the time said waiver or modification is to be granted, to be evidenced by written instrument signed by the assenting owner/occupants, and by the unanimous written consent of the advisory board. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Sec. 22-69. - Reservation of powers to city. 
    The council of the City of Monroe hereby reserved unto itself the right, power and authority to impose additional covenants, restrictions and conditions upon the property located in the park provided that such additional covenants, restrictions and conditions which may be hereafter imposed may not be so construed as to require any owner/occupant to change the location of or to abandon, any structure located on the premises, or to change the nature and manner of operating its business. Provided, that this section shall not in any way operate as an abridgment or restriction of the police power of the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 9685, 4-8-97) 
Chapter 23 - NOISE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 9439, adopted Apr. 26, 1994, amended the Code by repealing former Ch. 23,  23-1-23-3 and adding a new Ch. 3,  23-1-23-11. Former Ch. 3 pertained to similar provisions and derived from the Code of 1958,  19-2-19-6. 
Cross reference- Advertising and signs, Ch. 3; disturbing the peace,  12-153. 

Sec. 23-1. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter: 
(a)  All technical terms, unless the context otherwise requires, shall be defined in accordance with the American National Standards Institute publications, as revised. (American Standards Institute, 1430 Broadway, New York, N.Y. 10018) 
(b)  "A" band level shall mean the total sound level of all noise as measured with a sound level meter using the "A" weighting network. The unit is the dbA. 
(c)  Ambient noise shall mean the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far. 
(d)  Commercial district shall mean the following: 
(1)  An area where offices, clinics and the facilities needed to serve them are located; 
(2)  An area with local shopping and service establishment; 
(3)  A tourist-oriented area where hotels, motels, and gasoline stations are located; 
(4)  A business strip along a main street containing offices, retail businesses, and commercial enterprises; 
(5)  Other commercial enterprises and activities which do not involve the manufacturing, process or fabrication of any commodity. "Commercial district" shall include, but not be limited to, any parcel of land zoned commercial or business under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(e)  Commercial purpose shall mean and include the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound-amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for or soliciting the patronage of customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating any such sound equipment. 
(f)  Construction activities shall mean any and all activity incidental to the erection, demolition, assembling, altering, installing or equipping of building, structure, roads or appurtenances thereto, including land clearing, grading, excavating and filling. 
(g)  Continuous noise shall mean a steady, fluctuating, or impulsive noise which exists, essentially without interruption, for a period of ten (10) minutes or more. 
(h)  Decibel (db) shall mean a unit of level which denotes the ratio between two (2) quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two (2) amounts of power is ten (10) times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio. 
(i)  Device shall mean any mechanism which is intended to produce or which actually produces sound when operated or handled. 
(j)  Emergency work shall mean work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
(k)  Industrial district shall mean an area in which enterprises and activities which involve the manufacturing, processing or fabrication of any commodity are located. "Industrial district" shall include but not be limited to, any parcel of land zoned as an industrial district, under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(l)  Motor vehicle shall mean any vehicle such as but not limited to, a passenger vehicle, truck, truck-trailer, trailer or semi-trailer propelled or drawn by mechanical power, and shall include motorcycles, minibikes, go-carts, and any other vehicle which is self-propelled. 
(m)  Noncommercial purpose shall mean the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. Noncommercial purpose shall mean and include, but shall not be limited to, educational, philanthropic, political, patriotic, and charitable purposes. 
(n)  Residential district shall mean an area of single or multiple-family dwellings and shall include areas where multiple unit dwellings, high-rise apartments and high-density residential districts are located. "Residential district" shall also include, but is not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, homes for the aged, schools, courts and similar institutional facilities. 
(o)  Sound-amplifying equipment shall mean any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music, or any other sound. Sound-amplifying equipment shall not include standard automobile radios when used and heard only by the occupants of the vehicle in which the automobile radio is installed. Sound-amplifying equipment, as used in this chapter shall not include warning devices or authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on any vehicle used only for traffic safety purposes. 
(p)  Sound level meter shall mean an instrument or apparatus including a microphone, an amplifier, an output meter, and weighting networks for the measurement of sound pressure. The output meter reads sound pressure level when properly calibrated, and the instrument is of type 2 or better, as specified by the American National Standards Institute Publication. 
(q)  Sound truck shall mean any motor vehicle, or any other vehicle regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound-amplifying equipment. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-2. - Unnecessary noise prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any unnecessary noise within the city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise permitted herein, the maximum permissible sound pressure levels of any source of sound shall be as herein established for the time period and district listed in Table A of this section. This includes, but is not limited to, sound from such activities as production, processing, cleaning, servicing, testing, operating, or repairing either vehicles, materials, goods, products or devices. This subsection (b) shall not apply to any source of sound proscribed or restricted by subsection (c) of this section. Sound pressure levels in excess of those established for the districts of the city, at times herewith listed, shall constitute prima facie evidence that such sound is an unnecessary noise. Sound pressure levels shall be measured at the approximate location of the property line or the boundary of the public way, at a height of at least four (4) feet above the immediate surrounding surface, on a sound level meter of standard design and operated on the "A" weighting network. 
TABLE A 
Sound Pressure Level Limit 
dB(A) Day Night District (7 a.m.-10 p.m.) (10 p.m.-7 a.m.) Residential 65 60 Commercial 70 65 Industrial 85 80  
When a noise source can be identified and its noise measured in more than one district, the sound pressure level limits of the most restrictive district shall apply. 
The sound pressure level limits, and provisions hereof, applicable to commercial districts shall also apply to any parcel of land zoned agricultural district under the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(c)  Except as otherwise permitted herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to make or continue, or cause to be made or continued, any unnecessary noise within the city which can be heard by any person at a distance of more than fifty (50) feet. This subsection (c) shall apply to televisions, radios, stereos, CD players, phonographs, or tape players which are being used or played while in transit, including but not limited to, transit by means of carriage by a pedestrian, animal, bicycle, or any motor vehicle, whether private or commercial. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 9982, 8-10-99) 
Sec. 23-3. - Construction, power equipment. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no person shall engage in, cause or permit any person to be engaged in construction activities in any residential or commercial district between the hours of 9:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
Construction projects shall be subject to the maximum permissible noise level specified for industrial districts for the periods within which construction is to be completed pursuant to any applicable building permit. 
Construction activities directly connected with the abatement of an emergency are excluded from the provisions of this section. 
(b)  No person shall operate on any property within a residential or commercial district or on any public way within a residential or commercial district, any power equipment, such as but not limited to, chain saws, pavement breakers, log chippers, riding tractors, powered hand tools, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the next day or within residential, commercial or industrial noise districts between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. which emits a noise level in excess of the levels set in section 23-2. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-4. - Sound amplifiers. 
(a)  Prohibition. It shall be unlawful to maintain or operate any loudspeaker or amplifier connected with any television, radio, stereo, CD player, phonograph, microphone, or other device by which sounds are magnified and made heard over any public street or public place without having first secured a permit therefor. 
(b)  Registration. 
(1)  Every user of sound-amplifying equipment shall file a registration statement with the director of administration five (5) days prior to the date on which the sound-amplifying equipment is intended to be used, which statement shall contain the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number of both the owner and user of the sound-amplifying equipment; 
b.  The maximum sound-producing power of the sound-amplifying equipment which shall include the wattage to be used, the volume in decibels of sound which will be produced, and the approximate distance for which sound will be audible from the sound-amplifying equipment; 
c.  The license and motor number if a sound truck is to be used; 
d.  A general description of the sound-amplifying equipment which is to be used; and 
e.  Whether the sound-amplifying equipment will be used for commercial or noncommercial purposes. 
(2)  Registration statement; approval. The director of administration shall return to the applicant an approved certified copy of the registration statement unless he finds that: 
a.  The conditions of the motor vehicle movement are such that use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or 
b.  The conditions of pedestrian movement are such that use of the equipment would constitute a detriment to traffic safety; or 
c.  The registration statement reveals that the applicant would not be able to comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
d.  The applicant and/or the applicant's group, associates, etc., have violated the sound permit provisions herein within a period of six (6) months of the requested date in the present application. 
(3)  Registration statements; disapproval. In the event the registration statement is disapproved, the director of administration shall endorse upon the statement his reasons for disapproval and return it forthwith to applicant. 
(c)  Fees. Prior to the issuance of the registration statement, a fee in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day, or any portion thereof, shall be paid to the city, if the loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment is to be used for commercial purposes. No fee shall be required for the operation of a loudspeaker or sound-amplifying equipment for noncommercial purposes. 
(d)  Regulations. The commercial and noncommercial use of sound-amplifying equipment shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted shall be either music or human speech, or both. 
(2)  The operation of sound-amplifying equipment shall only occur between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. each day except on Sundays and legal holidays. The operation of sound-amplifying equipment on Sundays and legal holidays shall only occur between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. 
(3)  No sound emanating from sound-amplifying equipment shall exceed the limits set in section 23-2. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful to operate any sound-amplifying equipment within two hundred (200) feet of churches, schools, hospitals, city, parish or state buildings. 
(e)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to radios in homes or in private pleasure vehicles when the same are operated in such manner as to comply with section 23-2 herein, nor to noise devices, bands, or other musical devices used in any public parade or procession which is operated under a permit in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(f)  [ Obscenity prohibited. ] No licensee shall use or permit to be emanated or emitted from any such device, any lewd, obscene, profane, or indecent language or sounds, or any false representation of any matter, product or project advertised thereby, the sale of which is prohibited by any law, ordinance or statute. 
(g)  Limitations. The provisions of this section shall not apply to any bell or chime or any device for the production or reproduction of the sound of bells or chimes from any church, clock or school. 
(h)  Violation of permit. In addition to the penalty set forth in section 23-11, any violation of the sound permit shall disqualify the applicant and/or the applicant's group, associates, etc., from receiving another sound permit for a period of six (6) months from the date of the violation. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-5. - Animals and fowl. 
    No person shall keep or maintain, or permit the keeping of, upon any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by such person any animal or fowl otherwise permitted to be kept which, by any sound, cry, or behavior, shall violate the provisions of section 23-2. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-6. - Bells and chimes. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, operate, cause or permit to be sounded any bell or chime or any device for the production or reproduction of the sounds of bells or chimes, from any church, clock or school, between the hours of 10:00 p.m. of one day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-7. - Drums. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city. This section shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or duly licensed parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized to engage in such conduct. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-8. - Hawkers and peddlers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to sell anything by outcry within any area of the city zoned for residential uses. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food, and beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses, and other similar licensed public entertainment events. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-9. - Warning signals. 
    No person shall sound any horn or signalling device on any truck, automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle on any street or highway within the municipality, except as a danger warning, and then only for a reasonable period of time. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-10. - Exceptions. 
    Noise or sound generated by the following activities shall not be subject to this chapter: 
(1)  Cries for emergency assistance or warning calls; 
(2)  Radios, sirens, horns and/or bells on police, fire and other emergency response vehicles; 
(3)  Parades, displays and other events for which a special permit has been obtained from the city, when operated or conducted within the conditions set forth in the permit; 
(4)  Activities regularly scheduled in municipal and educational facilities; 
(5)  Fire alarms and burglar alarms, prior to the giving or notice and reasonable opportunity for the owner or tenant in possession of the premise served by such alarm to turn it off; 
(6)  Locomotive, other railroad equipment and signals, aircraft and boats on navigable waterways. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95) 
Sec. 23-11. - Penalty. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall be issued a summons and upon conviction shall be fined not less than five dollars ($5.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense; and a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 9439, 4-26-94; Ord. No. 9511, 4-25-95; Ord. No. 9982, 8-10-99) 
Chapter 24 - PROCEDURES FOR ABATEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,732, adopted Sept. 27, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 24,  24-1, 24-16-24-20, 24-25-24-28, and enacted a new Ch. 24 as set out herein. The former Ch. 24 pertained to nuisances and derived from Code 1958,  14-6-14-8, 17-8, 22-2, 22-3, 26-6; Ord. No. 7530, 5-24-83; Ord. No. 9796, 4-28-97; Ord. No. 10,409, 6-8-04; Ord. No. 10,512, 7-12-05. 
Cross reference- Animals and fowl, Ch. 6, buildings, Ch. 9, abandoned iceboxes,  12-225; litter, Ch. 21; noise, Ch. 23; nuisances and nuisance abatement, Ch. 24.5; Weeds in railroad ditches, etc.,  29-6; inoperable vehicles,  33-15; Sewers, Ch. 30; sale of abandoned vehicles by city,  33-16; and trees and shrubs, Ch. 34. 
State Law reference- Nuisance abatement, R.S. 33:4770.11 et seq.; Administrative Procedure Act, R.S. 49:950 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL. 

Sec. 24-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Code violation means a violation of any provision of the Code of Monroe related to public health, housing, environmental, historic district, nuisance or vegetation ordinances, Monroe's Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance, as amended, the Building Code of the City of Monroe, as amended, or the Fire Code of the City of Monroe, as amended. 
    Order, judgment or notice of judgment means an administrative act of the hearing officer. 
    Unoccupied means having no legal occupant(s), vacant. 
    Violator means person(s), natural or juridical, who has been found liable and/or guilty of a Code violation and/or ordered to abate or correct a violation in an order issued under this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-2. - Authorization. 
    Any agency of the city having a responsibility for the enforcement of Code violation(s) may enforce violations of such ordinances by the owners of immovable property or their agents, tenants, or representatives, pursuant to the procedures for administrative adjudication established in this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-3. - Appointment of hearing officer for City of Monroe environmental court. 
(a)  Administrative adjudication proceedings under this article shall be conducted before hearing officers who have been licensed to practice law in Louisiana for at least two (2) years. 
(b)  Hearing officers shall be appointed by the mayor subject to approval of the city council, and shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor. 
(c)  Hearing officers shall be sworn before the city attorney to uphold the Constitution, the laws and constitution of the State of Louisiana, and the Charter and ordinances of the City of Monroe, and to abide by the provisions of the Louisiana Code of Governmental Ethics and the City of Monroe's Code of Ethics. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-4. - Authority of hearing officer. 
    Hearing officers who have been appointed and sworn in accordance with section 24-3 shall have the authority to hear and decide any and all Code violations. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-5. - Powers of a hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer shall have the power to: 
(a)  Administer oaths and affirmations. 
(b)  Issue orders compelling the attendance of witnesses, respondents, alleged violators, and violators and the production of documents. 
(c)  Determine whether or not an alleged violator is liable or guilty of code violations. 
(d)  Levy fees, costs, and penalties. 
(e)  Order violators to correct violations within a stipulated time. 
(f)  Take any and/or all necessary and lawful measures to effect corrections of the violation if the violator fails to do so within the time allocated by the hearing officer. 
(g)  Record orders, judgments, notices of judgments, or liens in the mortgage office. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-6. - Procedure for hearing. 
(a)  Whenever the city agency having enforcement responsibility determines that a Code violation exists, a notice of violation(s) shall be provided to the owner and/or the mortgage holder and/or the occupant of the property upon which such nuisance exists or upon the person causing or maintaining the nuisance. 
(b)  A notice of violation(s) shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Provide the municipal address of the cited property; 
(3)  Provide the date of the inspection; 
(4)  Provide notice of alleged Code violation(s) at the cited property; 
(5)  Provide the mailing address and telephone number of the enforcement agency; 
(6)  Provide the time, date and location of the administrative hearing whereby the alleged Code violation shall be adjudicated; 
(7)  Provide notice that the failure to appear at the hearing shall be considered an admission of liability for the charged violation(s); 
(8)  Provide the risk of fees, penalties, costs, and liens that may be imposed for continued violation(s); and 
(9)  Provide the risk of remedial measures that may be ordered by a hearing officer to correct or abate Code violation(s). 
(c)  Prior to holding an administrative hearing pursuant to this article, the alleged violator shall be notified at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the date that such a hearing is scheduled. Notice shall be personally served or sent to the alleged violator by regular and certified or registered U.S. mail at the address listed in the assessor's office of the parish. The date of the postmark shall be deemed to be the date of delivery. Any notification so sent and returned by the U.S. Post Office shall be considered as having fulfilled the notification requirement. Proof of notification and attempts at service shall be entered in the record for each case prior to the hearing. 
(d)  Any person charged with Code violation(s) may present any relevant evidence and testimony at such hearing and may be represented. An alleged violator's physical presence shall not be required at the hearing if documentary evidence, duly verified by such person, is submitted to the hearing officer via the agency of the city having a responsibility for the enforcement the Code violation(s), prior to the date of the hearing. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to limit the authority or the ability of a hearing officer to determine an alleged violator's liability or guilt based solely upon submitted documentary evidence. 
(e)  Any order compelling the attendance of witnesses or the production of documents may be enforced by the municipal court or by any other court of competent jurisdiction. 
(f)  Any administrative adjudication hearing held under the provisions of this article shall be conducted in accordance with the rules of evidence of the Administrative Procedure Act, R.S. 49:950 et seq. Testimony of any person shall be taken under oath and shall be recorded. 
(g)  The hearing officer shall issue a final order, judgment, or notice of judgment within thirty (30) days of the hearing, excluding legal holidays. A copy of the final order, judgment, or notice of judgment may be personally served on the day of the hearing or shall be sent to the violator by regular and certified or registered U.S. mail within fourteen (14) days of issuance. The order, judgment, or notice of judgment shall: 
(1)  Be signed by the hearing officer; 
(2)  State whether or not the alleged violator is liable or guilty of each violation and any specific determinations thereto; 
(3)  Provide the amount of fees, costs, and penalties assessed for each violation; 
(4)  Provide the defects to be corrected and the extent by which each violation shall be corrected, repaired, and/or abated; 
(5)  Provide the reasonable period of time by which each violation shall be corrected, repaired and/or abated; 
(6)  Notify the violator(s)' of their right to appeal; and 
(7)  Notify the violator that the city may act to abate violation(s) if the violator fails to act in accordance with the order, judgment, or notice of judgment, where applicable. 
(h)  The city may enforce any order assessing fees, costs, and penalties, and/or stipulating a required correction, repair, or abatement measure. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-7. - Penalties. 
(a)  The penalty for each violation shall not exceed the maximum that may be imposed by municipal court as provided in R.S. 13:2575 et seq., or the fine imposed by ordinance of the city council. 
(b)  Each day that violation(s) continue after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense at a rate set by the city council. 
(c)  A schedule of penalties may be established by ordinance providing penalty amounts, consistent with subpart (a), for specific Code violation(s). 
(d)  Environmental court fines. 
Type of Violation       Amount of Fine 
1st Offense-High grass & weeds ..... $100.00 
2nd Offense-High grass & weeds ..... 200.00 
1st Offense-Inoperable vehicle ..... 50.00 
2nd Offense-Inoperable vehicle ..... 200.00 
1st Offense-Littering/illegal dumping/discarded items ..... 50.00 
2nd Offense-Littering/illegal dumping/discarded items ..... 200.00 
1st Offense-Derelict/unsecure structure ..... 50.00 
2nd Offense-Derelict/unsecure structure ..... 200.00 
All other first offense nuisance violations not listed above shall be set at fifty dollars ($50.00) per violation or less. 
All other second offense nuisance violations not listed above shall be set at two hundred dollars ($200.00) per violation or less. 
Any subsequent violation following a second offense violation shall be set at four hundred fifty dollars ($450.00) or less. 
Daily fines shall not exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) per day per violation for residential properties and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per day per violation for commercial properties. Fines for residential properties shall not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). 
Upon proof of age, all senior citizens, sixty-five (65) and older, shall be given an additional thirty (30) days prior to enforcement under section 24-8(b). 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 11,737, 10-25-16) 
Sec. 24-8. - Costs. 
(a)  Costs and expenses that may be recovered and enforced against a violator under this article include: 
(1)  The city's direct cost for abatement; 
(2)  Costs of the investigation, enforcement, and/or remediation or abatement of a violation; 
(3)  City costs for equipment use or rental if required for abatement; 
(4)  Attorney's fees if attorney other than city attorney or assistant city attorney provides services; 
(5)  Hearing and/or court costs including but not limited to hearing officer and witness fees. In the event the city attorney or assistant city attorneys cannot serve as the hearing officer the rate of pay for such hearing officer shall be set by the city council. 
(6)  Costs of technical services and studies as may be required for abatement; 
(7)  Costs of monitoring programs necessary for correcting, monitoring, abating or mitigating violations; 
(8)  Any expense reasonably and rationally related to the city's enforcement action(s) to bring violation(s) into compliance or to abate and/or correct a violation of local, state or federal law. 
(b)  If payment is not received within thirty (30) days of personal service the mailing of the notice or statement of costs, or following any appeal hearing upholding all or part of the costs, the city may issue a demand of payment. A demand of payment shall be mailed to a violator and provide notice that, if payment is not received by the date indicated in the demand, the city may lien the property that was subject to the enforcement/abatement action for all applicable costs. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-9. - Appeal. 
    Any person determined by the hearing officer to be guilty of a Code violation may appeal the determination to the civil district court for the parish. Such appeal shall be instituted by filing, within thirty (30) calendar days of the mailing of the hearing officer's order, a petition with the clerk of the civil district court along with payment of such costs as may be required by the clerk of court. After filing a petition for appeal, the clerk of court shall schedule a hearing and notify all parties of the date, time, and place of such hearing. Service of notice of appeal under this subsection shall not stay the enforcement and collection of the judgment unless the person who files the appeal furnishes security prior to filing notice of appeal with the department of finance in the amount fixed by the hearing officer sufficient to assure satisfaction of the finding of the hearing officer relative to the fine(s), fee(s), penalty/penalties, cost(s) of the hearing, and cost(s), if any, of correcting the violation(s). 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-10. - Liens. 
(a)  After the time and procedures have run for a final appeal the city shall have a lien and privilege against the immovable property in, on, or upon which violation(s) occurred. The lien and privilege shall secure all fines, fees, costs, and penalties that are assessed by the city and described in the order, judgment, or notice of judgment and the notice or statement of costs. The recordation of the order, judgment, or notice of judgment in the mortgage office of the parish shall constitute a lien and privilege against the land upon which violation(s) exists. Any lien and privilege recorded against an immoveable property under this article shall be included in the next annual ad valorem tax bill. 
(b)  The city, upon recordation of the order, judgment, notice of judgment, or lien and upon notice to the city council, may: 
(1)  Apply to the clerk of district court for issuance of a writ in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Article 2253, under the authority of R.S. 13:2575 and 13:2576, upon describing with particularity the immovable property and the manner in which the writ is to be enforced; or 
(2)  Institute a suit against the owner of record in any court of competent jurisdiction to enforce the order, judgment, notice of judgment, or lien. 
(c)  In order for the lien and privilege to arise, the order, judgment, notice of judgment or lien shall be final and not subject to appeal when recorded in the mortgage office and all appeal delays have elapsed. 
(d)  Any monies collected pursuant to this chapter shall first satisfy all outstanding municipal liens recorded against an immovable property and only when all outstanding municipal liens are satisfied in full shall monies be applied towards an immovable property's ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-11. - Enforcement of liens-Additional requirements. 
(a)  Only if property is unoccupied may the city institute legal proceedings to obtain a writ to cause the seizure and sale of a property with outstanding liens, pursuant to section 24-10(b)(1); 
(b)  Unoccupied properties that maintain a valid homestead per of the La. Const. art. VII,  18(G)(5) and 20(A)(10), shall be exempt from this section upon presentation of a signed affidavit from the assessor or his designee, attesting that the owner is approved for an extension of the special assessment level. This affidavit shall be renewed annually. The owner shall also submit, along with the aforementioned affidavit, a copy of their annual affidavit of intent to return and reoccupy the homestead that is filed with the assessor as required by La. Const. art. VII,  20(A)(10). 
(c)  Any person with a legally protected interest in a property must be provided notice that is reasonably calculated to apprise them of the seizure and upcoming sale of the property. 
(d)  If the seized property does not sell for at least two-thirds (?) of the appraised value of the property, the city may donate the seized property to a bona fide 501(c)(3) non-profit agency. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-12. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The regulations, procedures, and remedies established by this chapter are nonexclusive and may be pursued independently of each other and in addition to other remedies provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-13. - Recordkeeping. 
(a)  At its commencement by notice of violation, every adjudication proceeding shall be assigned a docket number and a style in the form of "City of Monroe versus" followed by the name of the alleged violator. The records pertaining to each proceeding shall be maintained as a separate file in a manner similar to the fashion in which the clerks of court maintain the records of civil cases. 
(b)  Each agency charged with the enforcement of an ordinance within the scope of this article shall, with the advice of the legal department, maintain a log or index of all adjudication proceedings which shall set forth information, including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  The style and docket number of the case and the date it was commenced; 
(2)  Alleged Code violation(s); 
(3)  Date of the alleged violation(s); 
(4)  Address or other description of the property upon which the alleged violation(s) exist or have occurred; 
(5)  Date(s) of any hearings, trials or continuances and the dates of their commencement and/or termination and, if the case is terminated, of its final disposition; 
(6)  Statement(s) as to the dates of any hearing and of any final order in the case and as to whether and when any lien was filed; 
(7)  Statement(s) as to the date of filing and disposition of any appeal. 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24-14. - Transfer of ownership. 
    It is a violation for any property owner(s) to transfer a property that receives a notice of violation without notifying the enforcement agency of the city that sent said notice of violation. Anyone found in violation of this section shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. No. 11,732, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 24-15-24-28. - Reserved. 
Chapter 24.5 - NUISANCE/BLIGHT AND NUISANCE/BLIGHT ABATEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,733, adopted Sept. 27, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 24.5,  24.5-1-24.5-5, 24.5-8-24.5-14, 24.5-31-24.5-38, 24.5-46-24.5-58, 24.5-66, 24.5-71-24.5-80, 24.5-86-24.5-89, and enacted a new Ch. 24 as set out herein. The former Ch. 24.5 pertained to nuisances and nuisance abatement and derived from Ord. No. 10,410, 6-8-04. 
Cross reference- Procedures for abatement, Ch. 24. 
State Law reference- Nuisance abatement, R.S. 33:4770.11 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 24.5-1. - Legislative findings of fact. 
    It is hereby found and declared that the City of Monroe contains a great number of unsightly and unsafe properties and dilapidated structures which have become a liability to the community. Such conditions give rise to the spread of disease and crime, impair the economic value of property upon which they are situated, and necessitate excessive and disproportionate expenditures for crime prevention, public health, welfare and safety programs, fire and accident protection, and other services. 
    As a result of the conditions of dilapidated structures and noxious matters within the city, the city finds it has a compelling interest and purpose in the abatement of these nuisances, which are not exclusive. The city is in need of additional authority to enforce the ordinances and regulations of the city applicable to such properties, including, but not limited to, the city's building, fire and zoning codes. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4770.1. 
Sec. 24.5-2. - Title. 
    The provisions embraced with this chapter and the articles and sections thereof shall constitute and be known and may be cited as the "Nuisance Abatement Code," hereinafter referred to as "this code." 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-3. - Purpose. 
(a)  This chapter establishes a procedure for the abatement of public nuisances on both vacant and occupied residential or commercial property. 
(b)  The intent of this chapter is to simplify the abatement process for public safety nuisances in an effort to further stabilize neighborhoods and to protect the health and welfare of the citizens of Monroe. Standards are established with respect to structure and the environment which are essential to make all premises safe, sanitary and fit for human use and habitation. Existing structures that do not comply with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide the minimum level of health, safety and welfare required by this Code. 
(c)  This chapter is remedial and essential to the public interest, and it is intended that this chapter be strictly construed to effect its purpose. All premises within the city on the effective date of this chapter, those constructed thereafter, or any relocated to the city thereafter must comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-4. - Liability. 
    Any officer or employee, or any member of the city council, charged with the enforcement of these provisions, shall not thereby render himself liable personally, and is hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damages that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of their duties. 
    Any suit brought against any officer or employee because of such act performed by him in the enforcement of any provision of this Code shall be defended by the city legal department until the final termination of the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-5. - Severability. 
    If any section, clause or provision of this chapter shall be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole or any part thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-6. - Generally. 
(a)  The provisions of this code shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities of persons for the maintenance of all premises, including structures and the exterior of property. The owner of a premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in compliance with the requirements contained herein, except as otherwise provided for in this Code. 
(b)  A person shall not occupy as an owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided in this division so as not to adversely affect the public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-7. - Right of entry. 
(a)  In the performance of his or her duties, the code enforcement officer may enter any land, structure, or premises in the city to enforce this Code, at any reasonable time, as provided in this section. 
(b)  Prior to entering any land, structure, or premises to enforce this Code, the code enforcement officer must give notice of his or her intent to enter. Notice shall be in writing and provide the date and time at which the code enforcement officer will be present to make the inspection, and inform the person notified that he or she may request to reschedule the inspection to another date and time by contacting the code enforcement officer before the stated date. 
(c)  If the property is occupied, notice shall be provided by certified or registered mail to the occupant or the person with apparent right of possession, with a courtesy copy mailed to the owner at the owner's last known address as provided in the assessor's records, and conspicuously posted at or near the entrance to the structure or premises. If the property is vacant, the notice shall be mailed or delivered to the last known address of the owner as provided in the assessor's records. 
(d)  After notice has been given, if the person notified fails to arrange for, denies, or unduly delays the entry, the code enforcement officer may request that the legal department file in a court of competent jurisdiction a petition for right of entry to authorize entry for the inspection. The court of competent jurisdiction shall grant the petition upon determining that: 
(1)  The notice required by subparts (b) and (c) of this section have been given; and 
(2)  The petition establishes probable cause that an inspection will reveal violation(s) of this code. 
(e)  The petition for right of entry shall be verified by the code enforcement officer and accompanied by a sworn and signed affidavit containing facts within the personal knowledge of the affiant that probable cause exists. 
(f)  Any inspection conducted pursuant to an order permitting right of entry shall be made within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date the order is issued, unless otherwise provided in the order. The order shall be void upon expiration of the inspection period. 
(g)  Neither an order nor prior notice is required in any of the following named circumstances: 
(1)  Entry is by permission of an owner or occupant upon the code enforcement officer presenting credentials and requesting entry, or at the request of an owner or occupant of the land, structure, or premises or by a person with apparent right of possession; 
(2)  If the land, structure, or premises is vacant, visibly open and obviously accessible to members of the general public and violations of this code are in plain view; 
(3)  Immediately after an accident or disaster that causes the code enforcement officer to believe that immediate entry is necessary for investigative purposes or to protect property or public health or safety. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES CLASSIFIED 

Sec. 24.5-8. - Nuisance defined. 
(a)  For the purpose of this chapter, a nuisance is defined as any person, natural or juridical, doing any unlawful act, or omitting to perform a duty, or suffering or permitting any condition or thing to be or exist, which act, omission, condition or thing either: 
(1)  Annoys, injures or endangers the safety, health, comfort or repose of others; or 
(2)  Offends public decency; or 
(3)  Is offensive to the senses; or 
(4)  Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct or renders dangerous for passage a lake or basin or any public or private street, highway, sidewalk, square, alley, public park, stream, ditch or drainage; or 
(5)  Essentially interferes with another person's comfortable enjoyment of life and property or tends to depreciate the value of the property of others; or 
(6)  Adversely affects the utility and habitability of property within the entire city, specifically causing substantial damage to nearby property, or adversely affecting the habitability and economic well-being of the city as a whole. 
(b)  Specific nuisances may include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Use or sale of controlled substances prohibited by federal, state or local law. 
(2)  Excessive noise and peace disturbances. 
(3)  Use of a building or permits for prostitution, or lewd and lascivious behavior. 
(4)  Use of firearms. 
(5)  Vacant or unused buildings which are open to entrance by unauthorized persons because of broken, missing or open windows, doors or other opening(s). 
(6)  Any building or lot not located in Zoning Districts B-1, B-2, B-3, B-4, CBD or I-1 which is used for the storage of junk vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-9. - Nuisances affecting health. 
(a)  Definitions. The following terms, wherever used or referred to in this chapter shall, unless different intent clearly appears from the context, be construed to have the meanings given herein. 
(1)  Industrial wastes shall mean all liquid and water-borne solid, liquid or gaseous wastes resulting from industrial manufacturing, food processing operation, processing any natural resource or any mixture of these with water or domestic sewage as distinct from normal domestic sewage. 
(2)  Storm drainage system (sometimes termed "storm sewer system") shall mean any stream, creek, ditch, watercourse, drainage conduit, sewer, pond, lake, drainage easement, or topographical configuration which acts to channel the course of water flow; or any combination of the above; or all other natural outlets which empty into any of the above which carry storm and surface water and drainage. 
(3)  Sewage shall mean a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
(b)  Illustrative enumeration. The maintaining, using, placing, depositing, leaving or permitting to be or remain on any public or private property of any of the following items, conditions or actions is hereby declared to be and constitute a health nuisance; provided, however, this enumeration shall not be deemed or construed to be conclusive, limiting or restrictive: 
(1)  All decayed or unwholesome food offered for sale to the public; 
(2)  All pools of water or vessels holding stagnant water in which mosquitoes can breed; 
(3)  Carcasses of animals not buried or otherwise disposed of in a sanitary manner within twenty-four (24) hours after death; 
(4)  Accumulations of trash which includes manure, rubbish, litter, rubble, refuse, debris, paper, combustible materials, offal or waste, or matter of any kind or form which is uncared for, discarded, or abandoned, or improperly stacked building materials which are potential breeding places for flies, mosquitoes, rats, mice or other vermin; 
(5)  Improperly constructed privy vaults, leaking septic tanks or sewer lines or other sewage existing in an unsanitary manner and which could cause disease transmission; 
(6)  Noxious weeds and other rank growths of vegetation, including but not limited to poison ivy, poison oak, or poison sumac and all vegetation at any state of maturity which: 
a.  Exceeds twelve (12) inches in height, except healthy trees, shrubs, or produce for human consumption grown in a tended and cultivated garden unless such trees and shrubbery by their density or location constitute a detriment to the health, benefit and welfare of the public and community or a hazard to traffic or create a fire hazard to the property or otherwise interfere with the mowing of said weeds; 
b.  Regardless of height, harbors, conceals, or invites deposits or accumulation of refuse or trash; 
c.  Harbors rodents or vermin; 
d.  Gives off unpleasant or noxious odors; 
e.  Constitutes a fire or traffic hazard; or 
f.  Is dead or diseased. 
(7)  All buildings, walls, and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise, and which endanger the health, peace and safety of the public; 
(8)  Offensive trades and businesses not authorized by the board of health as provided by law; 
(9)  All public exposure of persons having contagious or infectious diseases; 
(10)  Any solid or industrial waste, including but not limited to garbage, tin cans, bottles, rubbish, refuse, trash, construction waste or demolition waste, tree trimmings, brush, debris, wood, grass clippings, manufacturing waste or industrial waste dumped, thrown, burned, spilled, buried or abandoned, unless required permits have been obtained; 
(11)  Dense smoke, strong odors, noxious fumes, gas or soot or cinders in such quantities as to render the occupancy of property uncomfortable to a person of ordinary sensibilities; 
(12)  Accumulated or blowing trash, building materials or other waste material from the construction, remodeling or repair of buildings, or from the operation of any industrial, commercial or manufacturing facility; 
(13)  Trees damaged or dead to the extent that a limb, tree or part could fall; 
(14)  Garbage cans or any trash containers which are not fly tight or are contrary to the ordinances relating thereto; or which are kept or stored within twelve (12) feet of a curb, or edge of paving where there is no curb, in excess of twenty-four (24) hours; 
(15)  Any animal kept or maintained in an unsanitary condition or surroundings; 
(16)  Discharge into any storm drainage system of any: 
a.  Untreated sewage, sewage solids, process wastewater, refuse, explosive or combustible liquid, solid or gas, oils, greases, industrial waste or other polluted waters except where a federal, state or local permit for connections, discharge or disposal has been obtained; 
b.  Waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes to constitute a hazard to humans or animals or to cause corrosion, discoloration or deposition on structures and equipment; or 
c.  Any solid or viscous substances in such quantities or of such size capable of causing obstruction to the flow in the storm water drainage system or other interference with the proper operation of the drainage system of the City of Monroe. 
(17)  Any building or other structure which is in such a dilapidated condition that is unfit for human habitation or kept in such an unsanitary condition that it is a menace to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or presents a more than ordinarily dangerous fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located; 
(18)  All unnecessary or unauthorized noises and annoying vibrations, including animal noises; 
(19)  Improperly secured swimming pools, whether filled or unfilled; 
(20)  All disagreeable or obnoxious odors and stenches, as well as the conditions, substances or other causes which give rise to the emission or generation of such odors and stenches; or 
(21)  Any building, structure or other place or location where any activity which is in violation of local, state or federal law is conducted, performed or maintained. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-10 - Reserved. 
Sec. 24.5-11. - Nuisances offending peace and safety. 
    The following are hereby declared to be public nuisances affecting public peace and safety: 
(a)  All trees, hedges, signs or other obstructions, or any portion of the same, located within a sight-distance triangle which prevent persons driving vehicles approaching an intersection of streets from having a clear view of traffic approaching such intersection. "Sight-distance triangle" shall mean the area within an imaginary triangle formed at a street corner as follows: Extend the curb lines (or the edge of the pavement where no curbs exist) into the street to a point where those lines intersect; from that point of intersection, measure along both curb lines (or edges of pavement) to two (2) points, each of which is thirty-five (35) feet from the point of intersection; the connecting of these three (3) points shall form the sight-distance triangle; 
(b)  All limbs of trees which project over a public sidewalk or street and which are less than eight (8) feet above the surface of the public sidewalk and nine (9) feet above the surface of the street; 
(c)  All wires over streets, alleys or public grounds which are not licensed by the city or which are strung so that the lowest portion is less than fifteen (15) feet above the surface of the ground; 
(d)  All buildings, walls and other structures which have been damaged by fire, decay or otherwise and which are so situated as to endanger the safety of the public, or which are otherwise built, erected or maintained in violation of any ordinance; 
(e)  All explosives, inflammable liquids and other dangerous substances stored in any manner, in any amount other than that provided by ordinance; 
(f)  All loud or unusual noises and annoying vibrations which offend the peace and quiet of persons of ordinary sensibilities; 
(g)  All buildings and all alterations to buildings made or erected, within the city fire protection limits as established by ordinance, which are in violation of any ordinance concerning the manner and materials of construction; 
(h)  Obstructions and excavations affecting the ordinary use by the public of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public ground except under such conditions as are provided by ordinance; 
(i)  Any use of the public streets or sidewalks which causes large crowds of people to gather, obstructing the flow of traffic and the free use of the streets or sidewalks; 
(j)  All hanging signs, awnings, canopies and other similar structures over the streets or sidewalks so situated or constructed as to endanger public safety; 
(k)  All barbed wire fences which are located within three (3) feet of any public sidewalk; 
(l)  The keeping of any animal or reptile as a pet, wild by nature, exotic or vicious, when not kept by a licensed circus, show or pet store, in a zoo or in an accredited school; or 
(m)  The repeated use of any real property or structure thereon to commit a felony in violation of the Louisiana Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-12. - Rules of construction. 
    The fact that certain acts or conditions are in sections 24.5-9, and 24.5-11 herein specifically declared to be a nuisance shall not be construed that any other act, fact, condition or thing shall not be a nuisance if such other act, fact, condition or thing would have been a nuisance under section 24.5-9 herein or under any other law of the city. Nothing in this title shall be construed to be a limitation upon the definition of or the provisions for the abatement of or punishment of any nuisance specified in any other part of these ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-13. - Prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, maintain or allow the creation or maintenance of a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-14. - Article to be supplemental. 
    The provisions of this article shall be supplemental to all other ordinances and remedies available to the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 24.5-15-24.5-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROCEDURE FOR ABATEMENT 

Sec. 24.5-31. - Abatement. 
    An owner shall abate or cause a premises to be abated in accordance with the hearing officer's order. If the owner fails to abate within the time prescribed by the hearing officer, the code enforcement officer may cause the premises to be abated without further notice or hearing(s), and the costs of abatement shall be charged against the premises and shall be a lien upon such property. A certified copy of the statement of costs reflecting the amount of such charges shall be filed with the recorder of mortgages, which shall operate as a lien and privilege in favor of the city against the property. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-32. - Procedure. 
    Whenever the code enforcement officer determines that violation(s) of this code exists or has grounds to believe that violation(s) have occurred-notice, hearing, appeal and all procedures and remedies thereto, including the collection of resultant debts and liens, shall be as provided in chapter 24 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-33. - Abatement manner. 
(a)  A hearing officer shall order any and all necessary and lawful measures to correct or abate violation(s), including but not limited to: repairing the premises to comply with this code, securing the premises from entry by others. The correction, repair, or alteration of any violation(s) shall be completed within the stipulated period of time provided in the hearing officer's order. 
(b)  Any repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and if applicable, installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-34. - Penalties. 
    A penalty may be imposed for each noticed violation existing on, in or upon a premises. The penalty for each noticed violation shall not exceed the maximum provided in section 24-7. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-35. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24.5-36. - Liability for costs. 
    In addition to any and all procedures and/or penalties set forth in chapter 24, the city may recover the costs incurred in abating a sanitary sewer nuisance by adding the same to the utility bill of any person found to be liable for the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-37. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24.5-38. - Reports, investigations and notices by the fire department. 
(a)  Upon discovery of a nuisance by any city fire department personnel, the complaint shall be forwarded to the fire prevention and investigations divisions. 
(b)  Personnel from these divisions shall inspect and document through written and other documentation of conditions of said property. 
(c)  Officers within these divisions shall notify the owner or the mortgage holder and/or the tenant of the offending property, by certified mail, return receipt requested, of the nuisance. Depending upon the nature and the severity of the violation, the officers shall allow fifteen (15) days if a major violation or thirty (30) days if a minor violation for the landowner to resolve the violations voluntarily. Only after the expiration of the affixed period will the officer arrange for cleanup or other abatement. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 24.5-39-24.5-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DILAPIDATED AND/OR UNSECURED BUILDINGS AS A NUISANCE 

Sec. 24.5-46. - Application. 
    The procedures provided in this article shall apply to all nuisances relating to the condemnation, demolition and removal of a dilapidated building or structure and to the securing or boarding of an unsecured building or structure. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-47. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, unless the context clearly states otherwise, the following definitions shall apply: 
(a)  (1)  Abandonment shall mean giving up with the intent of never again claiming a right or interest in; to leave without intending to return. 
(2)  Abatement may include, but shall not be limited to, removal, cleaning, cutting, mowing, securing, boarding unoccupied buildings or structures, removing dangerous portions of buildings or structures and demolitions of dilapidated structures or abandoned buildings. 
(3)  Building, when combined with other words or used alone, shall refer to any type of building, structure, residence or dwelling. 
(4)  Dilapidated building shall mean any building which: 
a.  Is unsafe, unsanitary, unfit for human habitation, deemed uninhabitable or not provided with adequate egress; or 
b.  Constitutes a fire hazard or may otherwise be dangerous to human life; or 
c.  In relation to its condition constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence, or abandonment for a period in excess of six (6) months; or 
d.  Through neglect and injury, which exceeds the ordinary, usual, or expected maintenance of a building, lacks necessary repairs which constitutes a hazardous building; or 
e.  Has been declared to constitute a public nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(5)  Party wall or common wall shall be applied as set forth in CC art. 675, or any other subsequent enumeration. 
(6)  Secured building shall mean the closing of any building by means of placing or attaching boards or other materials over doors, windows, and other entry points in order to prohibit persons from entering the building and in order to maintain it in its present condition without further damage to such building or danger to the public welfare and safety. Securing buildings shall be done in accordance with city regulations. 
(7)  Unsafe building shall mean any building which meets any or all of the following criteria: 
a.  The building is likely to partially or completely collapse because of: 
(i)  Dilapidation, deterioration or decay; 
(ii)  Faulty construction; 
(iii)  The removal, movement or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; 
(iv)  The deterioration, decay or inadequacy of its foundation; or 
(v)  Any other causes. 
b.  The building is likely to cause sickness or disease when sought to be used for its intended purpose because of dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation facilities, or otherwise is determined by any code enforcement officer or the building inspector or his assignee, or health official to be unsanitary or unfit for human habitation. 
c.  It has been determined by the fire marshal or fire chief that the building is a fire hazard because of obsolescence, dilapidated conditions, deterioration, damage, lack of sufficient fire-resistive construction, faulty electric wiring, gas connections or heating apparatus or other causes. 
d.  It has been determined that any portion of the building remaining on a site, after the demolition or destruction of such building, or whenever an unsecured building has been abandoned for a period of six (6) months so as to constitute the building or portion thereof an attractive nuisance or hazard to the public. 
e.  The building or any portion, any member, appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability, or is not so anchored, attached or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting a wind pressure of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
f.  The building or any portion thereof has cracked, warped, buckled or settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially become less resistant to winds or other natural occurrences such as is required in the case of similar new construction. 
g.  The building's exterior walls or other vertical structural members list, lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb (perpendicular) line passing through the center of gravity does not fall inside the middle one-third (?) of the base. 
h.  Whenever the building, exclusive of the foundation, shows thirty-three (33) per cent or more damage or deterioration of its supporting member or members, or fifty (50) per cent or more of damage or deterioration of its nonsupporting members, enclosing or outside walls or coverings. 
i.  Whenever the building has been so damaged by fire, wind, flood or other natural occurrence, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become: 
(i)  An attractive nuisance to children; 
(ii)  A harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons; or 
(iii)  As to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing unlawful or immoral acts. 
j.  Whenever any building is in such a condition as to be deemed or declared a public nuisance by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
k.  Whenever an owner keeps the doors and windows of a vacant building open or the building is deficient and lacking the appropriate number of walls in such a manner as to allow unauthorized entry. 
l.  Whenever any building lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or the public. 
m.  Whenever a building has been unsecured for more than twelve (12) consecutive months. 
(8)  Unsecured building shall mean any building which is not occupied by a legal or equitable owner thereof, or by a lessee of a legal or equitable owner, and into which there are one or more unsecured openings such as broken or unlocked windows, broken or unlocked doors, holes in exterior walls or roof, broken basement or cellar hatchways or other similar unsecured openings which would facilitate an unauthorized entry into the building. 
(b)  Building shall not be interpreted or construed to mean residential and commercial structures which are under construction or which are in a substandard condition as a result of a natural disaster, an act of God, force majeure, a catastrophe, or such other occurrence over which the owner or owners have no control, except as set forth in R.S. 33:4770.7. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Provisions, R.S. 33:4770.6. 
Sec. 24.5-48. - Building; exterior walls; roofs; party walls. 
(a)  (1)  Buildings destroyed by natural or other occurrences, acts of God, force majeure or catastrophe shall not remain in their destructive state in excess of ninety (90) days after the appropriate law enforcement agency releases the property. 
(2)  Such buildings shall be classified as dilapidated buildings if no reasonable and substantive efforts are made by the owner or owners to repair or to rehabilitate such building. 
(3)  Buildings destroyed by natural or other occurrences, acts of God, force majeure or catastrophe and which have been in a destructive state in excess of three (3) months, as set forth in subsection (a)(1) of this section, shall be subject to the uniform procedures of condemnation and demolition previously established by state statutes, city ordinances and other governing authorities. 
(b)  All unsafe buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation or by condemnation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in this article or in existing state laws and local ordinances. 
(c)  Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks, lose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other condition which might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls or to the occupied spaces of the building. All siding materials shall be kept in repair. 
(d)  (1)  Roofs shall be maintained in a safe manner and have no defects which might admit rain or cause dampness in the walls or interior portion of the building. 
(2)  No portion of the roof shall display signs of deterioration, abuse or improper installation that could be constructed to affect the purpose of that item or cause damage to the immediate area or roof structure, that could allow dampness or admit rain to the interior of that building. 
(e)  If a building with a party or common wall is ordered to be demolished, then the party or common wall itself shall remain intact to maintain the adjoining building, only if an adjoining building exists. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4770.7. 
Sec. 24.5-49. - Maintenance. 
    All buildings, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required in a building when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order. The owner, or his designated agent, shall be responsible for the maintenance of the building. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4770.8. 
Sec. 24.5-50. - Notice to owner; hearing, notice filed with recorder of mortgages binds transferees. 
(a)  Before the City Council may condemn any building, there must be submitted to it a written report recommending the demolition or removal of the building signed by the chief code enforcement officer or some city official or other person authorized to act in such matters for the city. The mayor or chief executive shall thereupon cause to have served notice upon the owner and occupant, if any, of the building requiring him to show cause at a meeting of the city council, regular or special, why the building should not be condemned. The date and hour of the meeting shall be stated in the notice which shall be served at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing, except in case of grave public emergency as hereinafter provided. The notice may be served by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner and occupant, if any, at his last known address. The notice may also be served by any sheriff or deputy sheriff having jurisdiction and power to serve legal process where the owner of the building is found in the State of Louisiana, and the officer shall make return of the service as in ordinary cases. 
Notice may also be given so as to inform all persons who may have a legal interest in the building or structure or the property on which the structure is located by publishing said notice in the local newspaper or the official journal in accordance with the publication requirements for city council meetings. 
(b)  (1)  The tax assessor shall require an alternate agent for service of process in the event the owner of the property cannot be located or is otherwise not properly identifiable. 
(2)  If the owner is absent from the state or unrepresented therein, or in the event the building is owned by a minor who has no tutor or an interdict who has no curator, then the notice shall be served upon the occupant of the condemned building or structure, if any, and also upon an attorney at law appointed by the mayor to represent the absentee, minor, or interdict. Domiciliary service may be made as in ordinary cases. 
(c)  In case of grave public emergency where the condition of the building is such as to cause possible immediate loss or damage to person or property, the city council may condemn the building after twenty-four (24) hours' notice served upon the owner or his agent and/or the occupant and attorney at law appointed to represent the absentee owner. 
(d)  After the hearing, if, in the opinion of the city council, the facts justify it, an order shall be entered condemning the building and ordering that it be demolished or removed within a certain delay. If repairs will correct dilapidated, dangerous or unsafe conditions, the city council may grant the owner the option of making such repairs, but in such a case, the general nature or extent of the repairs to be made, the time thereof, and the defects to be corrected, shall be specified in the decision of the city council. The city council may order that the building or structure be secured. The decision and order of the city council shall be in writing and shall be final unless appealed from within five (5) days as hereinafter provided. 
(e)  The owner, mortgage holder, occupant, agent or other representative of the owner may appeal from the decision of the city council to the state district court having jurisdiction. The appeal shall be made by the filing of a suit against the city, setting forth the reasons why the decision or order of the city council is illegal or improper and the issue shall be tried de novo. Where a grave public emergency has been declared by the city council, the owner of the building who desires to prevent the demolition or removal thereof must file his petition within forty-eight (48) hours and must, at the time of the filing of the petition, furnish such bond as may be fixed by the district judge to cover any damages that might be caused by the condition of the building. Either party may appeal from the judgment of the district court as in other cases. 
(f)  Any notice served pursuant to this section shall be filed with the recorder of mortgages. Once filed, said notice shall be deemed notice to all subsequent transferees. Any transferee of such property takes the property subject to all recorded liens, mortgages, and notices thereunto pertaining. 
(g)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to deprive property owners of their property without due process of law. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4770.9. 
Sec. 24.5-51. - Unsafe buildings-demolition, repair or rehabilitation required; procedure. 
    All buildings or structures which are unsafe, unsanitary or not provided with adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard or are otherwise dangerous to human life or which in relation to existing use constitutes a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, are severally in contemplation of this section, unsafe buildings. All such unsafe buildings are declared illegal and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation or by demolition in accordance with the following procedure: 
(1)  Whenever the code enforcement officer or the building inspector or the city engineer shall find any building or structure or portion thereof to be unsafe, as defined in this chapter, he shall, in accordance with established procedure for legal notices, give the owner and mortgage holder, agent or person in control of such building or structure written notice stating the defects thereof. This notice shall require the owner within a stated time either to complete specified repairs or improvements or to demolish and remove the building or structure or portion thereof. 
(2)  If necessary, such notice shall require the building, structure or portion thereof to be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied until the specified repairs and improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the code enforcement officer or the building inspector. The code enforcement officer or the building inspector shall cause to be posted at each entrance of such building or structure a notice which reads: 
"THIS BUILDING IS UNSAFE AND ITS USE OR OCCUPANCY HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE CITY OF MONROE OFFICE OF CODE ENFORCEMENT." 
Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or demolition is completed. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove such notice without written permission of the code enforcement officer or the building inspector, or for any person to enter the building except for the purpose of making the required repairs or of demolishing the same. 
(2)  Any person not commissioned to make repairs or to rehabilitate or to demolish the building or structure shall not enter upon or remain in or upon the movable or immovable property owned by another without express, legal or implied authorization. Such entrance is declared unlawful and shall be deemed criminal trespass. 
(3)  Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with applicable state and local laws. 
(4)  The following persons may enter or remain upon the structure, watercraft, movable or immovable property of another: 
a.  A duly commissioned law enforcement officer in the performance of his duties. 
b.  Any firefighter, whether or not a member of a volunteer or other fire department, and any employee or agent of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry engaged in locating and suppressing a fire. 
c.  Emergency medical personnel engaged in the rendering of medical assistance to an individual. 
d.  Any federal, state or local government employee, public utility employee or agent in suppressing or dealing with an emergency that presents an imminent danger to human safety or health or to the environment. 
e.  Any federal, state or local government employee, public utility employee or agent in the performance of his duties when otherwise authorized by law to enter or remain on immovable or movable property. 
f.  Any person authorized by a court of law to enter or remain on immovable property. 
g.  Any person exercising the mere right of passage to an enclosed estate, as otherwise provided by law. 
The following persons may enter or remain upon immovable property of another, unless specifically forbidden to do so by the owner or other person with authority, either orally or in writing: 
a.  A professional land surveyor or his authorized personnel, engaged in the "Practice of Land Surveying," as defined in R.S. 37:682. 
b.  A person, affiliate, employee, agent or contractor of any business which is regulated by the Louisiana Public Service Commission or by a local franchising authority or the Federal Communication Commission under the Cable Reregulation Act of 1992 or of a municipal or public utility, while acting in the course and scope of his employment or agency relating to the operation, repair or maintenance of a facility, servitude or any property located on the immovable property which belongs to such a business. 
c.  Any person making a delivery, soliciting, selling any product or service, conducting a survey or poll, a real estate licensee or other person who has a legitimate reason for making a delivery, conducting business or communicating with the owner, lessee, custodian or a resident of the immovable property, and who, immediately upon entry, seeks to make the delivery, to conduct business or to conduct the communication. 
d.  An employee of the owner, lessee or custodian of the immovable property while performing his duties, functions and responsibilities in the course and scope of his employment. 
e.  The owner of domestic livestock or his employees or agents while in the process of retrieving his domestic livestock that have escaped from an area fenced to retain such domestic livestock. 
f.  The owner of a domestic animal while in the sole process of merely retrieving his domestic animal from immovable property and not having a firearm or other weapon on his person. 
g.  Any candidate for political office or any person working on behalf of a candidate for a political office. 
h.  The owner or occupant of a watercraft or vessel traveling in salt water engaged in any lawful purpose for the purpose of retrieval of his property or for obtaining assistance in an emergency situation. 
(5)  In case the owner, mortgage holder, agent or person in control cannot be located within the stated time limit, or if such owner, mortgage holder, agent or person in control shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with notice to repair, rehabilitate or to demolish and remove said building or structure or portion thereof, the code enforcement officer or the building inspector, after having ascertained the cost, shall cause such building or structure or portion thereof to be demolished or secured or required to remain vacant. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-52. - Compliance with decision. 
    The owner, mortgage holder or the designated agent of either may proceed to demolish and remove the building or structure, or have it repaired, in accordance with the order of the city council, provided a contract is executed by the owner, mortgage holder or agent of either, obligating himself to have the work done within the required time and files with the mayor a copy of the contract, together with a bond to guarantee performance. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-53. - Demolition. 
    Demolition of a structure shall not be considered complete until fully dismantled, torn down, and brought down smooth and level with the ground, including the proper removal and disposal of debris or other remnants of the act of demolition. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-54. - Failure to comply. 
    At the expiration of the special securing permit, if the property owner, mortgage holder or agent of either fails to or refuses to comply with the decision of the city council and fails to appeal therefrom within the legal delays provided therein, then, in that event, the mayor may proceed with the demolition and/or removal of the condemned building or structure, in which case neither the mayor nor the city council shall be liable in damages. 
    Prior to demolition and/or removal of the building or structure by the city, the mayor or his designee shall serve notice to the owner, or his agent or the mortgage holder, and the occupant of the building, if there exists an occupant, or upon the attorney-at-law appointed to represent the minor, interdict or absentee owner, giving the time when work will begin upon the demolition and/or removal of the building. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-55. - Inspection, demolition, notice. 
    Upon the expiration of the special securing permit, the city shall inspect the building(s) or structure(s) to determine compliance. If the building or structure is found to be deficient, the city shall begin the procedural process of demolishing the building or structure in accordance with the Code. 
    Notice shall be mailed to the property owner and the mortgage holder advising that the structure no longer qualifies for any permits with the exception of a demolition permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-56. - Post-demolition. 
    After the demolition and removal of debris by the city, pursuant to due notices provided in this article, if the cost and/or expense thereof has not been paid within ten (10) days, the tax collector of the city shall furnish the owner, as last shown on the last assessment roll of the city, and/or the mortgage holder, a written statement showing the cost and/or expense incurred for the work and the place or property on which the work was done. If such statement is not paid within ten (10) days thereafter, the amount therefore shall be included in and form part of the taxes due by the owner of such property. The city shall be allowed to pursue its right of action to recover costs in accordance with sections 24-10 and 24-11. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-57. - Post-demolition payment plan. 
    Within ten (10) days of receiving notice of the written statement showing the cost and/or expense incurred for the demolition work as per section 24.5-56, the owner of such property may apply to Code Enforcement for approval of a payment plan to be established by the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-58. - Attorney to represent absentee, minor or interdict. 
    In the event the building or structure is unoccupied and its owner is absent from the state and unrepresented therein, or in the event the building is owned by a minor who has no tutor or an interdict who has no curator, the mayor shall appoint any attorney-at-law to represent the absentee, minor or interdict upon whom the notices and other proceedings provided in this article may be served. The attorney shall be paid a reasonable fee to be taxed as cost. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 24.5-59-24.5-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - STAGNANT WATER AND UNSANITARY CONDITIONS 

Sec. 24.5-66. - Elimination of stagnant water and other things; reinspection 
    The City's administrative hearing officer is hereby empowered to order the owner of lots and other real property to eliminate, fill up, or remove stagnant pools of water or any other unsanitary thing, place or condition which might become a breeding place for mosquitoes, flies, vermin and germs that are harmful to the health of the community. The administrative hearing officer may require the reinspection of such premises. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 24.5-66-24.5-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - INOPERABLE, ABANDONED AND WRECKED VEHICLES AS NUISANCES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, R.S. 33:4876; 32:473.1 et seq. 

Sec. 24.5-71. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section, "inoperable" shall mean a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, or unable to perform the functions or purpose for which the vehicle was originally constructed. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or deposit, or permit to be parked, stored or deposited thereon, an inoperable vehicle unless it is enclosed in a garage or other building; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to vehicles which are inoperable for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less. 
(c)  Whenever a complaint is made to the division of code enforcement, or the division of code enforcement becomes aware of a violation of this section, the division of code enforcement shall cause to be served upon the person in possession of the vehicle or the owner of the real property upon which such inoperable vehicle is located, a written notice which shall inform such person of the violation and direct that he comply with the provisions of this section within ten (10) days following receipt of the notice, or will be required to appear in environmental court for violation of this section. 
(d)  In the event the owner of such inoperable vehicle cannot be found, and the owner of the real property upon which such vehicle is located is a nonresident of the parish, the division of code enforcement shall have the authority to enter upon such property and cause the vehicle to be removed. All costs incurred shall be assessed against the property upon which the vehicle is located. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-72. - Abandoned motor vehicles and boats. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, "abandoned motor vehicle" shall mean any vehicle or conveyance which is self-propelled and designed to travel along the ground, which includes, but is not limited to, an automobile, a bus, a moped, a motorcycle, a truck, a tractor, a go-cart, a golf cart, a camper, a motor home and a trailer, which is left on public or private property for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours, is left without an intent to return, regardless of whether wrecked or inoperable, and regardless of whether such vehicle bears a current registration and a current vehicle inspection sticker. 
    For the purpose of this article, "abandoned boat" shall mean any vessel initially designed for the carrying of passengers or cargo upon water, whether currently seaworthy or not, and regardless of size or design, including, without limitation, a barge, a motorboat whether inboard or outboard, a canoe, a rowboat, a raft and a sailboat, which is left on public or private property for a period of more than forty-eight (48) hours, is left without an intent to return, regardless of whether wrecked or inoperable, and regardless of whether such vehicle bears a current registration and a current vehicle inspection sticker. 
(b)  No person shall abandon or leave any vehicle, including a wrecked or inoperable vehicle, whether attended or not, upon any public property within the City of Monroe for a period of time in excess of forty-eight (48) hours. The presence of any abandoned vehicle, or parts thereof, on public property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  This section does not apply to vehicles parked or stored on public property by the city or by any of its departments. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-73. - Wrecked motor vehicles. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, "wrecked vehicle" shall mean any motor vehicle which does not have lawfully affixed thereto both an unexpired license plate and a current motor vehicle safety inspection certificate, and the condition of which is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, incapable of operation by its own power on a public street, or from which the wheels, engine, transmission or any substantial part thereof has been removed. 
(b)  The presence of any wrecked vehicle, or parts thereof, on public property is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-73.1. - Parking and storage regulated. 
    No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any subject item of any kind, which is wrecked or inoperable, whether attended or not, upon any private property within the city, except that, with respect to an inoperable motor vehicle, such vehicle may be parked, stored or left on such property not to exceed forty-eight (48) hours, after which time such inoperable motor vehicle shall constitute a nuisance subject to removal after three (3) days following proper notices provided in section 24.5-75. 
    The presence of such subject items on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance which may be abated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-74. - Exceptions. 
(a)  The provisions of sections 24.5-72 and 24.5-73 shall not apply to: 
(1)  Any subject item parked or stored within a building or enclosed garage on private property. 
(2)  Any subject item held in connection with a business enterprise lawfully licensed by the city for the servicing and repair of subject items and properly operated in an appropriate business zone pursuant to the zoning ordinances of the city. 
(3)  Any subject vehicle within a carport that is being actively repaired on at least a weekly basis. Subject vehicle and its parts when not being repaired shall be neatly covered with an opaque cover. 
(b)  A subject vehicle which is not inoperable or wrecked, except for not having a current license or safety inspection may be stored in a covered carport. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-75. - Notice of compliance. 
(a)  Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department, the fire department or the office of code enforcement that any nuisance as described in section 24.5-72 appears to exist on public property, such department or office shall cause a written notice to be affixed to the subject item, declaring the existence of the nuisance and ordering whoever has interest in the subject item to comply with this article by removing the subject item within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of the notice. 
    Whenever it comes to the attention of the police department, the fire department or the office of code enforcement that any nuisance as described in section 24.5-73 appears to exist on private property or utility rights-of-way or on public property, such department or office shall cause a written notice to be affixed to the subject item, declaring the existence of the nuisance and ordering whoever has an interest in the subject item to comply with this article by removing the subject item within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of the notice. 
    Additionally, if such nuisance is found to exist on private property, in addition to the foregoing notice, a copy of such notice shall be delivered to the owner or occupant of the property. If a copy of the notice cannot be delivered to such owner or occupant, a copy of the notice shall be left at the property, with a duplicate copy sent to the owner or occupant of the property by certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(b)  The notice described in subsection (a) shall contain the request for removal within the time specified in this section; and the notice shall advise that upon failure to comply with the notice of removal, the police department, the fire department or the office of code enforcement shall undertake such removal, with the cost of removal to be levied against the owner of the subject item. 
    The notice shall also advise the person to whom the notices are applicable of his right to contest the determination of the police department, the fire department or the office of code enforcement that a violation under this article exists by requesting a hearing before the city's administrative hearing officer, and that, if such a hearing is desired, the request can be made by filing a written request with the director of code enforcement. A request for hearing must be made within the time for removal set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-76. - Hearing. 
    Upon receiving a request for hearing pursuant to section 24.5-75, the director of code enforcement shall set the hearing before its next regular meeting environmental court hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the person requesting the hearing and to the citing department or office. No other notices are required. A request for a hearing under this section stays all enforcement proceedings until an order of the city's administrative hearing officer is entered. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-77. - Reserved. 
Sec. 24.5-78. - Issuance of order by administrative hearing officer. 
    After a hearing, the city's administrative hearing officer shall issue a written order, either finding the existence of a nuisance or finding that a nuisance does not exist. It shall state in its order the findings of fact on which it based its decision. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-79. - Removal of subject item. 
(a)  Within the time for removal set forth in the notice for removal, or within forty-eight (48) hours of the date on which an order is entered by the administrative hearing officer affirming the determination of the citing department or office, the owner of the abandoned, wrecked or inoperable subject item and the owner or occupant of the private property on which the subject item is located, either of or both of them, shall cause the removal of the subject item. 
(b)  If the violation is not remedied within the time set forth in the notice, the police department or the office of code enforcement shall have the right to take possession of the subject item and remove it from the premises. 
(c)  In the event of removal and disposition of the subject item, the owner of the subject item shall be liable for the expenses incurred in so doing. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-80. - Notice of possession. 
    The police department or the office of code enforcement, after taking possession of subject item pursuant to this article, shall furnish notice in accordance with this section by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the registered owner of subject item at his last known address within fifteen (15) days of the date on which possession of subject item is taken, with a copy of the notice to the owner or occupant of the property from which subject item is taken. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-81. - Exceptions to prior notice requirement; grounds. 
    The requirement that notice be affixed to an abandoned or inoperable vehicle at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to removal may, as determined by the police department or the office of code enforcement, be omitted in those circumstances where there is a special need for prompt action to eliminate traffic obstructions or to otherwise maintain and protect the public safety and welfare. Such findings shall, in all cases, be entered by the police department or the office of code enforcement in the appropriate records. Circumstances justifying the removal of vehicles without prior notice include: 
(a)  Vehicles abandoned on the streets. For vehicles left on the public streets and highways, such circumstances include that immediate removal of such vehicles may be warranted when they are: 
(1)  Obstructing traffic. 
(b)  Other abandoned or inoperable vehicles. With respect to abandoned or inoperable vehicles left on city-owned property other than the streets and highways, and on private property, such vehicles may be removed without giving prior notice only in those circumstances where the police department or the office of code enforcement finds a special need for prompt action to protect and maintain the public health, safety and welfare. By way of illustration but not limitation, such circumstances include vehicles blocking or obstructing ingress or egress to businesses and residences, vehicles parked in such a location or manner as to pose a traffic hazard, and vehicles causing damage to public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Secs. 24.5-82-24.5-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WEEDS AND NOXIOUS GROWTH[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Weeds in railroad ditches, etc.,  29-6; trees and shrubs, Ch. 34. 

Sec. 24.5-86. - Prohibited; duty to remove. 
    The owner of any lot, place or area within the limits of the city shall cut and destroy all weeds or grass or deleterious or unhealthful growth, or other obnoxious matter, growing, lying or being in or upon any sidewalk or upon any lot, place or area within the city, and remove such weeds, grass, growth or matter from his premises. Such cutting and removal shall be done as often as necessary in order to ensure that such lots, places or areas do not constitute a hazard to the health of the citizens of the community, but in no event less than twice each month between April 1, and October 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
Sec. 24.5-87. - Notice to owner, failure to comply. 
    In the event any owner of any lot, place or area within the limits of the city fails to cut, destroy and remove such weeds, grass or other unhealthful growth or obnoxious matter in the manner required by this article, the city shall cut, destroy and/or remove the same and the city shall charge the costs, charges or expenses incurred in the cutting, destruction or removal of such noxious weeds, grass or other growth as set forth in a schedule of costs adopted by the city council. 
    No such work shall be undertaken by the city until the owner of the lot, place or area, where the weeds or growth are to be removed, as shown on the last assessment roll of the city, has an opportunity of doing the work himself with at least five (5) days after notice has been given him by advertisement in the official journal of the city for two (2) consecutive days or after notice has been given him by certified mail, addressed in accordance with the tax rolls of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:5062. 
Sec. 24.5-88. - Mailing statement showing expense incurred; addition to tax liability. 
    If, after the cutting, destruction or removal of weeds, grass or growths by the city, after due notice as provided in this article, the cost or expense thereof has not been paid within ten (10) days, the director of administration shall furnish the owner, as shown on the last assessment roll of the city, by registered mail a written statement showing the cost or expense incurred for the work, and the place or property on which the work was done. If said statement is not paid within one month thereafter, the amount thereof shall be included in and form part of the taxes due by the owner of said property and when collected shall be credited to the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:5063. 
Sec. 24.5-89. - Penalties. 
(a)  The Monroe police and fire departments and the office of code enforcement shall have the authority to enforce the ordinances in this chapter, including the authority to issue summons and/or a notice to appear in environmental court for violations of such ordinances. The administrative hearing officer(s) for the City of Monroe environmental court shall have jurisdiction to hear cases relative to such violations and to impose penalties for such violations in accordance with applicable ordinances. 
(b)  The offender shall be cited for the offense by means of summons and/or a notice to appear in environmental court as provided by ordinance. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  Whoever violates the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to the penalties provided in this section and in chapter 24: 
(1)  Upon first conviction be ordered to bring the property into compliance with city ordinances. 
(2)  Upon second conviction be ordered to bring the property into compliance and be sentenced to thirty (30) hours of community service. 
(3)  Upon third or subsequent conviction be ordered to serve fifty (50) hours of community service or in a work detail, as approved by the court, or any combination of the aforementioned penalties. 
(e)  The court may require an individual convicted of a violation of this article to remove the weeds, grass, or other noxious matters which have accumulated on his property in disregard of the health and safety of others in lieu of or in addition to the penalties prescribed in this section and chapter 24. 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4770.11. 
Sec. 24.5-90. - Grass and weed cutting; abutting owner's liability; notice; waiver of notice. 
(a)  Property shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition, including ordinances providing for the cutting, destruction, or removal of noxious weeds or grass or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious matters on any sidewalks or banquettes and on any lot, place, or area within the city. The charges, costs, and expenses incurred by the city in enforcing such ordinances, shall, to the extent of the actual cost thereof be a charge, cost, or expense of the property abutting the sidewalk or banquette or of the lot, place, or area, and the owner thereof. 
(b)  If an owner of property fails to cut, destroy, or remove such grass or other matter from his property or from any abutting sidewalk or banquette, the city shall notify the property owner of its intent to perform such work after five (5) days and to charge the property owner for the work. Such notice may be given by advertisement in the official journal of the city for two (2) consecutive days, by certified mail, addressed in accordance with the tax rolls of the city, or served on the property owner, by domiciliary or personal service, by a representative of the city. 
(c)  The city may undertake the cutting, destruction, or removal of noxious weeds or grass or other deleterious, unhealthful, or noxious matters on any property within its jurisdiction on a monthly basis without the notice required in subsection (b) of this section if the property owner liable has been notified pursuant to said subsection at any time during the immediately preceding twelve (12) months and has failed to do the work himself after opportunity to do so. However, prior to undertaking such work, the city shall file and record an affidavit, signed by the mayor or his designee, at the administrative office. Such affidavit shall include the following: 
(1)  A description of the property sufficient to reasonably identify it. 
(2)  A photograph of the property sufficient to reasonably identify its unsafe or unsanitary conditions and to justify the necessity for cutting, destroying, or removing weeds, grass, or other noxious matters. 
(3)  A statement that the property owner liable has within the past twelve (12) months failed to do such work after notification and opportunity to do so pursuant to subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Once the city has undertaken such actions, pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, it shall have the bill for the work delivered by registered mail, addressed in accordance with the tax rolls of the municipality, or served on the property owner, by domiciliary or personal service, by a representative of the city. 
(e)  Upon failure of the property owner to pay the charges within thirty (30) days of receipt of the bill, the city may file a certified copy of said charges with the recorder of mortgages, and the same, when so filed and recorded, shall operate as a lien and privilege in favor of the city against the property on which the work was done or against the property abutting the sidewalk or banquette on which the work was done. The lien and privilege granted under this subsection shall have the same ranking as an ad valorem tax lien on immovable property as provided in R.S. 9:4821(1). 
(Ord. No. 11,733, 9-27-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 33:4770.12. 
Chapter 25 - PARKS, RECREATION AND BOATING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Community affairs department,  4-09. 
Cross reference- Board of trustees of the Masur Museum of Art,  2-101 et seq.; litter in parks,  21-9; parks in subdivisions,  32-75; speed in parks,  33-31. 
State Law reference- Exercise of police powers in parks, R.S. 33:4558; boat safety, R.S. 34:851.1 et seq.; local boat safety regulations, R.S. 34:851.27. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 25-1. - Landing of watercraft on banks of Ouachita River. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or operator of any vessel, boat, houseboat, shantyboat, or other watercraft whatsoever, to land upon, tie up, anchor, fasten at or adjacent to, or to occupy with such vessel, boat, houseboat, shantyboat or any other watercraft whatsoever, any portion of or to permit any such vessel, boat, houseboat, shantyboat or any other watercraft whatsoever, to land upon, tie up, anchor, fasten to or to occupy any portion of the east bank of the Ouachita River, at any point within the corporate limits of the city without the express permission or consent of the owner of the land or premises fronting along such river at the point or place at which such watercraft shall be sought to be landed, anchored, tied up or fastened; provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the landing of watercraft for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours. 
(b)  None of the provisions of this section shall apply to that portion of the east bank of the Ouachita River, lying south of the north line of Pine Street and north of the south line of Calypso Street. 
(Code 1958,  26-4) 
Sec. 25-2. - Resident boats and timber rafts in certain area. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to moor, anchor or in any manner attach to the banks, or near the same, of the Ouachita River, in front of the city from the south side of the head of Calypso Street to the northern limits of the city, any houseboat or structure built upon floating logs, used for residence or for the keeping and selling of fish, or any floating watercraft or like character, or of any timber raft or parts thereof; provided, this section shall not apply to any wharfboat used exclusively for receiving, discharging or transferring freight, or to rafts of timber to be used in piling when moved at or opposite the point at which piles are to be used. 
(Code 1958,  26-5) 
Sec. 25-3. - Maximum boat speeds. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any boat in the Ouachita River at a speed in excess of idling speed for such boat within an area bounded on the south by the north line of Texas Avenue extended, on the west by the centerline of the Ouachita River, and on the north by the south line of the Interstate 20 highway bridge. 
(Code 1958,  26-24; Ord. No. 7293, 6-23-81) 
Secs. 25-4-25-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FORSYTHE PARK WEST AND FORSYTHE BOAT DOCK 

Sec. 25-16. - Names and descriptions. 
    The area bounded on the east side by Riverside Drive, on the south side by the north line of Forsythe Avenue as extended westward, on the west side by the Ouachita River, and on the north side by the north line of Park Avenue as extended westward shall be known as "Forsythe Park West" and the system of docks owned by the city and located in the Ouachita River adjacent to Forsythe Park West shall be known as "Forsythe Boat Dock". 
(Code 1958,  26-20) 
Sec. 25-17. - Swimming. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to swim or wade in the Ouachita River in the water area adjoining Forsythe Park West and bounded on the south by the north line of Forsythe Avenue as extended westward and on the north by the north line of Park Avenue as extended westward, except as may be necessary for the purpose of launching or retrieving boats in the areas designated by the city for such purposes or except for emergency purposes. 
(Code 1958,  26-21) 
Sec. 25-18. - Parking areas and street system. 
    The police department shall designate appropriate parking areas for motor vehicles and boat trailers within Forsythe Park West and shall also establish speed limits and street systems, for either one-way or two-way traffic for the movement of motor vehicles and boat trailers in Forsythe Park West. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or operate any motor vehicle or boat trailer in Forsythe Park West in violation of any traffic signs, signals or other visual indicator devices established by the police department. 
(Code 1958,  26-22) 
Sec. 25-19. - Trash, garbage, refuse, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit any trash, rubbish, refuse or garbage of any nature or kind whatsoever in Forsythe Park West except in receptacles established and appropriately marked for such deposits by the city. 
(Code 1958,  26-23) 
Sec. 25-20. - Docking or mooring of boats. 
    It shall be unlawful to tie any boat to the Ouachita River bank bounding the west side of Forsythe Park West, or to dock any boat on said bank, or to launch into or retrieve from the water abutting said bank any boat, except for emergency purposes, in any location or locations other than those which may be designated by the city for one or more of such purposes. 
(Code 1958,  26-25) 
Sec. 25-21. - Rules and regulations for Forsythe Boat Dock. 
    The following rules and regulations shall govern the operation of Forsythe Boat Dock: 
(a)  No boat shall be moored, parked at or tied to the Forsythe Boat Dock unless the owner or lessee of said boat has made application for and obtained a permit for such purpose from the city except that forty (40) feet on the south end of the Forsythe Boat Dock shall be reserved and may be used for the purpose of loading passengers in or unloading passengers from small craft. Within said forty (40) foot area, no boat shall be parked, moored or tied except temporarily for the purposes above stated. 
(b)  No permit for the docking of a boat at Forsythe Boat Dock shall be issued except upon the payment of a dock permit fee. This fee shall be calculated at the rate of seventy-five cents ($0.75) per month for each running foot of boat length, with a minimum monthly fee of thirty dollars ($30.00) per month and a maximum monthly fee of sixty dollars ($60.00). This fee shall be payable every six (6) months, in advance, and should said fee at any time become thirty (30) days delinquent, such permit shall be deemed revoked, cancelled and voided. 
(c)  No small boats, drink stands, or articles of any other kind or nature whatsoever shall be stored or permanently placed on the Forsythe Boat Dock except as such may be placed there by the city. 
(d)  All necessary cables, ropes, and other necessary devices to properly secure and tie a boat to the Forsythe Boat Dock shall be supplied by the boat owner and must be approved by the city employee in charge of such dock. 
(e)  No boat dock permit shall be issued for any boat in excess of seventy (70) feet in length. 
(f)  No person shall be allowed to loiter around the Forsythe Park Boat Dock in such a manner as to impede or obstruct passage to and from the area where boats are moored. 
(Code 1958,  26-26) 
Secs. 25-22-25-31. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LEVEES 

Sec. 25-32. - Motorized vehicles. 
(a)  Restricted. All motorized traffic on the Ouachita River Levee from the toe of the levee to the crown inside the city limits, including but not limited to three-wheelers, motorcycles, trucks, cars, etc., is prohibited. All designated crossways approved by the Tensas Levee District can be used in their normal fashion. 
(b)  Exceptions. this article shall not apply to authorized emergency vehicles involved with health and safety of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7396, 5-25-82) 
Secs. 25-33-25-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - MONROE BOAT DOCK AND RECREATION AREA[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7397, adopted May 25, 1982, did not specifically amend this Code; hence inclusion as Ch. 25, art. IV,  25-43, was at the discretion of the editor. 

Sec. 25-43. - Admission fee. 
(a)  Levied. An admission or entrance fee in the amount of one dollar ($1.00) per vehicle, with an additional fee of twenty-five cents (25) per person for every person in excess of four (4) persons per vehicle, is hereby levied and established for all vehicles entering the Monroe Boat Dock and Recreation Area adjacent to Forsythe Park in the city. 
(b)  Exemptions. The owners of boats moored in the rental spaces of the Monroe Boat Dock, the patrons and passengers of the Twin City Queen, and all authorized vehicles of the City of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, State of Louisiana, the U.S. Corps of engineers or the Tensas Levee District while on official business are exempt from the admission or entrance fee. 
(c)  Use of Proceeds. All proceeds from the admission or entrance fee established herein shall be and are hereby dedicated to the recreation department. 
(d)  Implementing of Provisions. The mayor is hereby authorized to take whatever steps necessary to implement the provisions herein, including but not limited to the installation of gates, barriers, fences or other structures, subject to applicable provisions in the Charter and/or applicable provisions of state and federal laws. 
(Ord. No. 7397, 5-25-82) 
Secs. 25-44-25-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BAYOU DeSIARD[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Bayou DeSiard as principal water supply for city,  36-1 et seq. 

Sec. 25-54. - Maximum boat speeds. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any boat in Bayou DeSiard within the city limits of the City of Monroe in excess of thirty-five (35) miles per hour. 
(Ord. No. 7725, 9-11-84) 
Sec. 25-55. - No-wake zone. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate any boat in Bayou DeSiard at a speed in excess of idling speed for such boat within the area southeast, between the Edgewater Garden Dam and the Northeast Louisiana University footbridge. 
(Ord. No. 7725, 9-11-84) 
Sec. 25-56. - Speed limit-Portion of Bayou DeSiard. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor boat or vessel on that portion of Bayou DeSiard, between the extension of Chatham Drive and its intersection with Bayou DeSiard, eastward to the Midway Dam in excess of ten (10) miles per hour. Any person or persons who violate the provision of this section, shall be fined by a sum not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for a term not to exceed ten (10) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 9205, 3-12-91) 
Secs. 25-57-25-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FEES 

Sec. 25-61. - Parks, recreation and boating. 
(a)  The admission fees for the Louisiana Purchase Gardens and Zoo are hereby established as follows; 
(1)  Individual rate: 
Adults (13-64) ..... $6.00 
Youth (3-12) ..... 4.50 
Senior citizens (65 and over or mobility impaired confined to a wheelchair) ..... 4.50 
Children 2 and under ..... Free 
(2)  Group rate: 
Adults (13-64) ..... $4.50 
Youth (3-12) ..... 3.00 
Senior citizens (65 and over) ..... 3.00 
Children 2 and under ..... Free 
(Group rate is for identifiable groups of ten (10) or more paying customers who make advanced arrangements or lesser groups of mentally impaired individuals associated with a recognized non-profit agency.) 
    Adjustments to these rates may be made by the Director of the Louisiana Purchase Gardens and Zoo with the approval of the Director of Community Affairs to accommodate events, marketing opportunities, meet community demand, or adjust to changing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 7976-A, 2-24-87; Ord. No. 9047, 2-28-89; Ord. No. 10,401, 5-25-04; Ord. No. 10,477, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 11,708, 8-23-16) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7976-A, adopted Feb. 24, 1987, did not specifically amend this Code; hence its inclusion as  25-61 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 25-62. - Chennault Golf Course and Selman Field Golf Course. 
(a)  The fee schedule at Chennault Golf Course is established as follows: 
(1)  Electric golf carts: 
Rates effective 
01-May-05 Rates effective 
01-May-07 9 holes $6.00 $7.00 18 holes 11.00 12.00  
Per rider fee will be a flat fee for cart rental. This will eliminate half cart rentals. 
(2)  Greens fees: 
A. Weekdays (9 holes): Regular $ 9.75 $10.75 Senior, 55 and up   8.75   9.75 Junior (8-17)   7.75   8.75 B. Weekdays (18 holes): Regular 17.00  18.00 Senior, 55 and up 13.50  14.50 Junior (8-17) 10.50  11.50 C. Weekdays and holidays (9 holes): Regular 11.00  12.00 Senior, 55 and up 11.00  12.00 Junior (8-17) 11.00  12.00 D. Weekdays and holidays, Friday thru Sunday (18 holes): Regular 18.00  19.00 Senior, 55 and up 18.00  19.00 Junior (8-17) 18.00  19.00  
(3)  Range balls: 
Small bucket $3.00 $4.00 Large bucket  4.00  5.00  
(4)  Pull carts: 
9 holes $2.50 $3.00 18 holes  3.50  4.00  
(5)  Annual membership: 
Family ..... $950.00 
Regular ..... 800.00 
Senior ..... 600.00 
City employee ..... 600.00 
Women members will be included with regular or senior membership 
(6)  Tournament fees: Each participant in a tournament held at Chennault Golf Course is charged an additional fee. Prices include greens fee and cart fee plus tournament fee for each day during the week: 
Monday through Friday $29.00 $30.00 Saturday and Sunday (a.m. or p.m.) 34.00 35.00  
Changes to tournament fees to go into effect Jan. 1, 2006. 
(7)  Twilight greens fee: 
18 holes $12.00 $13.00  
Twilight time will be from October 1 through February 28. 
(8)  All day greens fee: 
Peak season ..... $25.00 
(9)  All day cart fee: 
Peak season ..... $15.00 
Fee starts March 1 and ends September 30. 
(10)  All day greens fee with a cart: 
Winter rate ..... $20.00 
Fee starts October 1 and ends February 28. 
(11)  Specials. Community affairs director and golf director will have permission from the mayor and council to run specials at the golf facilities as needed to promote and increase play at golf courses. 
(b)  The fee schedule at Selman Field Golf Course is established as follows: 
(1)  Electric golf carts: 
9 holes $6.00 $7.00 18 holes 11.00 12.00  
Per rider fee will be a flat fee for cart rental. This will eliminate half cart rentals. 
(2)  Greens fees: 
A. Weekdays (9 holes): Regular $9.00 $10.00 Senior, 55 and up 7.75 8.75 Junior (8-17) 7.75 8.75 B. Weekdays (18 holes): Regular 14.00 15.00 Senior, 55 and up 10.50 11.50 Junior (8-17) 10.50 11.50 C. Weekdays and holidays (9 holes) Friday through Sunday: Regular 10.00 11.00 Senior, 55 and up 10.00 11.00 Junior (8-17) 10.00 11.00 D. Weekdays and holidays (18 holes): Regular 15.00 16.00 Senior, 55 and up 15.00 16.00 Junior (8-17) 15.00 16.00  
(3)  Range balls: 
Small bucket $3.00 $4.00 Large bucket 4.00 5.00  
(4)  Pull carts: 
9 holes $2.50 $3.00 18 holes 3.50 4.00  
(5)  All day greens fee: 
Peak season ..... $19.00 
(6)  All day cart fee: 
Peak Season ..... $15.00 
Fee starts March 1 ending September 30. 
(7)  All day greens fee with a cart: 
Winter Rate ..... $20.00 
Fee starts October 1 ending February 28. 
(8)  Tournament fee: Each participant in tournament held at Selman Field Golf Course is charged an additional fee. Tournament sponsor must have and or pay for at least thirty-six (36) players to schedule a golf tournament. Below includes green fee and cart fee plus tournament fee for each day during the week: 
Monday thru Friday $25.00 $26.00 Saturday or Sunday (a.m. or p.m.) 28.00 29.00  
Changes to tournament fees to go into effect January 1, 2006. 
(9)  Specials. Community affairs director and golf director will have permission from the mayor and council to run specials at the golf facilities as needed to promote and increase play at golf courses. 
(Ord. No. 9061, 4-25-89; Ord. No. 9285, 4-28-92; Ord. No. 9435, 4-12-94; Ord. No. 9471, 10-11-94; Ord. No. 95-91, 4-23-96; Ord. No. 9912, 4-27-99; Ord. No. 10,096, 1-9-01; Ord. No. 10,194, 3-26-02; Ord. No. 10,474, 4-12-05; Ord. No. 10,490, 5-24-05) 
Sec. 25-63. - Municipal Golf Course. 
    The general fees set forth herein and established by ordinance of the Monroe City Council shall remain in effect until such time as there may be a contract entered into between the City of Monroe and a lessee for the maintenance and operation of the municipal golf course and, in such an event, the fee schedule may be set by the director of community affairs in conjunction with the needs of the lessee based upon costs and improvements. In the event the director of community affairs and the lessee cannot resolve any dispute which may arise as to the establishment of fees, the lessee shall have the right to appeal to the Monroe City Council for the establishment fees. 
    The fee schedule at Municipal Golf Course is hereby established as follows: 
Green fees: a. Weekdays per 9 holes Regular ..... $ 9.00 per 9 holes walking Senior 55 and up .....  6.00 per 9 holes walking b. Weekends and holidays Regular .....  11.00 per 9 holes Senior 55 and up .....  10.00 per 9 holes Youth (8 years to 17 years) .....  7.00 per 9 holes (Special youth rate does not apply on any Friday that falls on a holiday) All Electric Carts Fee ..... $ 6.00 (per 9 holes) 
$ 6.00 NO EXCEPTIONS Walking Pull Carts .....  2.00 Small Range Balls Bucket .....  3.00 Large Range Balls Bucket .....  5.00 *Youth under 8 years old free if playing with a paid to play adult *Special. The community affairs director and designated staff will have permission from the mayor and council to run specials at the golf facility as needed to promote and increase play at golf courses. *The maximum number of tournament players shall be thirty (30) golfers and the rates may be adjusted dependent on the peak season. *Course rental is $600.00 for a half day and $1,200.00 for the entire day.  
(Ord. No. 9564, 1-9-96; Ord. No. 9772, 2-24-98; Ord. No. 10,622, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 11,617, 10-27-15) 
Sec. 25-64. - General fees and charges. 
    The schedule for general fees and charges for certain Monroe recreational facilities is hereby established as follows: 
Fee and Charge Schedule for Certain Recreation Facilities 
Fees Cleanup/ 
Breakage 
Deposit RECREATION CENTER-RENTALS Room Rentals $25.00 per hr. $75.00 Gym $75.00/3 hrs., $35.00 per hr. after first 3 hrs. $75.00 Benoit Pavilion (large covered pavilion w/kitchen, restrooms, tennis courts, playscape and sand volleyball courts) First priority with rental agreement $250.00 w/4 hr. min. $50.00 ea. Additional hr. $75.00 Benoit Pavilion (small shelter w/kitchen) $150.00 up to 4 hrs., $50.00 for each additional hr. $75.00 Benoit Pavilion (small shelter without/kitchen or covered pavilion area) $75.00 up to 4 hrs., $50.00 for each additional hr. $75.00 Benoit Pavilion (kitchen and multi-purpose room) $100.00 up to 4 hrs., $50.00 for each additional hr. $75.00 Birthday Parties $25.00 per hr. $75.00 Funeral Repast Fee $25.00 for first three (3) hours, $25.00 per hour for each additional hour, each additional hour charged at $6.25 per quarter hour. Funeral repasts requiring city employee overtime shall be deducted from the $75.00 refundable clean-up fee $75.00 Summer Youth Program Reg. 6 wks. For $6.00 Aerobics $1.50 per indiv. per class - 75% instr, 25% city Note: Weekly rentals - Mon.-Sat. $25.00 per hr. 
Sunday rentals = $35.00 per hr. with 3 hr. minimum - If over 3 hrs. = $35.00 per hr. for each additional hr. B. J. Washington Community Center Non-competitive training in boxing $25.00 per month Competitive boxing $10.00 per month and a $50.00 registration fee per year with USA Boxing Fitness and workout lessons $10.00 per month B.J. Washington Boxing and Fitness Center: Fitness Training: 1. $10.00 per month for all adults (ages 18 and over) 2. School team athletes, 14 players or less per session: $125.00 per month 3. School team athletes, 15-20 players per session: $150.00 per month (20 athletes maximum for all schools per session) 4. School non-team athletes ages 17 and under: No fees charged 5. Note: There will be different sign-in sheets for paying participants and non-participating visitors (i.e., vendors, parents/family members, city employees, etc.) Note: Assistance will not be provided to those seeking USA Boxing Association (USABA) affiliation (discontinued in 2010). PARKS Chennault Park Park Admission Small Shelter $25.00 $75.00 Large Shelter/Restrooms $50.00 $75.00 Special Events - coordinated through Community Affairs office ex. Concerts, corporate events, car shows, activities with over 250 people Contract Forsythe Park/Forsythe Pt. 1 Shelter (on river) $50.00 up to 4 hrs. see note Bandstand Rental $50.00 up to 4 hrs. see note Pool Lobby Rental $50.00 up to 4 hrs. see note Picnic area/open area $50.00 up to 4 hrs. see note Volleyball Courts (lighted sand) $50.00 up to 4 hrs. see note Note: Fees based on $50.00 for 50 or less people with a $50.00 deposit, 51-150 people $75.00 with $75.00 cleanup deposit, over 150 people - Negotiate contract. River Oaks Park (pavilion) $25.00 up to 4 hrs. $50.00 Charles Johnson Park $25.00 up to 4 hrs. $50.00 No Reservations Robinson Place Park $25.00 up to 4 hrs. $50.00 No Reservations ATHLETICS Adult Softball $290.00/team Adult Basketball $250.00/team Youth Tackle Football Free Youth Flag Football Free Youth Softball Free Youth Baseball Free Youth Basketball Free Volleyball $25.00/day ULM Softball Complex & other fields $25.00/field ULM Softball Complex - Concession $150.00/day $75.00 Tennis court fees, including lessons, camps, tournaments or clinics $1.00 for children and $2.00 for age 18 and over Lessons, camps, tourn. And clinic fees paid to the instructor Tennis - OWTA Fees (spring, summer and fall leagues) $1.50 Basketball Tour. (Gym Rental) $75.00/day $75.00 MP&R Half-Marathon MYGSL - Girls Softball Adler Registration Fees pd. To Organization MYBA - Boys Baseball Registration Fees pd. To Organization AQUATICS Youth Admission $0.50 $1.00 Adult Admission $1.00 $1.50 Swim Lessons $10.00 2 wks. $20.00 2 wks. = 10 lessons = $2.00 per lesson Birthday Parties $15.00 2 hrs. max. $25.00/2 hr. max. American Red Cross - Free learn to swim lessons $350.00 wk. if have to open pool early - based on chemical cost Concessions  
DOWNTOWN RIVERMARKET FEES Fees Application fee *One time application fee of $15.00* Size Daily Rentals 501c3 non-profit booths (Information Only) 
10  10 tent $20.00 per day 501c3 non-profit booths (Sales) 
10  10 tent $40.00 per day* Hot Prepared Food Vendors 
Two Parking Lot Spaces $80.00 per day* Food and Alcohol Vendors 
Two Parking Lot Spaces $100.00 per day* Produce/Farmer's Booth 
10  10 tent $6.00 per day Artisan Booths (Handmade) 
151/2  141/2 Pavilion Space $60.00 per day* Sales Booths - Non-Artisan 
151/2  141/2 Pavilion Space $80.00 per day* Snack Food Vendors 
10  10 tent $40.00 per day* *Long-term rental fees consist of 4 consecutive Saturdays in a row. When a vendor books 4 or more events at one time and pays, they get $10.00 off each day's Daily Rental fee. **Any rentals received after Friday at 11:00 a.m. will be charged the Vendor late fee. Vendor Add-On Fees Fees Vendor trash pick-up fee $50.00 Food vendor grease/trash pick-up fee $150.00 Vendor late fee** $20.00  
DOWNTOWN RIVERWALK PARK RENTAL FEES Fees Gazebo Area $50.00 up to 4 hours and $25.00 per hour thereafter Smaller Pavilions $25.00 up to 4 hours and $25.00 per hour thereafter Long Pavilions $50.00 up to 4 hours and $25.00 per hour thereafter Amphitheatre $25.00 up to 4 hours and $25.00 per hour thereafter Entire Riverwalk Complex $350.00 up to 4 hours and $100.00 for each additional hour  
(Ord. No. 10,494, 5-24-05; Ord. No. 10,607, 7-11-06; Ord. No. 10,762, 11-27-07; Ord. No. 11,042, 3-9-10; Ord. No. 11,310, 7-24-12; Ord. No. 11,323, 8-28-12; Ord. No. 11,369, 3-26-13; Ord. No. 11,469, 4-22-14; Ord. No. 11,807, 10-24-17; Ord. No. 11,916, 2-12-19) 
Secs. 25-65-25-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PARK HOURS 

Sec. 25-71. - Closing hours. 
    All parks and recreation areas maintained, operated and/or owned by the city of Monroe shall be closed to the public between the hours of 12:00 midnight until 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 9144, 6-25-90) 
Sec. 25-72. - Exceptions. 
    The closing hours set forth in section 25-71 shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  To any park or recreational area of the City of Monroe for which different hours of operation have been enacted; or 
(2)  For any approved function or event which has obtained written permission for extended hours from the Office of the Mayor or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 9144, 6-25-90) 
Secs. 25-73-25-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - FORSYTHE PARK 

Sec. 25-81. - Name and description. 
    The area bounded by Forsythe Avenue, by Riverside Drive, Park Avenue, and by the municipal golf course shall be known as Forsythe Park. 
(Ord. No. 9434, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 25-82. - No alcohol zone. 
    The display, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in the following areas of Forsythe Park: 
(1)  The All Children's Park; 
(2)  The area fronting on Sycamore Street between the natatoriums and the Golf Pro Shop, extending eastward to the golf course proper; 
(3)  The natatoriums and all streets and parking areas adjacent thereto; 
(4)  Sycamore Street and all parking areas adjacent thereto; 
(5)  All parking areas adjacent to the tennis courts; and 
(6)  All parking areas within the park fronting on Forsythe Avenue and Riverside Drive. 
(Ord. No. 9434, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 25-83. - Designation; blue zone. 
    The area described in section 25-82 shall be known as the blue zone and shall be indicated as such by blue paint on curbing or street surface, and by appropriate signage on other surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 9434, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 25-84. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of section 25-82 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) or imprisoned for more than thirty (30) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 9434, 4-12-94) 
Sec. 25-85. - Exceptions. 
    The prohibition set forth in section 25-82 shall not apply to the premises of the American Legion Building nor to any special event or function which has obtained a written permit for such exception from the mayor or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 9434, 4-12-94) 
Secs. 25-86-25-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - CHARLES H. JOHNSON CHILDREN'S PARK 

Sec. 25-90. - Name and description. 
    The area on the east side of Wilson Street between Bernstien Park Drive and Standifer Street shall be known as Charles H. Johnson Children's Park. 
(Ord. No. 9599, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 25-91. - No alcohol zone. 
    The display, possession and/or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in all areas of Charles H. Johnson Children's Park, including but not limited to the playground area and the parking areas. 
(Ord. No. 9599, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 25-92. - Designation; blue zone. 
    The area described in section 25-91 shall be known as the blue zone and shall be indicated as such by blue paint on curbing or street surfaces, and by appropriate signage on other surfaces. 
(Ord. No. 9599, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 25-93. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of section 25-91 shall, upon conviction, be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than two hundred fifty ($250.00) or imprisoned for more than thirty (30) days or both. 
(Ord. No. 9599, 5-28-96) 
Sec. 25-94. - Exceptions. 
    The prohibition set forth in section 25-91 shall not apply to any special event or function which has obtained a written permit for such exception from the mayor or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 9599, 5-28-96) 
Chapter 25.4 - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
ARTICLE I. - PAWNBROKERS 

Sec. 25.4-1. - Pawnbroker defined. 
    "Pawnbroker" means a person who lends money on deposit of pledge, or who takes other things as security for the money advanced, or who purchases property for the purpose of selling it back at a stipulated price, or who makes a public display at his place of business of the sign generally used by pawnbrokers to denote their business, namely, three gilt or yellow balls, or who publicly exhibits a sign that money is to be loaned on personal property or deposit. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Pawnbroker defined, R.S. 37:1782. 
Sec. 25.4-2. - License required. 
    No person shall do business as a pawnbroker without having first obtained the license required by the City of Monroe's Occupational License Ordinance. Any person desiring a license as pawnbroker shall make application, in writing, stating the full name(s) and residence(s) of the applicant(s), if an individual or a partnership; and if a corporation, the name and residence of each of its officers and the location at which the business will be conducted. 
    If the business is being carried on, conducted or engaged in more than one location then each location must have a separate license. 
    Upon the payment of the license fee and the filing of the bond hereafter provided for, the applicant shall be licensed to carry on, conduct, or engage in the business of pawnbroker at the place designated in the license. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Cross reference- Occupational license tax,  20-21 et seq. 
Sec. 25.4-3. - Change in location. 
    If, after issuance and delivery of a license under the provisions of this article, any change is made in the location of the place of business designated therein, the business shall not be conducted at the location or under such license, until the official issuing the license notes the change on the license and the chief of police is notified in writing of the change. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-4. - Bond. 
    Every person making application for a license under the provisions of this article shall submit with the application a bond in favor of the City of Monroe in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00), with security, conditioned for the due observance of all provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-5. - Book to be kept; entries required. 
    Every pawnbroker shall keep a book which shall be a bound volume, in which shall be fairly written in ink at the time of each loan an accurate description in the English language of the person making the loan or selling any goods, as well as an accurate description of the goods, article, or item pawned, pledged or sold, the amount of money loaned thereon, and the time of pledging the same. When a watch is pawned, the number, name of maker, all letters or marks thereon must also be entered in the book; and whenever any articles manufactured from gold or silver are pawned, all letters or marks thereon must also be entered in the same book. 
    The name, address, sex, race, height, weight, and driver's license number of the person or persons making the loan, pledging, pawning, selling, or delivering said merchandise to the pawnbroker shall be obtained and included with each ledger entry. 
    Records of each transaction shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. No entry made in such book shall be erased, obliterated, defaced or removed. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Required records, R.S. 37:1796. 
Sec. 25.4-6. - Photographic and other records; exceptions. 
    In addition to the information required in section 25.4-5, every pawnbroker shall be required to obtain a photograph of a person selling or delivering merchandise to the dealer. The quality of such photograph shall be sufficient to readily identify the person depicted. In lieu of the photograph of the person selling or delivering the merchandise, secondhand dealers may obtain a thumbprint of such person, the quality of which thumbprint shall be sufficient to readily identify the person. Each photograph or thumbprint shall be cross-referenced with the ledger entry required by section 25.4-5, and shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-7. - Book to be open for inspection. 
    The book containing records of loans, pledges, purchases and deliveries required in sections 25.4-5 and 25.4-6 and the various articles pledged and referred to therein shall at all times be opened to the inspection of law enforcement officers of the Louisiana State Police, the Ouachita Parish Sheriff's Office and the Monroe Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Inspection of records, R.S. 37:1797. 
Sec. 25.4-8. - Copy of entries to be furnished daily. 
    Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall make and deliver to the Monroe Police Department, every day before the hour of twelve o'clock noon, a legible and correct copy of the entries made in the book required by section 25.4-5 during the previous day. The name given by the person making the loan shall also be furnished to the Monroe Police Department when specially requested in writing by the chief of police of the Monroe Police Department or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Required daily information, R.S. 37:1798. 
Sec. 25.4-9. - Sale of property; lapse of time required; record. 
    No pawnbroker shall sell any jewelry pledged to him as collateral security for loans made before a lapse of twelve (12) months from the time of the loan; neither shall he sell other property other than jewelry pledged to him for a loan before the lapse of three (3) months. 
    All sales of property by a pawnbroker, whether acquired through forfeiture or purchase, shall be recorded in the same manner as required in sections 25.4-5 and 25.4-6. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Sale of property, R.S. 37:1800. 
Sec. 25.4-10. - Hours of pawnbrokers. 
    A pawnbroker shall neither open his place of business before the hour of 7:30 a.m. nor keep it open after the hour of 7:00 p.m., except Saturdays and the month of December, during which time the hour of 7:00 p.m. shall be extended to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Pawnbroker hours, R.S. 37:1790. 
Sec. 25.4-11. - Minors; taking property in payment or pledge. 
    No pawnbroker shall take or receive in payment or pledge for money loaned, any property, bonds, notes, securities, articles, or other things of value from any minor. Lack of knowledge of age shall not be a defense to a violation of the section. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Pledges by minors, R.S. 37:1802. 
Sec. 25.4-12. - Violations by pawnbrokers; penalty. 
    Any pawnbroker who shall violate, neglect, or refuse to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days or more than thirty (30) days, or both, for the first offense. For the second and subsequent offenses, the pawnbroker shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. If convicted three (3) times, his license shall be revoked and he shall thereafter not be permitted to engage in the business of pawnbroker in the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-13. - Failure to comply; penalty. 
    Anyone acting as a pawnbroker without complying with the provisions of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-14. - Pledgor's liability prohibited. 
    A pledgor shall have no obligation to redeem pledged goods or make any payment of a pawn transaction. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1803. 
Sec. 25.4-15. - Prohibited practices. 
    A pawnbroker shall not: 
(1)  Accept a pledge from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years, lack of knowledge of age shall not be a defense; 
(2)  Make any agreement requiring the personal liability of the pledgor in connection with a pawn transaction; 
(3)  Accept any waiver, in writing or otherwise, of any right or protection accorded a pledgor under this article or under the provisions of any applicable state law; 
(4)  Fail to exercise reasonable care to protect pledged goods from loss or damage; 
(5)  Enter any pawn transaction which has a maturity date of more than ninety (90) days after the date of transaction on miscellaneous items and one year on jewelry items; 
(6)  Accept for pledge, pawn or security any articles prohibited under this article or prohibited under the provisions of any applicable state law; 
(7)  Display to the public any pistol, dirk, dagger, blackjack, hand chain, sword cane, knuckles made of any hard substance, switchblade knife, spring blade knife, or throwable knife, or depict the same on any sign or advertisement which may be viewed from the street; 
(8)  Violate, neglect, or refuse to comply with any provision of this article. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-16. - Presentation of ticket; presumption. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article or in the applicable provisions of state law, any person properly identifying himself and presenting a pawn ticket to the pawnbroker shall be presumed to be entitled to redeem the pledged goods described therein. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1794. 
Sec. 25.4-17. - Lost or destroyed ticket. 
    In the event the pawn ticket has been lost, destroyed or stolen, a pawnbroker shall deliver the pledged goods or issue a new pawn ticket. Before delivering the pledged goods or issuing a new pawn ticket, the pawnbroker shall require the pledgor to attest to the loss, destruction, or theft or the original ticket. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1795. 
Sec. 25.4-18. - Accepting pawn of certain articles forbidden. 
    No pawnbroker shall buy, sell, or take for pledge, pawn or security, any razor, except a safety razor, any dirk, bowie knife, or other knife of like kind or size, any sword cane, slingshot, blackjack, knuckles made of a hard substance, or Spanish stiletto. Firearms, which shall include pistols, handguns, shotguns, and rifles, shall be exempt from this provision. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-19. - Posting of maximum compensation. 
    The maximum charge of compensation charged by a pawnbroker pursuant to the authority herein shall be posted in a place clearly visible to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-20. - Pawn ticket. 
    The pawnbroker, at the time the pawn transaction is entered, shall deliver to the pledgor a memorandum or ticket which shall clearly set forth the following: 
(1)  The name and address of the pawnshop; 
(2)  The name and address of the pledgor and pledgor's description, or the distinctive number from the pledgor's driver's license or military identification; 
(3)  The date of the transaction; 
(4)  A brief but complete description of the pledged goods as set forth in section 24.4-5; 
(5)  The amount of cash advanced for the credit extended to the pledgor which shall be designated as the amount financed; 
(6)  The total amount, which shall include the amount financed plus the finance charge to be paid on a monthly basis to redeem the pledged goods, and the total of payments if paid on the maturity date; 
(7)  The annual percentage rate; 
(8)  The maturity date of the pawn transaction; 
(9)  A statement to the effect that the pledgor is not obligated to redeem the pledged goods, and a further statement that the pledged goods may be forfeited to the pawnbroker one year after the specified maturity date of any jewelry pledged or may be forfeited after three (3) months in the case of property other than jewelry; and 
(10)  The service charges which shall be incurred upon entering the pawn transaction and any other service charges which may accrue during the period of pawn. 
(11)  No more than four (4) items shall be listed on each ticket. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Pawn ticket, R.S. 37:1793. 
Sec. 25.4-21. - Stolen items. 
    Notwithstanding any provision of the Louisiana Civil Code or of any other provision of law to the contrary, when the operator of a pawn shop has acquired a stolen item, the operator or the pawn shop shall return the item to the owner at no cost to the owner, upon presentation by the owner of proof of ownership of the item and a certified copy of the police report in which the item was reported stolen. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Stolen things, R.S. 37:1805. 
Sec. 25.4-22. - Maximum rate of interest for pawn transactions. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, a person licensed as a pawnbroker, pursuant to this article and Louisiana Revised Statute Section 37:1751 et seq., may charge a maximum rate of interest of ten (10) per cent per month on pawn transactions. In addition to the interest charged on loans, the pawnbroker may charge a one-time fee not to exceed ten (10) per cent for all other services, including storage. Any transaction whereby property transferred to the pawnbroker and later redeemed by the previous owner shall be considered a loan for the purpose of this section. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Maximum rate of interest, R.S. 37:1491. 
Secs. 25.4-23-25.4-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SECONDHAND DEALERS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Secondhand dealers, R.S. 37:1861 et seq. 

Sec. 25.4-31. - Secondhand dealer defined. 
(a)  (1)  Every person in this state engaged in the business of buying, selling, trading in, or otherwise acquiring or disposing of used or secondhand property, including but not limited to jewelry, silverware, diamonds, precious metals, furniture, pictures, objects of art, clothing, mechanic's tools, carpenter's tools, automobile hubcaps, automotive batteries, automotive sound equipment such as radios, CB radios, stereos, speakers, cassettes, compact disc players, and similar automotive audio supplies, used building components, and items defined as cemetery artifacts is a secondhand dealer. 
(2)  For purposes of this section "cemetery artifacts" means any object produced or shaped by human workmanship or tools, including ornaments of archaeological, historical, cultural, or sentimental significance or interest, which may be used to memorialize the dead and shall include but not be limited to all cemetery items, objects, and properties including but not limited to any type of religious or sentimental addition or adornment, inside or outside of a tomb, gravesite, plot, mausoleum, vault or interment location, whether placed privately or by assignment, regardless of monetary worth, age, size, shape, or condition including but not limited to statues, bricks, signage, plaques, tablets, urns, pots, planters, benches, chairs, crosses or other religious symbols, vases, gates, fences, or any portions thereof. 
(3)  For purposes of this section, a "used building component" shall mean any object produced or shaped by human workmanship or tools that is an element of structural, architectural, archaeological, historical, ornamental, cultural, utilitarian, decorative, or sentimental significance or interest, which has been and may be used as an adjunct to, or component or ornament of any building or structure, regardless of monetary worth, age, size, shape, or condition, that is immovable property or fixture, including but not limited to bricks, siding, gutters, downspouts, lightning rods, chimney roofs, lights, chandeliers, stoves, tubs, sinks, faucets, faucet handles, toilets, bidets, showers, fans, furnaces, air conditioners, water heaters, sprinkling systems, shelving, countertops, cabinets, built-in speakers, shutters, trim, rafters, roof tiles, roofing, studs, foundation, barge boards, paneling, stairs, risers, banisters, wiring, plumbing, hinges, door latches, door knobs, medallions, mantles, flooring, carpet, tiles, molding, wainscoting, pavers, doors, windows, sills, transoms, joists, mailboxes, signage, fountains, decking, gates, fences, planters, landscaping, plantings or portions thereof, or component parts of immovable property of any nature or kind whatsoever. 
(4)  For purposes of this section, a "lot of used building components" shall mean a group of like used building components. 
(b)  Except as provided for in R.S. 37:1869.1, the provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Dealers in coins and currency, dealers in antiques, nor to gun and knife shows or other trade and hobby shows. 
(2)  Persons solely engaged in the business of buying, selling, trading in, or otherwise acquiring or disposing of motor vehicles and used parts of motor vehicles, and shall not apply to wreckers or dismantlers of motor vehicles who are licensed under the provisions of R.S. 32:771 et seq. 
(3)  Private residential sales commonly known as "garage sales" or "yard sales" as long as such sales take place at a residential address. 
(4)  Any bona fide charity possessing a valid exemption under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89; Ord. No. 10,619, 9-12-06; Ord. No. 10,953, 8-25-09) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1861. 
Sec. 25.4-32. - License required; application; bond; exemptions. 
    No person shall do business as a secondhand dealer in this city without having first obtained the license required by the City of Monroe's Occupational License Ordinance. Any person desiring a license as a secondhand dealer shall make application in writing, specifying the street address of the building where the business is to be carried on. The application shall be signed by at least three (3) property taxpayers of the City of Monroe, certifying that the applicant is of good moral character. The applicant shall also submit with his application a bond in favor of the city in the sum of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) with security, conditioned for the due observance of all provisions of this article. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to a retail tire outlet or to an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Cross reference- Occupational license tax,  20-21 et seq. 
Sec. 25.4-33. - Change in location. 
    If, after issuance and delivery of a license under the provisions of this article, any change is made in the location of the place of business designated therein, the business shall not be conducted at the location or under such license, until the official issuing the license notes the change on the license and the chief of police is notified, in writing, of the change. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-34. - Comprehensive record of secondhand goods or objects purchased. 
    Every secondhand dealer as defined in this article shall be required to maintain a book or ledger setting forth each purchase or sale of secondhand or used merchandise for each transaction. Each ledger entry shall be entered at the time of each transaction and shall contain an accurate description in the English language of the merchandise or article received, including serial numbers, model numbers, brand names, colors, sizes, initials, style and any other distinguishing letters, number or marks, numbers of said objects and the amount paid for the merchandise or article. 
    In addition to the above requirements on the merchandise or article, the secondhand dealer is required to keep the name, address, sex, race, height, weight, and driver's license number of the person or persons selling or delivering said merchandise to the secondhand dealer along with a description of how the merchandise was delivered. If the merchandise was delivered by vehicle the dealer shall obtain the license plate number of the vehicle. No dealer shall purchase or accept any merchandise by any other method unless the seller provides picture identification with a valid state driver's license, an armed forces identification card or a state identification card issued by the motor vehicle office of the state police department. The state driver's license number or the military identification card number or the state identification card number shall be recorded on the daily report. Any information required herein and not provided by the dealer shall automatically become a violation as per section 25.4-41. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89; Ord. No. 10,620, 9-12-06) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1864. 
Sec. 25.4-35. - Photographic and other records; exceptions. 
    In addition to the information required in section 25.4-34, every secondhand dealer shall be required to obtain a photograph of the person selling or delivering merchandise to the dealer. The quality of such photograph shall be sufficient to readily identify the person depicted. In lieu of the photograph of the person selling or delivering the merchandise, secondhand dealers may obtain a thumbprint of such person, the quality of which thumbprint shall be sufficient to readily identify the person. Each photograph or thumbprint shall be cross-referenced with the ledger entry required by section 25.4-34, and shall be preserved for a period of at least three (3) years. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  A transaction between dealers who are licensed under Article I of this chapter, Part I of Chapter 21 of Title 37 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950; 
(2)  The sale or purchase of manufactured registered bullion bars, coins, or other numismatic items; or 
(3)  A retail tire outlet or an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1864.1. 
Sec. 25.4-36. - Purchase of precious metals and stones from minors. 
    No secondhand dealer shall purchase gold, silver, copper, brass, or other precious metals, jewelry, precious stones or objects composed of such precious metals or stones from a person under the age of eighteen (18). Lack of knowledge of age shall not be a defense to a violation of this section. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to the sale or purchase of manufactured registered bullion bars, coins, or other numismatic items; or, a retail tire outlet or an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1864.2. 
Sec. 25.4-37. - Book to be open for inspection. 
    The book containing records of purchase required in section 25.4-34 and section 25.4-35, and the various articles purchased and referred to therein shall, at all times, be opened to the inspection of law enforcement officers of the Louisiana State Police, the Ouachita Parish Sheriff's Office and the Monroe Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1865. 
Sec. 25.4-38. - Daily reports of entries. 
    Every person licensed under the provisions of this article shall make and deliver to the Monroe Police Department, every day before the hour of 12:00 noon, a legible and correct copy of the entries made in the book required by section 25.4-34 during the previous day. The name given by the person making the loan shall also be furnished to the Monroe Police Department when specially requested in writing by the chief of police of the Monroe Police Department or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1866. 
Sec. 25.4-39. - Disposal or changing identity prohibited during thirty-day period; exceptions. 
    No secondhand dealer shall sell or dispose of or change or destroy the identity of any goods, articles, or things purchased by him before an interval of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of purchase has elapsed. Any secondhand dealer may sell, dispose of, change, or destroy any goods, articles or things purchased by him from a client known to him without any delay, and the secondhand dealer shall certify his knowledge of the client in the book set forth in section 25.4-34. 
    The provisions of this section shall not apply to a retail tire outlet or an automobile dealer dealing in tires. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1867. 
Sec. 25.4-40. - Hours of business. 
    A secondhand dealer shall neither open his place of business before the hour of 7:30 a.m. nor keep it open after the hour of 7:00 p.m., except Saturdays and the month of December, during which time the hour of 7:00 p.m. shall be extended to 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1868. 
Sec. 25.4-41. - Violations; penalty. 
    Any secondhand dealer who shall violate, neglect or refuse to comply with any provision of this article shall be fined not less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00), nor more than one hundred dollars ($100.00), or imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) days, or both for the first offense. For the second and subsequent offenses, the pawnbroker shall be fined five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. If convicted three (3) times his license shall be revoked and he shall thereafter not be permitted to engage in the business of secondhand dealer in the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Sec. 25.4-42. - Failure to comply; penalty. 
    Anyone acting as a secondhand dealer without complying with provisions of this article shall be fined not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 9110, 12-12-89) 
Chapter 25.5 - PEDDLERS, TRANSIENT MERCHANTS, ETC.[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7678,  1-10, adopted May 8, 1984, did not specifically amend the Code; therefore, codification as 25.5-21-25.5-30 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Cross reference- Licenses and taxation, ch. 20. 
State Law reference- Local regulation of peddlers, R.S. 33:4832. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 25.5-1-25.5-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRANSIENT AND OPEN-AIR MERCHANTS 

Sec. 25.5-20. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to protect the public from improper sales techniques by transient and open-air merchants, to discourage the sale of inferior quality merchandise by such merchants, to require posting of a security bond by all transient and open-air merchants in order to satisfy valid warranty claims of purchasers, and to provide a method for enforcement of violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7801, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 25.5-21. - Annual license tax. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license tax, as hereinafter specified, upon each person acting as a transient merchant or open-air merchant, as hereinafter defined, in the City of Monroe, who may be subject to such license under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  1, 5-8-84; Ord. No. 7801,  1, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 25.5-22. - Definitions. 
(a)  A "transient merchant" is any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other association, including agents, representatives and employees thereof, who exhibits merchandise, including models or samples thereof, in any hotel or motel room, rooming house, store, club, storehouse, house or other permanent building structure, for the purpose of selling, offering to sell or taking orders for the sale of such merchandise, and who in connection with such business advertises in the City of Monroe using one or more of the common media of newspapers, radio or television. 
(b)  An "open-air merchant" is any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other association, including agents, representatives and employees thereof, who exhibits merchandise, including models or samples thereof, in, upon or about an automobile, truck, trailer, mobile home or other mode of conveyance, or who exhibits such merchandise on any public or private street, driveway, lot, parking lot or other outdoor property within the City of Monroe, for the purpose of selling, offering to sell or taking orders for the sale of such merchandise. 
(c)  "Merchandise" shall mean any consumer item, new or used, except for the items listed below. 
(d)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other unincorporated association having a licensed permanent retail location in the City of Monroe, provided that: 
(1)  The name of such licensed retail business is used in connection with all merchandise sold or offered for sale; 
(2)  All vendees are notified that all merchandise is sold under the auspices of said licensed permanent retail business; 
(3)  The name of the licensed permanent establishment is clearly included in all advertisements in connection with the sale of such merchandise; 
(4)  The owner or owners of the licensed retail establishment expressly assume responsibility for all merchandise in the same manner as if the merchandise had been sold at the licensed permanent retail establishment. 
(e)  The provisions of this article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Sales of meat, seafood, vegetables, fruit or perishable farm products. 
(2)  Sales of handcrafted items at arts and crafts shows, fairs or festivals sponsored by a Louisiana nonprofit corporation. 
(3)  Sales made at events commonly known as flea markets, stamp shows, coin shows, arts and crafts shows, trade shows or other exhibitions, provided the manager, promoter, coordinator, or other persons in authority for such market, show or exhibition has complied with all applicable requirements of the sponsor of the market, show or exhibition and with the applicable requirements of the City of Monroe. 
(4)  Authorized sales by participating vendors on fairgrounds during a local or parish fair. 
(5)  Sales of soft drinks or refreshments. 
(6)  Sales of second-hand or used clothing. 
(7)  Sales of cut flowers. 
(8)  Sales of balloons and other trinket items at parades and circuses, provided that the sponsor of the parade or circus has obtained the proper permit and authorization from the City of Monroe. 
(9)  Sales of handcrafted items made or produced by an individual who has obtained a valid home-occupation license from the City of Monroe as required by law. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  2, 5-8-84; Ord. No. 7801,  2, 5-28-85) 
Sec. 25.5-23. - License required; fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for any transient merchant to transact any phase of business in the City of Monroe, including advertising, without first applying to the department of administration for a license. The fee for this license shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per annum. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  3, 5-8-84) 
Sec. 25.5-24. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Every transient merchant and/or open-air merchant subject to the provisions of this section, before selling at retail, or offering for sale at retail, within the incorporated limits of the City of Monroe any goods, wares or merchandise, either from stock or by sample, shall make application with the department of administration for a permit to carry on such business within the City of Monroe. Such application shall be in writing, duly sworn by the applicant in person, or by the applicant's duly authorized representative, and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of such business during the time it shall be carried on in the city; 
(2)  The address of such person while engaged in such business in the city; 
(3)  The capacity in which such person will act; that is, whether as proprietor or agent; 
(4)  The name of the person for whose account the business shall be carried on, and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated; 
(5)  Three (3) business references; 
(6)  The place where the owner of such business conducts or maintains an established place of business; 
(7)  The place in the city where it is proposed to carry on such business, and the length of time during which it is expected or proposed that such business shall be conducted; 
(8)  The place, other than the permanent place of business of the owner, where such transient merchant or open-air merchant within the six (6) months next preceding the date of such application conducted or carried on a temporary or transitory business, stating the nature there of and giving the post office and street addresses of any building or office in which such business was so conducted; 
(9)  A statement of the nature, character and quantity of the goods, wares or merchandise to be sold at retail or offered for sale at retail in the city and the invoice value of such goods; 
(10)  A statement as to whether the goods are to be sold at retail from stock in possession or by sample, and whether the same are to be sold at retail at auction or public outcry, or by personal solicitation, or otherwise; 
(11)  A brief statement of the nature and character of the advertising done or to be done in order to attract customers; 
(12)  The number, either of arrests or convictions of misdemeanors or crimes, and the nature of the offenses for which arrested or convicted, if any; 
(13)  To the application must be appended a letter from the firm for which the applicant purports to do business, authorizing the application to act as its representative; 
(14)  Written evidence of permission from the owner of the property where the retail activities are proposed to be conducted. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any transient vendor, solicitor, canvasser or merchant to engage in business until he shall have first applied to and obtained a permit to engage in business, in accordance with the above provisions and has paid all taxes and fees required by law for the transaction of such business in the incorporated limits for the City of Monroe; the director of administration shall issue such permit in writing which shall state the date same was issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on and the expiration date of such permit, the place where such business may be carried on under such permit, and the name of the person or persons authorized to carry on the same, which permit shall be signed by the director of administration or his authorized representative. 
(c)  The permit so issued shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event the person applying for such permit shall desire to do business in more than one place, then separate permits shall be applied for and issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business, and the fee herein provided for shall be paid for each permit. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  4, 5-8-84) 
Sec. 25.5-25. - Violation. 
    The violation of any of the foregoing provisions or the doing of business otherwise than provided in the application and permit issued thereon, shall constitute a forfeiture of the permit and the mayor of the City of Monroe, or his authorized representative may suspend the operation of such permit not to exceed ten (10) days, and upon the request of the holder of such permit, grant a hearing and rule upon such forfeiture. Should the department of administration find that there has been a violation of the conditions of the permit, working a forfeiture of the permit, such permit may be immediately forfeited, surrendered and cancelled. A forfeiture of the permit shall not entitle the permittee to any refund of taxes or fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  5, 5-8-84) 
Sec. 25.5-26. - Inspections. 
    Immediately upon issuing any permit provided for as above, the director of administration or any of his representatives shall at any time thereafter and at all reasonable hours make an inspection of the place of business as provided in said permit and shall determine whether or not such business is carried on or conducted by the person or persons and in the manner provided in the permit, and the application upon which the permit was issued, and whether the permit is posted as provided by section 25.5-25 and whether or not the other provisions of said section are being observed in the carrying on of such business. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  6, 5-8-84) 
Sec. 25.5-27. - Issuance of permit. 
    No permit shall be issued until the expiration of ten (10) days from date of application and after proper investigation of said applicant and provided said applicant meets all requirements herein set forth and has complied with all other applicable ordinances. The permit issued shall be valid for a period of duration of the sale. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  7, 5-8-84) 
Sec. 25.5-28. - Bonding. 
    Before such license is issued by the director of administration, the applicant will be required to furnish a performance bond in an amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). Such bond will be held by the director of administration for a period of ninety (90) days after all orders of goods, wares and clothing merchandise have been delivered to the persons from whom the orders are taken, to assure delivery of said orders to the satisfaction of such persons, and to be in compliance with the specifications stated in the order and meeting the requirements of the solicitations and advertisements. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  8, 5-8-84) 
Sec. 25.5-29. - Report by hotel or motel keeper. 
    Report by hotel or motel keeper. The owner, proprietor or manager of any hotel, motel, rooming house or other place of public accommodation shall report, within six (6) hours after renting, to the chief of police, the name of any person who has rented a room or other space for the sale and display of merchandise of a transient merchant, giving the location of the room so rented. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  9, 5-8-84) 
Sec. 25.5-30. - Penalties. 
    Any person who fails to obtain said permit or to comply with any regulations contained herein shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be imprisoned for a period of not more than thirty (30) days or fined the sum of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or both, at the discretion of the judge. A permittee so convicted shall forfeit said permit and not be entitled to a refund of the fees paid thereof. Every day that a violation of this article shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct offense. 
(Ord. No. 7678,  10, 5-8-84) 
Secs. 25.5-31-25.5-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MOBILE FOOD VENDORS 

Sec. 25.5-40. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Mobile food vendor means a person, natural or juridical, that has obtained the required permits under this section to operate a mobile food operation to serve or distribute victuals on the public right-of-way or private property. Mobile vendors will include food trailers and carts. 
    Mobile food vendor [vehicle] means any vehicle that is completely mobile with no permanent fixed location and which qualifies as a mobile vendor under the rules and regulations of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals, the vendor of which prepares all or most of its victuals on board the vehicle to serve or distribute to customers, in a form suitable for immediate ingestion or consumption. 
    Modular kitchen food vendor means any food unit that is factory built and delivered to a permanent fixed location and which qualifies as a food vendor under the rules and regulations of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals, the vendor of which prepares all or most of its victuals on board the vehicle to serve or distribute to customers, in a form suitable for immediate ingestion or consumption. 
    Food court means any area, public or private that is zoned by the City of Monroe for the selling of prepared food, the foods may be prepared either on site or in any kitchen approved by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals, said area to be used by one or more mobile food vendors or modular kitchen food vendors. 
    Food courts may establish non-food accessory businesses such as games, face areas or stages for music talents, painting, arcade play, exhibits and the like. Each of these accessory businesses must secure any City of Monroe and State of Louisiana sales tax permits as required. 
    Permittee means the recipient of a mobile vending permit under the terms and provisions of this article. 
    Private property means any private residence or business that is allowing the sale of victuals from a mobile food vendor. 
    Public right-of-way means any city street, alley, road, sidewalk, neutral ground, or other passageway whereby pedestrians or vehicles traverse. 
    Serve or distribute means soliciting the sale of or offering for sale victuals. 
    Victuals means food of any kind that is prepared, packaged or in a form that is suitable for immediate ingestion or consumption by human beings and shall not include any non-food items. 
    Defined permitted areas means those areas set forth in section 25.5-41 based upon such criteria as distance from fixed-based restaurants, valid concerns by other businesses or private citizens about specific areas or such other concerns as may be necessary to protect the rights of private citizens and land-based businesses. If a permit has been granted for a particular location and valid concerns are brought to the attention of tax and revenue and deemed to be valid, the permittee may be required to locate to another approved location. 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 25.5-41. - Permitted locations. 
(a)  River Market East to Civic Center from Interstate 20 at River to Louisville Ave.; 
(b)  DeSiard Street from River East to 18th Street; 
(c)  Washington Street from Walnut east to 18th Street; 
(d)  Eighteenth Street from Forsythe south to DeSiard; 
(e)  Louisville from the River to DeSiard and along DeSiard to Kansas Lane; 
(f)  Highway 165 from DeSiard north to Monroe City limits; 
(g)  Tower Armand from 18th Street to Highway 165; 
(h)  Air Industrial Park area; 
(i)  Private land for commercial use, parties and events and construction sites in permitted areas; 
(j)  ULM property including "The Grove" with permission of ULM; 
(k)  Forsythe Park, Forsythe Landing along the river; Louisiana Purchase Gardens and Zoo, Masur Museum and the Cooley House. 
(l)  To those areas south of Interstate 20 which are permitted pursuant to all other regulations as set forth in article III, sections 25.5-40 through 25.5-47. 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14; Ord. No. 11,746, 12-27-16) 
Sec. 25.5-42. - Permit required and authorized. 
    Every person, whether natural or juridical, who desires to use the public right-of-way, public places or private property to conduct any of the businesses or callings hereinafter set forth, shall first apply for and be granted a mobile vending permit from the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals pursuant to Title 51, Chapter XXIII of the Administrative Code and a mobile vending permit from the City of Monroe as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 25.5-43. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  A mobile vending permit shall be applied for with the department of taxation and revenue and shall be on forms provided by the city and in the format and number of copies as required by the instructions. No permit shall be issued until all requisite approvals by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals are finalized and received by the department of taxation and revenue. 
(b)  Any permit that is issued shall in each instance state the occasion and location for which it is issued, the location of the mobile food vendor activity and the date upon which it will expire. Permits may be issued on an annual basis if applied for. Nothing contained herein precludes the prorating of permit fees. Annual permits may be issued that cover all permitted locations within the City of Monroe. 
(c)  Permits shall be conspicuously displayed and be clearly visible from outside the mobile food unit at all times during operation. 
(d)  The director of the administration for the City of Monroe may prescribe such other policies and procedures as to the issuance of permits as may be required to carry out the full intent and purpose of this article. 
(e)  The provisions of this article III shall not be applicable to those areas and events which are otherwise exempted by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals for events such as recognized fairs and festivals. 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 25.5-44. - Permit and franchise fees. 
    There shall be a permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00). An annual permit fee shall be two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 25.5-45. - Rules and regulations for all mobile food vendors. 
    In addition to all other applicable laws pertaining to permits and franchises, all mobile vendors operating pursuant to this article shall also be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  All mobile food vendors shall be registered in the State of Louisiana and the driver of any truck shall have a valid driver's license permit. 
(2)  All mobile vendors shall comply with all applicable parking, traffic and vehicle safety laws, regulations and restrictions; 
(3)  No mobile vendor shall operate within twenty (20) feet of any intersection. 
(4)  No mobile vendor shall operate within twenty (20) feet of any stop sign, flashing beacon, yield sign or other traffic control signal located on the side of a roadway. 
(5)  No mobile vendor shall operate within three (3) feet of any public or private driveway, wheelchair ramp or bicycle ramp. 
(6)  No mobile food vendor shall be more than thirty-six (36) feet in length or eight and one-half (81/2) feet in width, however, mobile food establishments solely located on private or public property which are not used as traffic thoroughfares, may exceed the size stated herein with approval of the director of administration. 
(7)  No mobile vendor shall sell alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, or any other item the possession or use of which is deemed illegal under any federal, state or local law. 
(8)  No mobile vendor shall place any chairs, stools, tables or other fixtures, furniture or other obstructions on any portion of the public street, sidewalk or right-of-way, except as provided in subpart (10) of this section. 
(9)  All mobile vendors shall provide a trash receptacle within three (3) feet of the front or back of the mobile food vendor but out of streets or public walkways, which shall be large enough to contain all refuse generated by operation. 
The location shall be kept clean and free of trash and debris. All mobile vendors shall be responsible for cleaning all debris and refuse generated by such operation within a fifty-foot radius of the mobile food vendor upon ceasing operation. It shall be unlawful for any mobile vendor to leave any location without first picking up, removing and properly disposing of all trash or refuse remaining at a location. 
After dispensing victuals, at any location, a food truck operator, prior to leaving the location, shall pick up, remove and dispose of all trash of refuse within twenty-five (25) feet of the food operation which consists of materials originally dispensed from the food vendor, including packages or containers or parts of either used with or for dispensing the victuals. 
Any trash, garbage, refuse or other debris generated by the mobile vendor or relating to the operation of the mobile vendor shall be disposed of at approved locations. 
Existing liter laws will be invoked in distances outside the vendor's responsibility. 
Any mobile food vendor found to be or have been in violation of the permit location regulation or any other provision of this article shall have his license revoked by the department of taxation and revenue by delivery of such notice to the operator of the food truck. If such vendor has applied for a yearly license, then a pro-rated share of the cost of the license shall be returned. 
(10)  It shall be unlawful for any mobile vendor to operate in a defective, unsafe or unsanitary condition in violation of any applicable law or regulation. 
No mobile food vendor, whether through a local commissary or otherwise, shall discharge into the City of Monroe wastewater system without first having a commercial wastewater permit and all mobile food vendors must adhere to the provisions set forth in chapter 30, article III of the Monroe City Code. 
(11)  No mobile vendor shall operate any horn, sound amplification system, or other sound-producing device or music system which violates the existing municipal noise ordinance found in chapter 23 of the Monroe City Code. 
(12)  All mobile vendors must comply with all other applicable conditions and requirements imposed upon mobile vendors under the law, and must comply with all applicable city and state health laws and regulations and shall make such sales tax returns and other reports as required by provisions of the Code of the City of Monroe. 
(13)  Mobile food operations held on private property will be exempted from these regulations. 
(14)  No mobile food vendor shall operate within three hundred (300) feet of the outermost boundary of any private or public school property or within three hundred (300) feet of any location where a not for profit events where a sponsored school event is being held unless specifically requested in writing by the governing authority of such private or public school. 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 25.5-46. - Insurance requirements. 
    At the time of application for, and prior to the issuance of, any permit or franchise pursuant to this division, each and every applicant shall provide written proof of commercial vehicle insurance coverage on any mobile food vehicle or trailer in compliance with state law naming the City of Monroe as an additional insured for the operations of the business. 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14) 
Sec. 25.5-47. - Fines and forfeitures-Process and procedure. 
(a)  Any violation of any applicable provision of this article may be grounds for revocation of any permit or franchise issued under this article and shall be an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) per violation. 
(b)  Violations of the provisions of this article shall be brought by the appropriate department or agency to Monroe Municipal Court. 
(Ord. No. 11,520, 10-28-14) 
Chapter 26 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; flood hazard areas,  13-21 et seq.; electricity, Ch. 14; housing code,  19-16 et seq.; Monroe Industrial Park, Ch. 22; subdivisions, Ch. 32; zoning, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Planning, R.S. 33:101 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 26-1-26-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL PLANNING COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,919, adopted Apr. 28, 2009, deleted the former Art. II, Div. 1,  26-16, Div. 2,  26-26-26-29 and enacted a new Art. II as set out herein. The former Art. II pertained to regional planning and derived from Code 1958,  2-24-2-28.1. 
State Law reference- Planning commissions, R.S. 33:101 et seq. 

Sec. 26-26. - Created. 
    Pursuant to authority granted in Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended, sections 33:102 through 33:119, there is hereby created the Monroe Planning Commission. 
(Ord. No. 10,919, 4-28-09) 
Sec. 26-27. - Membership. 
(a)  The Monroe Planning Commission shall consist of nine (9) members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and approval of the city council. All members of the planning commission shall reside within the city limits of the City of Monroe. 
(b)  The members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation and shall hold no other public office. Members shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years from and after the expiration of the term of their predecessors in office. If a vacancy occurs otherwise than by expiration of the term, it shall be filled by appointment for the unexpired term by the mayor of the city, subject to the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 10,919, 4-28-09) 
State Law reference- Planning commission membership, R.S. 33:103. 
Sec. 26-28. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  The Monroe Planning Commission shall have such powers and duties as provided by law, and in particular the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statutes of 1950, as amended, section 33:106, and shall have such other powers and duties as may hereafter be lawfully conferred upon such commission by the city council. 
(b)  The Monroe Planning Commission shall also serve as the municipal zoning commission, and when acting as such, it shall hold separate meetings with separate minutes and records. 
(Ord. No. 10,919, 4-28-09) 
Secs. 26-29-26-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - DISPLAY OF AUTHORIZED MUNICIPAL STREET ADDRESSES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,701, adopted Apr. 27, 2007, repealed the former Art. III,  26-41, 26-42, and enacted a new Art. III,  26-41-26-50, as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to house numbering, and derived from the Code of 1958,  23-15, 23-16. 
Cross reference- Approval of numbering system in subdivisions,  32-71(i). 

Sec. 26-41. - Required. 
    The owner of every house or building in the city, or occupant or agent in charge thereof, has a duty to display a building/residence number in accordance with the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-42. - Owner to provide and affix. 
    The owner, agent of the owner or the occupant of such building/residence shall provide himself with the number designated by the zoning administrator and shall conspicuously place the same as follows: 
(1)  The number shall be displayed in a location visible from the road upon which the address number is assigned. 
(2)  If such building/residence has a mailbox on the same side of the road as the physical building/residence, numbers shall be placed on both sides of the mailbox. However, under the following circumstances, display of the number on a mailbox is not sufficient to meet the requirements herein and shall be governed by the requirements of subsection (3): 
a.  There is no mailbox; 
b.  The mailbox is on the opposite side of the road from the home; 
c.  There are multiple mailboxes at the location. 
(3)  Numbers must be placed on the house or building, preferably at front doors, but only if they are readily visible from the road (within fifty (50) feet) and the view of the numbers is not blocked by trees or shrubs. 
As used in this section, "front" means that side of the building which faces or aligns with the main or primary street or parking lot on which such building is situated. 
(4)  Numbers may be placed on a private sign or post at the entrance to the driveway, at a height of three (3) to four (4) feet. 
(5)  Numbers should be at least three (3) inches high for residences and at least two (2) inches high on mailboxes. 
(6)  Numbers should be plain block numerals, not script or written numbers. 
(7)  Numbers should be set on a background of contrasting color, preferably black on white. Reflective numbers are desirable. 
    House or building numbers shall not be placed on utility poles, parish road sign posts, or anywhere within the road. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-43. - Design, size, etc. 
    Numbers provided for in this article shall be of neat design and not less than three (3) inches in height for residences, and not less than six (6) inches in height for businesses, and shall be of such material as to ensure durability, and shall be of such color and nature as to ensure visibility. 
    If a number is not legible or visible from the street, the number shall be installed near the street and be legible and visible at all times. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-44. - Specific numbering system. 
(a)  Apartment house. A residential building in which the rooms are arranged and rented as apartments. An apartment is a room or set of rooms fitted especially with housekeeping facilities and leased as a dwelling. Apartment houses shall be numbered as follows: the apartment house shall be given one street number, and each individual apartment shall be given an apartment number. 
It shall be the responsibility of the apartment owner to number and to display the individual apartment numbers on apartment buildings. 
For example, 5352 (Name) Street, Apartment 1802; 5352 (Name) Street, Apartment 1803; etc. 
(b)  Residential condominium complex. A building or buildings with individually owned units. Each building shall be given a street number and each condominium unit shall be given a unit number. Unit numbers shall be assigned by the property owner in accordance with emergency 911 guidelines and approved by the zoning administrator. 
For example, 62 (Name) Street, Unit 1. 
(c)  Commercial complex. A building or buildings used for commercial or industrial use. Each building shall be given its own street number and each unit within that building shall be given its own unit or suite number. 
For example, 107 (Name) Street, Suite 1. 
Where there are multiple roads in a complex, each road shall be given a street name, and each building shall have its own street number. In the case of commercial condominiums, each unit in a building shall have its own unit number, and further subdivisions shall be given a letter. 
For example, 113 (Name) Street, Unit 3; 113 (Name) Street, Unit 3A; etc. 
(d)  Combined commercial and apartment complex. A building or buildings used for commercial use in which there may also be apartments. Each building shall be given its own street number; each commercial unit shall be given its respective unit or suite number; and each apartment shall be given its respective apartment number. At no time shall any unit or apartment in the same building be given the same number. 
For example, 58 (Name) Street, Unit 1; 58 (Name) Street, Unit 2; 58 (Name) Street, Apartment 3; etc. 
(e)  Duplex house. A dwelling consisting of two (2) separate family units which are separated from each other by a wall that extends from ground to floor. Each family unit shall be given its own street number. That in a situation where the dwelling units along a street are numbered in such a way that addressing the units in a new duplex house with a unique street number is not possible, the duplex units should be designated as Unit 1 and Unit 2 or Unit A or Unit B. 
For example, 5 (Name) Street; 7 (Name) Street. In certain situations 5 (Name) Street Unit 1 or A; 5 (Name) Street Unit 2 or B. 
(f)  Single-family dwelling. A detached one-family house which shall be given its own street number. 
For example, 1436 (Name) Street. 
(g)  Single-family dwelling with apartment. A primary residence with an accessory apartment. The primary residence shall be given a street number, and the accessory apartment shall be given that street number along with an apartment number. 
For example, 2502 (Name) Street; 2502 (Name) Street, Apartment 1. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07; Ord. No. 11,162, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 26-45. - Separate numbering. 
    Every structure with more than one principal use or occupancy shall have a separate number for each use or occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-46. - When to be affixed. 
(a)  For new constructions, the property owner shall display the assigned address number before requesting a final building inspection. 
(b)  For existing structures, within thirty (30) days after receiving written notification that the official number has changed or that any building/residence number is not properly displayed, the owner or tenant shall display the number in compliance with section 26-42 and shall remove any obsolete number. 
(c)  If the owner, occupant or agent fails to comply with this provision within ten (10) days of notice of noncompliance, the department of public works shall be entitled to affix such numbering, and to charge the owner, occupant or agent of the building or property the sum of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for such affixation, said sum to be affixed to the next monthly water bill addressed to the owner and or occupant of the service address. 
(d)  Whenever any number is put on a building or structure in accordance with this article and the same afterwards becomes illegible or defaced or is in any way destroyed, it shall be replaced within ten (10) days after such occurrence by the owner, occupant or agent of the premises. Failure to comply shall entitle the department of public works to affix such numbering and to charge the owner, occupant or agent of the building or property the sum of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) for such affixation, said sum to be affixed to the next monthly water bill addressed to the owner and/or occupant of the service address. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-47. - Enforcement. 
    The zoning administrator is hereby designated as the person responsible for approving the official number of each building and lot assigned by the property owner within the city. Said assignments shall be in accordance with emergency 911 guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-48. - Enforcement agencies. 
    The city code enforcement division, as well as the police department, the fire department and the inspections division shall be empowered to issue citations for violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-49. - Naming system. 
    All new and existing streets that serve two (2) or more properties shall be named regardless of whether the ownership is public or private. All private streets that serve one or two (2) properties shall be named upon request of a street owner and approval of the authorized city official. A "street" refers to any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way, or similar paved, gravel or dirt thoroughfare. "Property" refers to any property on which a more or less permanent structure has been erected or could be placed. All proposed names for streets within proposed new subdivisions shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning division and the planning commission. A street name assigned by the city shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the street as a public way. 
The following criteria shall govern the naming system of new streets: 
(1)  No two (2) streets shall be given the same name within the local 911 service area (e.g., no Pine Road and Pine Lane); 
(2)  No two (2) streets should have similar-sounding names within the local 911 service area (e.g., Beech Street and Peach Street); 
(3)  Each street shall have the same name throughout its entire length. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Sec. 26-50. - Naming of streets outside of subdivisions. 
    Property owners or developers of property associated with new or unnamed streets or access easements may petition the city to name such streets. In some cases, an existing named street may be considered for renaming if it is deemed by the zoning administrator that such renaming is necessary for efficient operation of the 911 system. The following procedures and criteria shall be followed: 
Applications by individuals or developers for naming or renaming of streets shall be made to the planning and zoning division office, and shall include the proposed street name and a vicinity location map. The proposed street name must be reviewed and approved by the zoning administrator based upon a public need for the renaming. 
(Ord. No. 10,701, 4-27-07) 
Chapter 27 - PLUMBING CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; gas, Ch. 17; housing code, Ch. 19; sewers and drains, Ch. 30; permit to break streets,  31-21; water, Ch. 36. 
State Law reference- Building codes, R.S. 33:4771 et seq.;state uniform construction code, R.S. 40:1730.21 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 27-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the plumbing code of the city, and may be cited as such. 
(Code 1958,  22-12) 
Sec. 27-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings assigned to them below: 
    Apprentice plumber: A person engaged in learning the plumbing trade by working under the direct supervision of a registered plumber licensed by the state, and in the employ of a plumbing contractor, and shall be indentured in the five-year apprentice training program approved by state laws relating to apprenticeship. 
    Journeyman plumber: A natural person who possesses the necessary qualifications and knowledge to install, alter, and/or repair plumbing systems. 
    Master plumber: A master plumber is a natural person who possesses the necessary qualifications and knowledge to plan, lay out and supervise the installation, alteration, and/or repair of plumbing systems. 
    Plumbing: The work or business of installing in buildings and on premises the pipes, fixtures, and other apparatus for supplying water and for removing liquid and water-borne wastes. 
(Code 1958,  22-14) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 37:1377. 
Sec. 27-3. - Condemned fixtures. 
    Whenever any plumbing fixtures in any building or serving any building are condemned by the planning and urban development director on account of their foul, unwholesome, imperfect or unsanitary condition, they shall be replaced by such fixtures and equipment as is required by this chapter. 
(Code 1958,  22-34) 
Sec. 27-4. - Unsafe conditions. 
    In any instance on which the planning and urban development director finds that the sewage disposal or plumbing equipment or fixtures in any premises are in such condition that the health or the safety of the general public or the occupants of the premises, is in danger, he shall be authorized to cause such premises to be immediately vacated and to remain so vacated until the condition or conditions creating the danger are corrected and such danger to the general public or occupants of the premises eliminated. Any person who refuses to obey an order of the planning and urban development director to vacate premises which the inspector has found to be in dangerous condition as set forth above shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958,  22-35) 
Sec. 27-5. - Plans and specifications. 
(a)  The plumbing, drainage and ventilation of all buildings, both public and private, erected in the city shall be executed in accordance with plans previously approved by the planning and urban development director in writing. Such approval shall be given if such plans and specifications comply with the provisions of this chapter. Suitable drawings and descriptions of such plumbing and drainage and means of ventilation shall, in each case, be submitted and placed on file in the office of the planning and urban development director. 
(b)  Plans for plumbing work filed with the planning and urban development director for approval shall state within what time the work therein described will be begun. If such work is not begun under the approved plans within the time specified, such plans must again be presented to the director for consideration. Plans shall be approved upon the condition that such approval expires by its own limitation within six (6) months from the date of the permit unless the work under it is then in progress. Plans and specifications shall be approved or rejected within five (5) days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays, from the date of filing with the director. 
(c)  Plans of the plumbing and drainage of buildings must be drawn in ink on heavy paper or on tracing cloth, seven (7) by eleven (11) inches, or multiples thereof. One vertical drawing is sufficient for a building when it can be made to show all the work; if such work cannot be shown on one drawing, others must be submitted. Where the buildings are situated together on one street and the plumbing is the same in each, the plans for one building in the block will be sufficient. 
(d)  Every plan must be accompanied by a clear description thereof, or abstract of the specifications, on a blank prescribed and supplied for that purpose by the planning and urban development director, showing location and street number of each building, and the size, kind and weight of pipes, and the kind of traps, closets and fixtures to be used in such building. 
(e)  No change or modification of plans will be permitted unless such change or modification is submitted to the planning and urban development director, approved and placed on file, as in the case of original work, and no alteration of the original plan will be allowed except on the written application of the owner of the property or his duly authorized agent. 
(Code 1958,  22-28) 
Sec. 27-6. - Adoption of Chapter XIV, Plumbing, of state sanitary code. 
    Chapter XIV of the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana, entitled "plumbing," as amended through March 20, 1984, and as it may be amended in the future, is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as fully as if set out at length herein, except such portions as may be specifically hereinafter deleted, modified, excepted or amended. The provisions of said Chapter XIV of the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana, entitled "plumbing," shall constitute and be the standards for all plumbing installations, equipment, fixtures and appliances in the city, except such portions as may be specifically hereinafter deleted, modified, excepted or amended herein. A copy of said Chapter XIV of the Sanitary Code of the State of Louisiana, entitled "plumbing," is on file in the office of the clerk of the city council for the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(Code 1958,  22-13; Ord. No. 9258, 11-26-91) 
Charter reference- Adoption of technical codes by reference,  2-15. 
State Law reference- Adoption by reference authorized, R.S. 33:1368 et seq. 
Sec. 27-7. - Plumbing code adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted the Louisiana Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition, as promulgated by the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals except such portions as may be hereinafter specifically deleted, modified, excepted or amended and codified into a subsequent yearly edition. 
(Ord. No. 10,559, 1-24-06; Ord. No. 11,494, 8-26-14) 
Secs. 27-8-27-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 27-21-27-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PLUMBING BOARD 

Sec. 27-31. - Created. 
    There is hereby created a plumbing board. 
(Code 1958,  22-15(a)) 
Sec. 27-32. - Members. 
(a)  The plumbing board shall consist of one master plumber, one journeyman plumber, the planning and urban development director or his delegate, the city engineer and three (3) members who are not city employees and who are not connected with the plumbing business. All members of the plumbing board, other than the ex officio members, shall be appointed by the council. 
(b)  Appointments to the plumbing board shall be for terms of one year's duration, subject to the pleasure of the city council. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
(Code 1958,  22-15(a), (b), (e)) 
Sec. 27-33. - Meetings. 
    A majority of the members of the plumbing board shall constitute a quorum. The board shall meet on call of the chairman or a majority of its members. 
(Code 1958,  22-15(c), (d)) 
Sec. 27-34. - Records. 
    A minute book shall be kept in which shall be recorded all business and transactions of the plumbing board. 
(Code 1958,  22-15(f)) 
Sec. 27-35. - Chairman. 
    The planning and urban development director or his delegate shall be the chairman of the plumbing board. 
(Code 1958,  22-15) 
Sec. 27-36. - Functions. 
    The plumbing board which shall constitute and act as a board of examiners to conduct all examinations required by this chapter and which shall perform such other functions as are imposed on it by ordinance. 
(Code 1958,  22-15(a)) 
Secs. 27-37-27-43. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PERMITS 

Sec. 27-44. - Required. 
(a)  Before starting any plumbing work covered by this chapter the plumber who is to do the work must obtain a permit from the planning and urban development director to do such work. Permits must be obtained for all extensions, alterations or other work to be done in connection with the house drain, the plumbing or the water supply in old buildings, except for minor repairs. "Minor repairs" shall mean stopping leaks in pipes, traps and cocks or faucets; opening up waste pipes, traps and drains through cleanouts only; and repairing broken fixtures and pipes. 
(b)  No property owner shall cause or permit any connection to be made to any drain, soil or water pipe, or to any pipe connected thereto, before the person doing such work shall have first obtained a permit from the planning and urban development director to do the same. The mere fact that such work has been done shall be considered prima facie evidence that such property owner authorized the same to be done without such permit. 
(Code 1958,  22-26, 22-27, 22-30(d)) 
Sec. 27-45. - Application. 
    A plumbing permit application shall be filed in triplicate on blanks furnished by the planning and urban development director. One of such copies shall be issued to the person applying for the permit, one shall be issued to the appropriate city department or agency, and one shall be retained by the director. 
(Code 1958,  22-29(a)) 
Secs. 27-46-27-53. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - INSPECTIONS 

Sec. 27-54. - Applications for inspection. 
    Applications for plumbing inspections must be filed at the office of the planning and urban development director by the plumber, on blanks furnished by the city. Applications for roughing-in inspections must be made when roughing-in is complete (this includes water supply, unless the same is exposed on the walls or the ceiling), and before any of the work is covered up or made inaccessible to the director. For sewer inspections, applications must be made, stating the time when the sewer will be complete and before the same has been covered. For final inspections, applications must be made when all fixtures are complete and before the house drain is connected or any portion of the system is used. 
(Code 1958,  22-30(b)) 
Sec. 27-55. - Plumbing fees. 
    The following fees shall be paid to the city for the inspection of plumbing fixtures, buildings connections or work, as indicated: 
Permit fee ..... $ 75.00 
For each fixture/miscellaneous drains ..... 10.00 
Convenience re-inspection fee ..... 20.00 
Re-inspection fee for initial inspection failure: 
First re-inspection ..... $ 35.00 
Second re-inspection ..... 50.00 
Third and subsequent re-inspections ..... 75.00 
per re-inspection until 
inspection is passed 
Fees are to be assessed and collected prior to issuance of final certificate of occupancy. No final certificate of occupancy or final plumbing inspection certificate shall be issued for a project with outstanding fees. 
Grease trap/oil separator ..... $ 25.00 
Penalty fees: 
First offense ..... $ 75.00 
Second offense ..... 250.00 
Third offense ..... 500.00 
and suspension of Monroe 
occupational license for one year 
Fees to be collected per this section: 
Buildings, move from one property to another (not to include sewer tap, inspection fee or added fixtures) ..... $ 50.00 
Single-family ..... 50.00 
Multifamily: first unit ..... 50.00 
Each additional unit ..... 25.00 
Minimum inspection ..... 20.00 
Moving fixtures ..... 10.00 
Extra sewer connections, within property lines: 
Residential ..... $ 25.00 
Commercial ..... 40.00 
For the issuance of a permit for underground sprinkler systems, the following fees shall be charged: 
Domestic backflow preventer ..... $ 60.00 
Irrigation backflow preventer ..... 60.00 
Fire main backflow preventer ..... 60.00 
(Code 1958,  22-29(c); Ord. No. 7252, 3-10-81; Ord. No. 10, 197, 4-9-02; Ord. No. 10,470, 3-22-05; Ord. No. 11,610, 9-8-15; Ord. No. 11,855, 5-8-18) 
Sec. 27-56. - Inspection of plumbing in relocated buildings. 
    When a building is moved from one location to another, the planning and urban development director shall make such generally recognized tests as may be necessary to insure that the plumbing and fixtures in said building comply with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1958,  22-30(e)) 
Sec. 27-57. - Presence of plumber. 
    All plumbing work must be tested by the plumber in the presence of the planning and urban development director before it is accepted. When it is inconvenient or impracticable to test the entire work at one time, it may be tested in sections, but each new portion tested must include all portions of the work previously tested. 
(Code 1958,  22-30) 
Secs. 27-58-27-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PLUMBERS[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- State regulation of plumbers, R.S. 37:1361 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 27-61. - Persons eligible to do plumbing work. 
    No person shall do, or be allowed to do, plumbing work unless he is a master plumber or a journeyman plumber working under the supervision and control of such a master plumber, or an apprentice plumber working under the direct supervision and control of a master plumber or a journeyman plumber; provided that a journeyman plumber, or an apprentice plumber working under the direct supervision and control of a journeyman plumber, shall be allowed to do and engage in the business of doing, the installation, removal, alteration and repair of any kind of plumbing with respect to residential buildings only, including single and multi-family residences and apartments, but not including hotels and motels. 
(Code 1958,  22-16) 
Sec. 27-62. - Special permits. 
    Engineers of buildings, firemen or porters, and general workmen around hotels, motels, factories, office buildings and other industrial and business establishments will not be allowed to do any plumbing work covered by this chapter, except the repairing of leaks and unstopping of pipes where it is not necessary to remove any part of the work or fixtures. Such parties may by special permit issued by the planning and urban development director, do pipe fitting mentioned in such permit in connection with water pipes. 
(Code 1958,  22-27) 
Sec. 27-63. - Place of business sign, etc. 
    Every licensed master plumber must have and maintain an established place of business and have a sign displayed and shall have someone in attendance to receive complaints or notices from the planning and urban development director or the plumbing board and where he can be contacted by patrons. 
(Code 1958,  22-23) 
Sec. 27-64. - Unauthorized use of name. 
    No person holding a master plumber's certificate or a journeyman plumber's license and no firm or corporation holding a certificate authorizing it to do plumbing work within the city shall allow his or its name to be used by any other person, firm or corporation, directly or indirectly either to obtain permits, to send in notices, to make returns, or to do any work under his or its certificate or license. The plumbing board may suspend or revoke any master plumber's certificate or the certificate of any firm or corporation authorizing it to do business in the city in the event such person, firm or corporation allows the use of his or its name as aforesaid, and may issue an order prohibiting any journeyman plumber from doing any further work within the city in the event such journeyman plumber violates the provisions of this section. 
(Code 1958,  22-24) 
Sec. 27-65. - Journeyman to register state license. 
    No journeyman plumber shall do plumbing work in the city unless he has first registered his state license with the planning and urban development director. 
(Code 1958,  22-18) 
Sec. 27-66. - Certificate fee for journeyman plumbers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any journeyman plumber who is not working under the supervision and control of a master plumber to engage in the business of installing, removing, altering and repairing any kind of plumbing with respect to residential buildings, in addition to registering his state license with the city as required by this division, such journeyman plumber has paid an annual certificate fee to the city of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). Each such certificate issued to a journeyman shall expire on December 31 following its issuance, and, if a renewal certificate fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) is not paid by March 1 of the succeeding year, a penalty of two dollars ($2.00) per month or fraction thereof, from March 1 until paid, shall be due and payable in addition to the certificate fee. Any journeyman plumber holding such a certificate who does not pay the renewal certificate fee shall not be entitled to a permit to do any residential plumbing work within the city until such fee is paid. This fee shall be in addition to the annual occupational license levied by the city on any business carried on by plumbing contractors. 
(Code 1958,  22-22) 
Sec. 27-67. - Qualifying agents for firms and corporations engaged in plumbing work; filing statement. 
(a)  Any firm or corporation wishing to engage in plumbing work in the city shall file with the plumbing board a statement showing the composition of such firm, or, if it is a corporation, a copy of its charter and a statement showing its present officers. At least one active member of such firm, officer of such corporation, or employee of such firm or corporation shall be a master plumber who has been issued a certificate by the plumbing board and shall be designated in writing to represent such firm or corporation in its dealings with the planning and urban development director and the plumbing board. Upon making a satisfactory filing and designation, such firm or corporation shall be issued a certificate by the plumbing inspector authorizing it to do work within the city. Should the designated representative of such firm or corporation cease to represent it actively in its dealings with the director and the plumbing board or cease to be a firm member, corporate officer, or employee of such firm or corporation, the certificate of such firm or corporation shall be void until a new filing as above described has been made, and a new representative has been designated to represent such firm or corporation. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, any firm or corporation wishing to engage in plumbing work in the city, with respect to residential buildings only, shall file with the director a statement showing the composition of such firm, or, if it is a corporation, a copy of its charter and a statement showing its present officers. At least one active member of such firm, officer of such corporation, or employee of such firm or corporation shall be a journeyman plumber as defined in this article and shall be designated in writing to represent such firm or corporation in its dealings with the director and the plumbing board. Upon making a satisfactory filing and designation, such firm or corporation shall be issued a certificate by the director authorizing it to do residential plumbing work within the city. Should the designated representative of such firm or corporation cease to actively represent it in its dealings with the director and the plumbing board or cease to be a firm member, corporate officer, or employee of such firm or corporation, the certificate of such firm or corporation shall be void until a new filing as above described has been made, and a new representative has been designated to represent such firm or corporation. 
(c)  All work done by any firm or corporation issued a certificate by the department director in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be supervised and controlled by the master plumber or journeyman plumber named in the designation filed with the planning and urban development director. 
(Code 1958,  22-19) 
Sec. 27-68. - Revocation of certificates, suspension or revocation of journeyman's right to work. 
(a)  The certificate of any master plumber or the certificate of any firm or corporation authorized to do plumbing work in the city may be suspended for not more than one year or revoked by the plumbing board for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Noncompliance with or violation of any provision of this chapter or any lawful order or requirement of the plumbing inspector or the plumbing board. 
(2)  Conviction of a felony in the courts of the United States or any state thereof. 
(3)  Failure to promptly pay any fee or charge due under this Code. 
(4)  The making of material representations or statements known to be fraudulent or false to any person for whom plumbing work is being performed or to the plumbing inspector with respect to any such plumbing work. 
(5)  Unreasonable delay in completing, installing, or repairing any plumbing work or fixtures. 
(6)  Refusal to install fixtures or appliances which comply with this article or discrimination against any line of fixtures or appliances complying with this chapter. 
(b)  Before any certificate is suspended by the plumbing board: 
(1)  Notice of the particular charge or charges must be given, in writing, to the certificate holder; 
(2)  A public hearing must be held; and 
(3)  The certificate holder must be given an opportunity to answer the charges and to offer any evidence, written or oral, on such charges. 
The certificate holder shall have the right to be represented by an attorney of his own choice and shall have the right to cross examine any witnesses. The plumbing board, through its chairman or secretary, shall have the right to summon witnesses, and the board may have all testimony recorded. The chairman or secretary of the board shall be empowered to administer oaths or affirmations to all witnesses appearing before the board. 
(c)  If the certificate of any person, firm or corporation is revoked, the board shall not authorize the issuance to such person, firm or corporation of a new certificate until at least one year following the date of revocation, and a new application must be filed, a new examination fee must be paid, and a new examination must be taken and passed before a new certificate may be issued to any person whose certificate has been revoked. The board shall have the right, without assigning any cause, to refuse to issue a certificate to any person, firm or corporation whose certificate has been previously revoked by action of the plumbing board. 
(d)  The plumbing board may issue an order suspending or revoking the right of any journeyman plumber to perform plumbing work within the city for any of the reasons hereinabove specified and in accordance with the provisions of this section pertaining to the suspension or revocation of the certificate of a master plumber. If the board issues an order suspending or prohibiting any journeyman plumber from doing plumbing work within the city, such journeyman plumber shall not thereafter be permitted to do any plumbing work within the city unless and until the period of suspension has expired or the board revokes its prohibitory order, as appropriate. 
(Code 1958,  22-25) 
Secs. 27-69-27-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CERTIFICATION OF MASTERS 

Sec. 27-76. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the plumbing business as a master plumber without a current and valid certificate issued by the plumbing board. 
(Code 1958,  22-21) 
Sec. 27-77. - Fee. 
    No person shall be issued a master plumber's certificate unless he pays a fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) to the city. 
(Code 1958,  22-21) 
Sec. 27-78. - Examination. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, any person who desires a master plumber certificate shall: 
(1)  Submit an application on forms provided by the plumbing board; 
(2)  Certify that he will pay the fees and conform to the rules and regulations of the plumbing board if his application is favorably acted upon; 
(3)  Pay a fifty dollar ($50.00) examination fee to the city; and 
(4)  Stand and satisfactorily pass an examination conducted by the plumbing board. 
(b)  The application forms prepared by the plumbing board shall require, among other information, the following: 
(1)  The name, age and residence address of the applicant; 
(2)  The number of years the applicant has been engaged in plumbing work; 
(3)  The name of the last employer of the applicant; and 
(4)  References as to the ability and reliability of the applicant. 
(c)  An examination of an applicant for a certificate as a master plumber shall be conducted by the plumbing board and shall be oral or written, or both, shall be given in a fair and impartial manner, and shall be sufficient to determine that the applicant has the necessary qualifications, knowledge and ability to properly plan, draw, lay out and supervise the installation, alteration and repair of plumbing systems and that the applicant has a proper knowledge and understanding of the plumbing regulations of the city. Examinations may be given by any four (4) members of the plumbing board. A percentage of seventy (70) shall be the minimum passing score on the examination, and any person who fails to make such score shall not be eligible for another examination for a period of six (6) months from the date of his last examination. 
(Code 1958,  22-17) 
Sec. 27-79. - Age requirements. 
    Any person applying to be designated as a master plumber shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
(Code 1958,  22-17(b)) 
Sec. 27-80. - Issuance. 
(a)  Each application for a master plumber's certificate shall be acted upon by the plumbing board with all reasonable speed. If the plumbing board finds that an applicant has satisfactorily passed the examination for the designation of master plumber, and such board does not find such applicant unqualified for any of the causes mentioned in this article, then, upon payment by the applicant to the city of the required certificate fee, the plumbing inspector shall issue a certificate to such person showing that he is qualified as a master plumber. 
(b)  The plumbing board may find an applicant unqualified for a master plumber's certificate for one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Furnishing on his application to the board any false or intentionally misleading information, or failing to respond completely to any question or request for information contained in such application. 
(2)  Conviction of the applicant on a felony charge in the courts of the United States or any state thereof. 
(3)  The existence of record of unsatisfied money judgments against such person. 
(4)  Revocation by the proper authority of this state or any other state or city of a master's certificate of competency in the field of plumbing held by the applicant. 
(Code 1958,  22-17(e)-(g)) 
Sec. 27-81. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  Each master plumber's certificate shall expire on December 31 following its issuance, and, if a renewal certificate fee of twenty dollars ($20.00) is not paid by March 1 of the succeeding year, a penalty of two dollars ($2.00) per month, or fraction thereof, from March 1 until paid shall be due and payable in addition to the certificate fee. 
(b)  A certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be renewable, without examination by March 1 of the year following its expiration. 
(Code 1958,  22-17(f), 22-21) 
Sec. 27-82. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7405, adopted June 8, 1982, repealed  22-20 of the 1958 Code, included herein as  27-82, relating to nonresident master plumbers. 
Chapter 28 - POLICE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Police department,  4-04. 
Cross reference- Bicycle registration,  8-21 et seq.; criminal code, Ch. 12; intimidation by officers,  12-67; false report of crime,  12-87(5); resisting an officer,  12-181; escape,  12-182; impersonation of officer,  12-224; traffic, Ch. 33; enforcement of provisions relative to vehicles for hire,  35-2. 
State Law reference- Police departments, R.S. 33:1941 et seq. 

Sec. 28-1. - Incentive pay program. 
(a)  The program herewith established shall be known as the "Monroe Police Department Incentive Pay Program". 
(b)  The objective of the incentive pay program herein established is to raise the educational level of the officers of the city police department in order to assure the continuance of a modern, efficient and effective department. 
(c)  All officers now or hereafter serving on active duty with, and as regular, fulltime employees of, the city police department shall be eligible to participate in this program. Personnel employed primarily to perform purely clerical or nonenforcement duties, including but not necessarily restricted to the following types of duties or persons: secretaries, filing clerks, office machine operators, switchboard operators, stenographers, meter maids, school crossing guards, dog pound keepers, and similar employees of the department shall not be eligible to participate in this program. 
(d)  The new incentive pay program shall commence January 16, 1980. This program shall include all new and old classified employees of the police department subsequent to its enactment, and shall thereafter progress in annual increments upon each anniversary of the employee's employment with the police department, as follows: 
(1)  Upon his employment with the department, a classified employee with one year of college credits (32 semester hours) or more in an approved curriculum shall be paid fifty dollars ($50.00) per month above his base pay. 
(2)  Upon the first anniversary of his employment with the department, a classified employee with two (2) years of college credits (64 semester hours) or more in an approved curriculum, shall be paid one hundred dollars ($100.00) per month above his base pay. 
(3)  Upon the second anniversary of his employment with the department, a classified employee with a Bachelor's Degree in an approved curriculum shall be paid one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) per month above his base pay. 
(4)  Upon the third anniversary of his employment with the department, a classified employee with a Master's Degree in an approved curriculum shall be paid two hundred dollars ($200.00) per month above his base pay. 
No classified employee shall be paid more than one of the above categories of incentive pay at the same time. All classified employees who are now members or who are hereafter employed by the police department shall be allowed credit, for purposes of computing incentive pay, for college work completed prior to the initiation of this program and for all college work completed prior to employment by the department if such college work otherwise meets the standards herein specified or authorized to be established by action of the chief of police. 
(e)  An employee must present to the chief of police a transcript from an accredited college which satisfactorily evidences the successful completion of the requisite college work to entitle him to the receipt of incentive pay. At any time that an employee has earned sufficient college credits to entitle him to the receipt of a higher rate of incentive pay, a new transcript must be presented to the chief of police. 
(f)  The college credits for which credit will be allowed in the incentive pay program must be in courses required in an accredited degree curriculum, other than the following degree curriculums. Home Economics, Library Science, Pharmacy, Medical Technology, Music and Nursing. However, upon petition of an officer, the chief of police is hereby empowered to waive this requirement and allow credit for purposes of this program for one or more courses in the above curriculums. 
(g)  College incentive pay shall be considered for the purposes of calculating pension and relief benefits. Deductions for pension and relief purposes shall be made from the incentive pay of all officers and the city shall appropriate said deduction as the employees' contribution to the police and relief fund. 
(h)  The chief of the police department is hereby empowered to promulgate such rules as he may deem advisable to provide for proper administration of the police department incentive pay program so long as such rules do not conflict with the provisions of this section. Such rules may include, but shall not be limited to, provisions concerning what colleges shall be deemed accredited for purposes of this program, what college credits shall be accepted for purposes of this program, what courses shall be and/or shall not be accepted for purposes of this program. 
(i)  In the event any question should arise as to the interpretation of any provision of this section or of any rule promulgated under the authority of this section, the decision of the chief of police as to the correct interpretation thereof shall be final, subject only to the power of the mayor to overrule such decision. 
(Code 1958,  20-15; Ord. No. 7038, 12-12-78; Ord. No. 7130, 2-26-80; Ord. No. 7179, 10-14-80) 
Sec. 28-2. - Supervisory personnel. 
(a)  Supervisors employed in the police department of the city shall include those individuals who occupy the ranks of sergeant, lieutenant, captain, major, assistant chief and chief. 
(b)  No individual employed as a supervisor in the police department shall be prohibited from becoming a member of a labor organization, but the city shall not recognize any employee organization as the collective bargaining representative for the supervisors employed in the police department and said supervisors shall be excluded from any bargaining unit for which an employee organization is the recognized collective bargaining representative. 
(c)  The salary increases of the individuals employed in the police department as supervisors, i.e., sergeants, lieutenants, captains and majors shall be governed by the following provisions: 
(1)  Each supervisor of the police department employed in the position, grade or class of sergeant shall receive salary increases in an amount equal to one hundred twenty (120) percent of any salary increase received by the individuals employed in the classification of patrolman who have completed their second year of active continuous service in the police department. 
(2)  Each supervisor of the police department employed in the position, grade or class of lieutenant shall receive salary increases in an amount equal to one hundred thirty (130) percent of any salary increase received by the individuals employed in the classification of patrolman who have completed their second year of active continuous service in the police department. 
(3)  Each supervisor of the police department employed in the position, grade or class of captain shall receive salary increases in an amount equal to one hundred forty (140) percent of any salary increase received by the individuals employed in the classification of patrolman who have completed their second year of active continuous service in the police department. 
(4)  Each supervisor of the police department employed in the position, grade or class of major shall receive salary increases in an amount equal to one hundred fifty (150) percent of any salary increase received by the individuals employed in the classification of patrolman who have completed their second year of active continuous service in the police department. 
(Code 1958,  20-16; Ord. No. 7039,  3, 12-12-78) 
Chapter 29 - RAILROADS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses,  12-21 et seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31. 

Sec. 29-1. - Obstructing crossings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railway company to obstruct or cause to be obstructed the public street crossings and causeways, within the city limits, with cars or engines of any description whatever, and they are hereby required to clear such crossing within five (5) minutes after the obstruction is so placed. 
(Code 1958,  21-4) 
Sec. 29-2. - Speed limit. 
    The maximum rate of speed at which any railroad locomotive, train, car or handcar may be driven or run by any person or persons along and on any railroad or tracks within the corporate limits of the city shall not exceed thirty (30) miles per hours; and any railroad engineer or engine-driver or conductor or other person who shall drive or run, or cause the same to be done, any railroad locomotive, train, car or handcar at a greater rate of speed than thirty (30) miles per hour within the city limits shall be responsible and punishable for such violation. 
(Code 1958,  21-8) 
Sec. 29-3. - Signals and flagging when switching over public crossings. 
    No car shall be kicked or dropped over a public crossing in the city. When cars are shoved, kicked, or dropped in a switching movement over a public crossing, a member of the crew must protect the crossing from a point on the ground near the center of the crossing and each movement over the crossing shall be made only on his signal except: 
(1)  When crossing is protected by manually controlled gates, watchman, or manually controlled crossing signals and they are functioning (automatic flasher lights and automatic gates are not within this exception); 
(2)  When cars are shoved over crossing and lead car is occupied by member of the crew and the movement is made only on his signal, and when the lead car is equipped with breakhose or pipe and air whistle from which brakes can be applied and whistle blown. 
(Code 1958,  21-3) 
Sec. 29-4. - Installation and maintenance of crossings. 
(a)  The owner of any railroad track or tracks, occupying any portion of any street within the city, shall install, occupy and maintain, in an efficient, proper, safe, suitable and good condition, appropriate crossing or crossings of the tracks of such railroad. The installation, occupation and maintenance of such crossings shall be at all times at the expense of the owner of the railroad track or tracks, and the type of construction, material, width and other specifications for such crossings shall be prescribed by the city engineer. 
(b)  Whenever it is deemed necessary by the city council that a crossing be installed, or that any existing crossing be repaired, renewed or replaced, the mayor shall give notice to the owner of the railroad track or tracks to do the work deemed necessary, as aforesaid, such notice to be in writing and to set forth the work deemed necessary, as aforesaid, and in the event the owner of the railroad track or tracks aforesaid fails to comply with the requirements of such notice within the period of time prescribed in such notice, the mayor shall have the work done, at the expense of the owner or owners of the railroad track or tracks aforesaid. 
(Code 1958,  21-2) 
Sec. 29-5. - Maintenance of drains and ditches. 
(a)  All railroad companies operating within the corporate limits of the city are required to keep all drains and ditches along both sides of their right-of-way, within the corporate limits, open and in such condition that they will carry off all water flowing into them, and shall not permit water to stand in the same. 
(b)  Whenever any drain or ditch of any railroad company within the city shall become filled up or obstructed, so that it will not permit water to flow along the same, it shall be the duty of the city engineer to give written notice, by service thereof by any police officer, to the section foreman in charge of the track in the city, which notice shall direct that the ditch or drain shall be open or cleaned out or the obstruction removed within ten (10) days from the service of said notice; and in the event of the failure of the company to open or clean out such drain or ditch or to remove the obstruction without delay, the city shall cause the same to be done at the expense of the railroad company, to be recovered by suit in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1958,  21-7) 
Sec. 29-6. - Rights-of-way maintenance and clearing of obstructions. 
    All railroad companies operating within the corporate limits of the city shall keep both sides of their rights-of-way, within the corporate limits, cut and free of all weeds and grass or other obnoxious matter, growing, lying or being in or upon any such rights-of-way. Such cutting and removal shall be done as often as necessary in order to insure that such rights-of-way do not constitute a hazard to the health of the citizens of the community; provided, however, that it shall be unlawful for any railroad company to start or set any fire in order to burn off weeds, grass or other obnoxious matter on said rights-of-way. 
(Code 1958,  21-7.1; Ord. No. 7170, 9-23-80) 
Sec. 29-7. - Responsibility for violations. 
    Any conductor, flagman, engineer, railroad official or other person in charge of any train, engine or cars of any railroad within the limits of the city who shall violate the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1958,  21-10; Ord. No. 7170, 9-23-80) 
Chapter 29.5 - SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 29.5-1. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the city, and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the deleterious secondary effects of sexually-oriented businesses within the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content or reasonable access to any communicative materials, including sexually-oriented materials. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually-oriented materials protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution or the corresponding provisions of the Louisiana Constitution, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually-oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-2. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the sections hereunder, whether or not such terms are capitalized in the text of the chapter, shall have the meanings therein respectively ascribed to them unless a different meaning is clearly indicated by the context: 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five (5) or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store means a commercial establishment that devotes twenty-five (25) per cent or more of its interior sales or display space to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others. 
The term "adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store" shall also include a commercial establishment which regularly maintains one or more adult arcades. Floor space shall be measured by dividing the floor space where patrons or customers of the establishment are permitted where the primary sales or displays are of the materials described above by the total floor space where patrons or customers of the establishment are permitted regardless of the materials. 
    Adult cabaret means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle club, or other similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which features persons who appear semi-nude. Regularity of such appearances is not required for an establishment to constitute an adult cabaret; a single occasion of such appearance or appearances shall be sufficient to cause the establishment to be classified as an adult cabaret. 
    Adult motel means a motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which: 
(1)  Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, other photographic reproductions, or live performances which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and which advertises the availability of such material by means of a sign visible from the public right-of-way, or by means of any on or off-premises advertising, including but not limited to, newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television; or 
(2)  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours; or 
(3)  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten (10) hours. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city or his or her designee. 
    Child pornography means material depicting a person under the age of eighteen (18) engaged in sexual activity. Child pornography is not protected by the First Amendment even if it falls short of the legal standard for obscenity and those directly involved in its distribution can be criminally punished. 
    Controlling interest means the power, directly or indirectly, to direct the operation, management or policies of a business or entity, or to vote twenty (20) per cent or more of any class of voting securities or ownership interests of a business. The ownership, control, or power to vote twenty (20) per cent or more of any class of voting securities or ownership interests of a business shall be presumed, subject to rebuttal, to be the power to direct the management, operation or policies of the business. 
    Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon means the dominant or principal theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, the films so described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the exhibition or description of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities. 
    Dual-purpose business means a commercial establishment that devotes at least twenty (20) per cent of its interior sales or display space to the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, digital video discs, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
(2)  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or others; and which does not meet the definition of adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store set forth above. Floor space shall be measured by dividing the floor space where patrons or customers of the establishment are permitted where the primary sales or displays are of the materials described above by the total floor space where patrons or customers of the establishment are permitted regardless of the materials. 
    Employ, employee, and employment describe and pertain to any person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually-oriented business, on a full time, part time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent, or otherwise. Employee does not include an independent contractor or a person working for an independent contractor who performs any service on the premises exclusively for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises, or for the rendition of services incidental to the business of the establishment but not an integral part thereof, such as accounting or legal services. 
    Escort means a person who, for compensation, agrees or offers to engage in any of the following acts: 
(1)  Act as a social companion, guide, or date for another person; 
(2)  Privately model lingerie with the intention of and for the purpose of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer; 
(3)  Privately disrobe for another person with the intention or providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer; 
(4)  Agree to come to a specified location for the purpose of disrobing and for the purpose of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer; 
(5)  To perform an act where one or more of the persons is nude, semi-nude or in a state of nudity or for the purpose of providing sexual stimulation or sexual gratification to the customer. 
    Escort agency means a person or business association who, whether on or off the licensed premises, furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts, as defined herein, for compensation. 
    Establish or establishment means and include any of the following: 
(1)  The opening or commencement of any sexually-oriented business as a new business; 
(2)  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually-oriented business, to any sexually-oriented business; or 
(3)  The addition of any sexually-oriented business to any other existing sexually-oriented business. 
    Exotic dancer means a male or female dancer that performs semi-nude or nude for compensation. 
    Exotic dance service means any business or person who provides exotic dancers to perform at a private residence, business or other location (other than an adult cabaret) within the city limits. 
    Licensee means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually-oriented business has been issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on the application for a sexually-oriented business license. In case of an employee, it shall mean the person in whose name the sexually-oriented business employee card has been issued. 
    Massage center means a commercial business which is not licensed by the state as a massage business and which allows any person, including but not limited to its employees, for compensation, to manipulates soft tissue including effleurage (stroking), patrissage (kneading,) tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, (active/passive range of motion), Shiatsu, and acupressure, either by hand, forearm, elbow, foot, or with mechanical appliances for the purpose of body massage. 
    Massagist means a person that is not licensed by the state as a massage therapist, and who, for compensation, manipulates soft tissue including effleurage (stroking), patrissage (kneading,) tapotement (percussion), compression, vibration, friction, (active/passive range of motion), Shiatsu, and acupressure, either by hand, forearm, elbow, foot, or with mechanical appliances for the purpose of body massage. 
    Nudity or a state of nudity means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, or anus with less than a fully opaque covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple and areola. 
    Obscene is something extremely offensive under contemporary community standards of morality and decency; grossly repugnant to the generally accepted notions of what is appropriate. Under the Supreme Court's three-part test, materially is legally obscene -- and therefore not protected under the First Amendment -- if, taken as a whole, the material: 
(1)  Appeals to the prurient interest in sex, as determined by the average person applying contemporary community standards; 
(2)  Portrays sexual conduct, as specifically defined by the applicable state law, in a patently offensive way; and 
(3)  Lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value. 
    Obscenity means the characteristic or state of being morally abhorrent or socially taboo, especially as a result of referring to or depicting sexual or excretory functions. 
    Operate or cause to operate means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state of doing business. 
    Operator means any person on the premises of a sexually-oriented business who is authorized to exercise overall operational control of the business or who causes to function or who puts or keeps in operation the business. A person may be found to be operating or causing to be operated a sexually-oriented business whether or not that person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the business. 
    Person shall mean individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Pornography means material (such as writings, photographs, or movies) depicting sexual activity or erotic behavior in a way that is designed to arouse sexual excitement. Pornography is protected speech under the First Amendment unless it is determined to be legally obscene. 
    Prostitute means a person who has been convicted of prostitution or prostitution by massage, or who engages in activities, that, if prosecuted, would constitute the criminal offense of prostitution or prostitution by massage under the Louisiana Revised Statutes; provided, however, that a person shall not be considered a prostitute if he or she is not currently engaging in activities, that, if prosecuted, would constitute the criminal offense of prostitution or prostitution by massage under the Louisiana Revised Statutes, and if: 
(1)  More than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for such person's last conviction of prostitution or prostitution by massage, whichever is the later date, if the conviction was for a misdemeanor offense; or 
(2)  More than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for such person's last conviction of prostitution or prostitution by massage, whichever is the later date, if the conviction was for a felony offense. 
    Regularly features or regularly shown means a consistent or substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part of the ongoing business. 
    Semi-nude or state of semi-nudity means a state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the genitals, anus, pubic area, vulva, and nipple and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps or devices. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided that the areola and nipple are not exposed in whole or in part. 
    Semi-nude model studio means any place where a person, who regularly appears in a state of semi-nudity, is provided for money or any form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. It is a defense to prosecution for any violation of this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity or semi-nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 
(1)  By a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
(2)  By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or: 
(3)  In a structure: 
a.  Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; and 
b.  Where, in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least three (3) days in advance of the class. 
    Sexually-oriented business means any establishment that is an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, dual purpose business, escort agency, exotic dance service, or semi-nude model studio as defined in this section. 
    Sexually-oriented entertainment activity means the sale, rental, or exhibition for any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, digital video discs, magazines, periodicals, or live performances which are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or display of specific sexual activity. 
    Specified anatomical areas means the human genitals, anus, and the female breast areola or nipple. 
    Specified criminal activity means any of the following offenses: 
(1)  La. R.S. 14:41-43.5 (rape and sexual battery offenses); La. R.S. 14:80-81.2 (sexual offenses affecting minors); La. R.S. 14:82-86 (offenses concerning prostitution); La. R.S. 14:104-6.1 (offenses concerning disorderly places and obscenity); La. R.S. 14:281-284 (operating places of prostitution, voyeurism); La. R.S. 40:961, et seq. (Uniform Controlled Dangerous Substances Law); engaging in organized criminal activity relating to a sexually-oriented business, specifically La. R.S. 14:230 (money laundering) La. R.S. 33:2845 (tax evasion); criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses; or offenses in other jurisdictions that, if the acts would have been committed in Louisiana, would have constituted any of the foregoing offenses; for which: 
a.  Less than two (2) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense; 
b.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five (5) years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four-month period. 
(2)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
    Specified sexual activity means any of the following: 
(1)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation or sodomy; or 
(2)  Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of the activities described in subsection (1) above. 
    Transfer of ownership or control of a sexually-oriented business means any of the following: 
(1)  The sale, lease, or sublease of the business; 
(2)  The transfer of securities (including interests in a limited liability company or partnership) or other ownership interests which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
(3)  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
    Valid photographic ID means a driver's license, selective service card or other lawful federal or state issued photographic identification, which, on its face, establishes the age and identity of the bearer, and leaves no reasonable doubt as to the authenticity or correctness of the identification. No form of identification mentioned above shall be accepted as proof of age if it is expired, defaced, mutilated or altered. If the identification submitted is a duplicate, the person shall submit additional identification which contains the name, date of birth and photograph of the person. In addition, an educational institution identification card, check cashing identification card, or employee identification card shall not be considered as a valid photographic ID. 
    Video includes image reproduction and display by videotape or any other medium, such as digital video disk or compact disk, that produces moving or still images on a screen, wall, or other similar display. 
    Viewing room shall mean the room, booth, or area where a patron of sexually-oriented business would ordinarily be positioned while watching a film, videocassette, or other video or visual reproduction. 
    Virtual child pornography means material that includes a computer-generated image that appears to be a minor engaged in sexual activity but that in reality does not involve a person under the age of eighteen (18). 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING AND FEES 

Sec. 29.5-3. - License or employee card required. 
(a)  Sexually-oriented business license. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented business in the city without a valid sexually-oriented business license. Separate sexually-oriented business licenses shall be required for each place of business of an operator. 
(2)  An applicant for a sexually oriented business license shall file at the office of the chief of police a completed application made on a form provided by the chief of police which includes an attestation to the authority of the applicant to act. The application shall be signed by the applicant. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the following information and is accompanied by all of the documents required by this section: 
a.  The applicant's full true name and any other names used in the preceding five (5) years. 
b.  Current home address and, if desired by the applicant, another mailing address of the applicant. 
c.  Written proof of age, in the form of a valid photographic ID. 
d.  The business name, location, legal description, mailing address and phone number of the sexually-oriented business. 
e.  The name and business address of the statutory agent or other agent authorized to receive service of process. 
f.  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
g.  A statement whether the applicant, or any entity in which the applicant owns a controlling interest, has had a license or permit to operate a sexually-oriented business or to be an employee of a sexually-oriented business issued by the united states, any state, or by any political subdivision of any state, authorized to issue permits or licenses, revoked within two (2) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against him involving violation of sexually-oriented business ordinances by this or any other state or local government or by the United States within one year prior to the application. 
The information provided pursuant to subsections (a)(2)a-g. of this section shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the chief of police within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(3)  An application for a sexually-oriented business license shall be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but shall be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. Applicants who are required to comply with sections 29.5-13 or 29.5-17 of this chapter shall submit a diagram meeting the requirements of those sections. A valid certificate of occupancy, lease agreement or proof of ownership, articles of incorporation, articles or organization, operating agreement or other instruments indicating the true direct and indirect ownership of the applicant, beneficial or otherwise, evidence of measurement from protected activities, will also be required when making application. 
(4)  If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is an individual, he shall sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a sexually-oriented business is other than an individual, each officer, director, general partner or other person who will participate directly in decisions relating to management and control of the business shall sign the application for a license as applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under section 29.5-4 and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
(5)  The application shall specify the form or forms of sexually-oriented businesses (according to the forms of sexually-oriented businesses described in section 29.5-2 of this chapter) to be operated by the applicant at the location for which the application is submitted. If the application specifies more than one form of sexually-oriented business, the application must meet the restrictions for each form of sexually-oriented business set forth in the application, and the license, if and when issued, shall specify the form or forms of sexually-oriented business for which the license is issued. A licensed sexually-oriented business may not operate any form of sexually-oriented business not set forth in its license. Any application to expand the scope of a sexually-oriented business license shall be treated as a new application insofar as the expansion is concerned. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to permit the operation of more than one form of sexually-oriented business at a single location by a single licensee if such operation at the location would be prohibited by applicable zoning or other land use statutes, laws, ordinances or regulations, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the operation of more than one form of sexually-oriented business at a single location by a single licensee if such operation at the location would be permitted by applicable zoning or other land use statutes, laws, ordinances or regulations. 
(b)  Sexually-oriented business employee card. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any operator of a sexually-oriented business to allow any employee to engage in employment requiring a sexually-oriented business employee card unless such employee is in possession of a sexually-oriented business employee card issued under the authority of this chapter. The license holder shall have such person obtain such a card prior to engaging in employment for which a permit is required by this chapter. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be an employee, as defined in this chapter, of a sexually-oriented business, or for an employee of a dual purpose business who engages in the activities described in section 29.5-18 of this chapter, in the city without a valid sexually-oriented business employee card. 
(3)  An applicant for a sexually-oriented business employee card shall file in person at the office of the chief of police a completed application made on a form provided by the chief of police. The application shall be signed by the applicant. An application shall be considered complete when it contains the following information: 
a.  The applicant's full true name and any other names used in the preceding five (5) years. 
b.  Current home address and, if desired by the applicant, another mailing address of the applicant. 
c.  Written proof of age, in the form of valid photographic ID. 
d.  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted or has pled guilty or nolo contendere to a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified criminal activity involved, including the date, place, and jurisdiction of each as well as the dates of conviction and release from confinement, where applicable. 
e.  A statement whether the applicant has had a license, permit or card to be an employee of a sexually-oriented business issued by the United States, any state, or by any political subdivision of any state, authorized to issue permits or licenses, revoked within two (2) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of court rendered against him involving violation of sexually-oriented business ordinances by this or any other state or local government or by the United States within one year prior to the application. 
The information provided pursuant to subsections a. through e. of this subsection shall be supplemented in writing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the chief of police within ten (10) working days of a change of circumstances which would render the information originally submitted false or incomplete. 
(c)  Fingerprinting. All applicants for licenses or cards under this chapter shall be fingerprinted. 
(d)  Confidentiality of information. The information provided by an applicant in connection with an application for a license or card under this chapter shall be maintained by the chief of police on a confidential basis, except that such information may be disclosed only to law enforcement agencies in connection with a law enforcement or public safety function, or as may be required by governing law or court order. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08; Ord. No. 11,300, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 29.5-4. - Issuance of license or employee card. 
(a)  Sexually-oriented business license. 
(1)  Within thirty (30) days after the filing of a completed application under section 29.5-3 for a sexually-oriented business license, the chief of police shall either approve the application or shall issue to the applicant a letter of intent to deny the application. Each person having a controlling interest in any entity applying for a sexually-oriented business license shall be considered an applicant, and each such person must meet the requirements for the approval of the issuance of the license to the entity. The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a license unless one or more of the following is found to be true: 
a.  An applicant is less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
b.  An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 29.5-3 for issuance of a license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
c.  Any taxes, fees or charges due to the city by the applicant or his or her business have not been paid. 
d.  An applicant has been shown to have committed a violation of section 29.5-6(a), section 29.5-9(b), section 29.5-17(a), (b), or (c) of this chapter within the previous year. 
e.  The sexually-oriented business premises are not in compliance with the interior configuration requirements of this chapter or are not in compliance with locational requirements established in the applicable zoning regulations. 
f.  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter. 
g.  An applicant, or the entity in which an applicant has a controlling interest, is not the owner of the premises or the tenant under a bona fide written lease therefore. 
h.  An applicant, or an entity in which an applicant has a controlling interest, has had a license or permit to operate an sexually-oriented business issued by the United States, any state, or by any political subdivision of a state, authorized to issue permits or licenses, revoked within two (2) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction rendered against him involving violation of sexually-oriented business ordinances by this or any other state or local government or by the United States for two (2) years prior to the application. 
i.  Any applicant is a person interposed for another person who does not meet the requirements for the issuance of a license. A person is considered an interposed person if such person is subsidized, financed or employed by an applicant to operate a sexually-oriented business without disclosing the true and beneficial ownership of the business. 
j.  Any applicant is the spouse of a person whose application for a sexually-oriented business license whose permit or license has been denied or revoked, unless judicially separated; provided, however, that in any such case: 
1.  The application shall not be denied solely on the basis of the age of the ineligible spouse; 
2.  A conviction of the spouse of a specified criminal activity shall not be cause for denial of a license if and only if: 
i.  The applicant had state and local permits prior to the conviction; and 
ii.  The applicant had a regime of separation of property, pursuant to applicable Louisiana law, and is the owner of the premises or has a bone fide written lease therefore, or the owner owns the premises as the applicant's separate property pursuant to applicable state law. 
k.  An applicant has any outstanding warrants for arrest for any crime. 
(2)  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the number of the license issued to the licensee(s), the expiration date, the form or forms of sexually-oriented business covered by the license, and the address of the sexually-oriented business. The sexually-oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time or in the case of a dual purpose business, the sexually-oriented business license shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the area of the adult entertainment materials. 
(b)  Sexually-oriented business employee card. Upon the filing of a completed application for a sexually-oriented business employee card and the payment of a nonrefundable application fee, the chief of police shall issue a temporary card to the applicant, which temporary card shall expire upon the final decision of the city to deny or grant the application, or, if approved, the issuance of the card. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a completed application, the chief of police shall either approve the issuance of a card or issue a written notice of intent to deny a card to the applicant. The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a card unless one or more of the following is found to be true: 
(1)  An applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of age. 
(2)  An applicant has failed to provide information as required by section 29.5-3 for issuance of a card or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the application form. 
(3)  An applicant has been shown to have committed a violation of subsection 29.5-6(a), subsection 29.5-9(b), subsections 29.5-17(a), (b) or (c) of this chapter within the previous year. 
(4)  An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity, as defined in this chapter. 
(5)  An applicant has had a card, license or permit to operate a sexually-oriented business or to be an employee of a sexually-oriented business issued by the United States, any state, or by any political subdivision of a state, authorized to issue cards, permits or licenses, revoked within two (2) years prior to the application, or been convicted or had a judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction rendered against him involving violation of sexually-oriented business ordinances by this or any other state or local government or by the United States for two (2) years prior to the application. 
(6)  An applicant has any outstanding warrants for arrest for any crime. 
An employee card issued pursuant to this section shall contain the card holder's photograph, full name, date of birth, race, sex and fingerprint. A sexually-oriented business employee shall keep the employee's card on his or her person or on the premises where the card holder is then working or performing and shall produce such card for inspection upon request by a law enforcement officer or other city official performing functions connected with the enforcement of this chapter. 
(c)  Issuance of license or card. After any application for a license under this chapter has been approved, it shall be submitted to the director of administrator, or his designee, who shall forthwith issue and sign the license upon payment of the prescribed fee. Any license for a sexually-oriented business shall be restricted to the single location described in the application; that is, each location for a sexually-oriented business must have a separate license. After any application for a sexually-oriented business employee card under this chapter has been approved, the chief of police shall issue the card. A sexually-oriented business employee card shall be good and valid for use on the premises of any sexually-oriented business, provided that the licensee has notified the chief of police of the name and address of the sexually-oriented business employee card holder within five (5) days of the hire date. 
(d)  Effect of failure to act. In the event that a city official fails to act or do a thing within a specified time that is required by this chapter, said failure shall not prevent the exercise of the constitutional rights of an applicant or licensee. If the act required by the city official and/or city council under this chapter, and not completed within the time prescribed hereunder, includes approval of condition(s) necessary for approval by the city of an applicant or licensee's application for sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business employee's license (including renewal), the license shall be deemed granted and the business or employee shall be allowed to commence operations or employment the day after the deadline for the city's actions have passed unless the city official's failure to act is dependent upon an action by the applicant. 
(e)  Appeal from notice of intent to deny. Upon issuance or deemed issuance of a written notice of intent to deny a license or card, the applicant may appeal the denial to the city council by making a written request for appeal to the clerk of council within ten (10) days after issuance or deemed issuance of the written notice of intent to deny the license or card. The applicant's temporary license or card, if any, shall continue in effect during such ten-day period. Upon timely appeal, the applicant's temporary license or card, if any, shall continue in effect until the city council has acted on the applicant's appeal or the applicant has withdrawn his or her appeal. The appeal to the city council shall proceed in accordance with the hearing provisions set forth in this chapter and the rules of the city council. The only issue on the appeal shall be whether the applicant meets the criteria for issuance of the license or card in question; the city council shall not have the authority to waive any of the requirements for the license or card in question. 
(f)  Temporary sexually-oriented business employee card. The temporary sexually-oriented business employee card issued pursuant to this section shall state on its face an expiration date forty-five (45) days after its date of issuance; provided, however, that, if the employee's card application or appeal from a denial of a card or card renewal is continuing at the end of each successive forty-five-day period, at the request of the applicant the chief of police shall issue a renewal temporary card, which shall expire forty-five (45) days after its issuance. Notwithstanding the stated forty-five-day expiration date, the temporary card shall expire upon either the issuance of a permanent card, the withdrawal of any appeal from the denial of issuance of a card, or the termination of any appeal of the denial of issuance of a card. Upon the denial of the issuance of the card (if not appealed), or the unsuccessful or withdrawal of appeal of the denial of issuance of the card, the applicant shall immediately return the temporary card to the chief of police. It shall be unlawful for any applicant to fail to return the temporary card to the chief of police within three (3) business days after the denial of the issuance of the card (if not appealed), or the unsuccessful or withdrawal of appeal of the denial of issuance of the card. 
(g)  Employee card application restriction. Any person denied a sexually-oriented business employee card for reasons listed in subsection (b) shall not be allowed to reapply for a period six (6) months following the notice of denial. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08; Ord. No. 11,300, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 29.5-5. - Fees. 
(a)  Sexually-oriented business license. The licensee shall pay one fee for the issuance of a sexually-oriented business license. If the license covers more than one form of sexually-oriented business as defined in section 29.5-1 of this chapter, the fee for the license shall be the highest fee for any of the forms of sexually-oriented business specified in the license. If the license covers forms of sexually-oriented business that are both type I and type II as set forth below, the fee shall be the fee for the type I license, and both a type I and a type II license shall be issued for such fee. The initial license and annual renewal fees for sexually-oriented business licenses shall be as follows: 
Type I license: $1,000.00. 
Adult cabaret. 
Adult motel. 
Adult motion picture theater. 
Escort agency. 
Exotic dance service. 
Type II license: $100.00. 
Adult arcade. 
Adult bookstore. 
Adult novelty store. 
Adult video store. 
Semi-nude modeling studio. 
Type III license: $100.00. 
Dual purpose business. 
(b)  Sexually-oriented business employee card. The fee for the application for issuance or renewal of a sexually-oriented business employee card shall be twenty dollars ($20.00). The fee is nonrefundable. There is no additional fee or charge upon issuance of the card after the completion of the application or renewal process. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-6. - Inspection. 
(a)  Sexually-oriented businesses and sexually-oriented business employees shall permit officers or agents of the city to inspect the business premises for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the specific regulations of this chapter, during those times when the sexually-oriented business is occupied by patrons or is open for business. This section shall be narrowly construed by the city to authorize reasonable inspections of the licensed premises pursuant to this chapter, but not to authorize a harassing or excessive pattern of inspections. 
(b)  The provisions of this section do not apply to areas of an adult motel which are currently being rented by a customer for use as a permanent or temporary habitation. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-7. - Term; renewal. 
(a)  Sexually-oriented business license. 
(1)  A sexually-oriented business license issued under this chapter shall be dated from the effective date as shown on the license and be valid for one year from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Application for the renewal of such a license shall be filed in the manner provided by this chapter for the initial license on or before sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date as shown on the existing license. The renewal license will be dated from the date of expiration of the existing license. 
(2)  The chief of police shall approve or deny the renewal within thirty (30) days after receipt of the completed renewal application. If approved, the renewal license shall be issued as provided in section 29.5-4. If denied, the chief of police shall issue a written notice of intent to deny the renewal application in the same manner as for the denial of an initial license application, and the appeal rights and any rights to continue operating set forth in section 29.5-4 shall apply to such renewal application. 
(3)  If a licensee fails to complete its renewal application within the time set forth in this section, its application shall be treated as a new application under sections 29.5-3 and 29.5-4 hereof, but the late filing shall not affect the expiration of the previous license; that is, if the license renewal application has not been acted upon prior to the expiration of the existing license, the existing license shall expire, and the business shall not be entitled to operate as a sexually-oriented business unless and until a new license is issued. 
(b)  Sexually-oriented business employee card. 
(1)  A sexually-oriented business employee card issued under this chapter shall be dated from the effective date as shown on the card and be valid for two (2) years from the date of issuance, unless sooner suspended or revoked. Application for the renewal of such a card shall be filed in the manner provided by this chapter for the initial card on or before sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date as shown on the existing card. The renewal card will be dated from the date of expiration of the existing card. 
(2)  The chief of police shall approve or deny the renewal within thirty (30) days after receipt of the completed renewal application. If approved, the renewal card shall be issued as provided in section 29.5-4. If denied, the chief of police shall issue a written notice of intent to deny the renewal application in the same manner as for the denial of an initial card application, and the appeal rights and any rights to continue operating set forth in section 29.5-4 shall apply to such renewal application. The failure of the chief of police to act on an application within the time set forth in this section shall be deemed a denial of the application for a license or card, and shall be deemed to be the issuance of a written notice of intent to deny the license or card applied for. 
(3)  If a card holder fails to complete his or her renewal application within the time set forth in this section, his or her application shall be treated as a new application under sections 29.5-3 and 29.5-4 hereof, but the late filing shall not affect the expiration of the previous card; that is, if the card renewal application has not been acted upon prior to the expiration of the existing card, the existing card shall expire, and the person shall not be entitled to be employed by a sexually-oriented business (or in certain operations of a dual purpose business, as the case may be), unless and until a new card is issued. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08; Ord. No. 11,300, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 29.5-8. - Suspension; fines. 
(a)  The following shall be the causes for the suspension of a sexually-oriented business license: 
(1)  If any applicant who possessed the qualifications for the license at the time of issuance of the license fails to maintain such qualifications during the licensed year; 
(2)  If there was any misstatement or suppression of fact in the application for the license; 
(3)  If the license was granted to any person who is or has been engaged in an sexually-oriented business with a person whose application for a license has been denied or whose license has been revoked; 
(4)  If the license was issued to an interposed person; 
(5)  If the licensee has violated any section of this chapter; 
(6)  If, without a proper license or zoning, any sexually-oriented business licensee allows any person to consume any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises or on any parking lot or open or closed space within or contiguous to the licensed premises; 
(7)  Violation of any controlled, dangerous substance law on the premises of the business holding the sexually-oriented business license; 
(8)  Violation of any obscenity law on the premises of the sexually-oriented business; 
(9)  If the licensee knowingly permits an employee to violate any section of this chapter on the licensed premises. 
(b)  The following shall be the causes for the suspension of a sexually-oriented business employee card: 
(1)  If any applicant who possessed the qualifications for the card at the time of issuance of the license fails to maintain such qualifications during the term of the card; 
(2)  If there was any misstatement or suppression of fact in the application for the card; 
(3)  If the card holder has violated any section of this chapter. 
(c)  The chief of police, with the approval of the mayor and the city attorney, shall issue a written letter of intent to suspend the license or card in question for a period not to exceed six (6) months if the chief of police finds that probable cause exists to believe that grounds exist for the suspension or revocation of a sexually-oriented business license of a sexually-oriented business employee card. The licensee or card holder shall have ten (10) days following the issuance of the letter of intent to suspend the license or card within which to appeal the suspension to the city council. The appeal shall be perfected by making a written request for appeal to the clerk of council. If no appeal is perfected within such time, the license or card holder shall be suspended in accordance with the written letter of intent to suspend the license or card. If the licensee or card holder perfects an appeal, no suspension shall take effect until after the city council has acted on the appeal or the appeal has been withdrawn. The appeal to the city council shall proceed in accordance with the hearing provisions set forth in this chapter and the rules of the city council. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the above, if the chief of police finds that probable cause exists to believe that a licensee or card holder has violated any provision of this chapter or that grounds exist for the suspension of his, her or its license or card, but that the violation or grounds in question are minor in nature, the chief of police, with the approval of the mayor and the city attorney, may impose an administrative fine, payable to the general fund of the city, instead of a request for suspension of the license or card. The chief of police shall report the imposition of the fine to the clerk of council. The fine shall be due and payable within ten (10) days from service of a notice on the licensee or the card holder by certified mail or hand delivery, unless within such [ten-day] period the licensee or the card holder files a written notice of appeal with the clerk of council. If the licensee or card holder perfects an appeal, the time for payment of the fine shall be suspended until after the city council has acted on the appeal or the appeal has been withdrawn. The appeal to the city council shall proceed in accordance with the hearing provisions set forth in this chapter and the rules of the city council. At the hearing, the city council may approve the fine, disapprove the fine, or assess a lower fine. 
(e)  Any fine imposed by the chief of police shall be progressive with each offense during the term of the license or card in question, in accordance with the levels set forth below: 
SOB License SOB Employee Card First fine for conduct during term of license or card $500.00 $100.00 Second fine for conduct during term of license or card $750.00 $250.00 Third fine for conduct during term of license or card $1,000.00 $500.00  
If either a licensee or a card holder has had three (3) fines imposed during the term of his, her or its license or card, if the chief of police, with the approval of the mayor and the city attorney, finds that probable cause exists to believe that grounds exist for suspension or revocation of a license or card issued pursuant to this chapter, he shall request suspension or revocation of the license or card in question. 
(f)  Nothing in this section is intended or shall be construed to require that the chief of police impose one or more fines as a prerequisite to seeking suspension or revocation of any license or card. The chief of police, with the approval of the mayor and the city attorney, may seek suspension or revocation for any grounds set forth in this chapter without the imposition of any fine. 
(g)  Notwithstanding anything in this chapter to the contrary, failure timely to pay any fine imposed under this section shall constitute grounds for suspension or revocation of the license or card of the person who fails to pay such fine. 
(h)  No person whose sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee card has been suspended shall operate a sexually-oriented business or be employed in a sexually-oriented business during the period of such suspension. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-9. - Revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police, with the concurrence of the mayor and the city attorney, shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee card if the chief of police finds that a cause of suspension in section 29.5-8 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months. 
(b)  The chief of police, with the concurrence of the mayor and the city attorney, shall issue a letter of intent to revoke a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee card if the chief of police determines that: 
(1)  The licensee or card holder has knowingly given false information in the application for the sexually-oriented business license or employee card. 
(2)  A licensee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A licensee has knowingly allowed prostitution on the premises; 
(4)  A licensee knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business during a period of time when the license was suspended, or a card holder was employed by a sexually-oriented business or in the sexually-oriented activity area of a dual purpose business during a period when the card holder's sexually-oriented business employee card was suspended; 
(5)  A licensee has knowingly allowed any specified sexual activity to occur in or on the licensed premises; 
(6)  The licensee or card holder has failed to maintain any qualification required for initial issuance or renewal of the license. 
(c)  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
(d)  Nature of revocation. When, after the notice and hearing procedure described in section 29.5-10, a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee card is revoked, the revocation shall continue for two (2) years and the licensee or card holder shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee card for two (2) years from the date revocation becomes effective, provided that, if the conditions of subsection 29.5-10(i) are met, a provisional license or card will be granted pursuant to that section. No person whose sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee card has been revoked shall operate a sexually-oriented business or be employed in a sexually-oriented business, unless and until a new sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee card has been issued to such person pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-10. - Hearing; denial, revocation, and suspension; appeal. 
(a)  Any notice or letter of intent issued under this chapter for the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license under this chapter shall be in writing, shall be addressed to the applicant, licensee or card holder (respondent), shall set forth the grounds therefore, and shall be delivered by personal delivery, or by certified mail. The notification shall be directed to the most current business address or other mailing address on file with the chief of police for the respondent. 
(b)  Upon any appeal to the city council as provided in this chapter, or upon the institution of revocation proceedings, the clerk of council shall notify the respondent in writing of the hearing date on respondent's denial, fine, suspension, or revocation proceeding. Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of respondent's appeal or the institution of revocation proceedings, the city council shall conduct a hearing at which respondent shall have the opportunity to present all of respondent's arguments and to be represented by counsel, and present evidence and witnesses on his or her behalf. The city may also be represented by counsel, and shall bear the burden of proving the grounds for denying, suspending, or revoking the license or card, or imposing the fine. 
(c)  The city council may administer oaths, issue subpoenas for the attendance of witnesses and the production of books, papers, accounts and documents, and examine witnesses and receive testimony at the hearing for denial, suspension or revocation of licenses under this chapter. If any person fails to comply with a subpoena issued by the city council, or if a witness refuses to testify in any matter regarding which he may be lawfully interrogated, such failure or refusal shall constitute contempt of the city council and upon conviction in any court of competent jurisdiction shall be punishable pursuant to section 1-11 of this Code. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, such a conviction of a licensee or card holder shall be cause for suspension or revocation of his or her license or card. 
(d)  If a respondent who has been notified of a hearing for denial, suspension or revocation of a license under this chapter does not appear, the hearing may proceed without him and the city council may consider and dispose of the case, but in all cases the city council, upon its own motion, may grant continuances from time to time. If the continuance is granted to a fixed future date by written consent or in the presence of the respondent or his or her counsel, no further notice of the hearing date need be given. In all other cases the same notice of hearing as in original hearings shall be given. 
(e)  Any hearing shall take no longer than four (4) hours, unless extended to meet the requirements of due process and proper administration of justice. 
(f)  In determining cases involving the suspension or revocation of licenses or cards, or the imposition of an administrative fine, the city council may accept, reject or modify the recommendation or action of the chief of police. The city council shall issue a decision on the issue before it within twenty-one (21) days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, the city council may, instead of or in addition to revocation or suspension of a license issued under the authority of this chapter, impose a fine on the licensee not to exceed the fines set forth in subsection 29.5-8(e). 
(h)  In hearings of the city council which finally result in withholding the issuance of a license or in suspending or revoking a license, the city council shall assess the costs of the hearing to the applicant or licensee. The costs are recoverable by the city council in any appellate proceeding instituted by the applicant or licensee or in any other appropriate judicial proceeding. 
(i)  An applicant or licensee who is aggrieved by a decision of the city council to withhold, suspend or revoke his or her license may, within ten (10) days of the notification of the decision, or within ten (10) days of the deemed action of the city council, take a devolutive appeal to the district court having jurisdiction over his place of business, and on such appeal, the trial shall be de novo. Upon the filing of any court action to appeal, challenge, restrain, or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement of the denial, suspension, or revocation, the city shall immediately issue the aggrieved party a provisional license. The provisional license shall allow the aggrieved party to continue operation of the sexually-oriented business or to continue employment as a sexually-oriented business employee and will expire upon the court's entry of a judgment on the aggrieved party's appeal or other action to restrain or otherwise enjoin the city's enforcement. 
(j)  Sexually-oriented businesses or sexually-oriented business employees operating or working under temporary cards or licenses, provisional cards or licenses, or de facto temporary cards or licenses shall be subject to the provisions of sections 29.5-11 through 29.5-18 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08; Ord. No. 11,300, 6-26-12) 
Sec. 29.5-11. - Transfer of license. 
    A licensee shall not transfer his or her license to another, transfer ownership or control or permit the transfer of ownership or control of the licensee, either voluntarily or by operation of law, or operate a sexually-oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address designated in the sexually-oriented business license application. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
ARTICLE III. - REGULATIONS 

Sec. 29.5-12. - Hours of operation. 
    Any sexually-oriented business may be open for business during any hours permitted under the hours under the regulations for the sale of alcoholic beverages that apply to the business. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-13. - Regulations pertaining to exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos. 
(a)  A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction characterized by an emphasis on the display of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall comply with the following requirements. 
(1)  Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall contain a diagram of the premises showing the location of all manager's stations, viewing rooms, overhead lighting fixtures, video cameras and monitors installed for monitoring purposes and restrooms, and shall designate all portions of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram shall be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and shall be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6) inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared. 
(2)  The application shall be signed by the applicant. 
(3)  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station or viewing room may be made without the prior approval of the chief of police. 
(4)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section. 
(5)  The interior premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one-foot candle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that the premises is occupied by patrons or open for business. 
(6)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no sexual activity occurs in or on the licensed premises. 
(7)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that not more than one person is present in a viewing room at any time. No person shall enter a viewing room that is occupied by another person. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of the operator, and of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that no openings of any kind exist between viewing rooms. No person shall make an attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms. 
(9)  It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee who discovers two (2) or more patrons in a viewing room or discovers any person making or attempting to make an opening of any kind between viewing rooms, to immediately escort such persons from the premises. 
(10)  It shall be the duty of the operator, or of any employee, who discovers an opening of any kind between viewing rooms to immediately secure such rooms, and prevent entry into them by any patron until such time as the wall between the rooms has been repaired to remove the opening. Removal and repairing openings between viewing rooms shall be in a manner that is as structurally substantial as the original wall construction. 
(11)  It shall be the duty of the operator, at least once each business day, to inspect the walls between viewing rooms for openings of any kind, documented by appropriate logs. 
(12)  It shall be the duty of the operator to post conspicuous signs in well-lighted entry areas of the business stating all of the following: 
a.  That no loitering is permitted in viewing rooms. 
b.  That the occupancy of viewing rooms is limited to one person. 
c.  That sexual activity on the premises is prohibited. 
d.  That the making of openings between viewing rooms is prohibited. 
e.  That violators will be required to leave the premises. 
f.  That violations of this section are unlawful. 
(13)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that floor coverings in viewing rooms are nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
(14)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that all wall surfaces and seating surfaces in viewing rooms are constructed of or permanently covered by nonporous easily cleanable material. 
(15)  It shall be the duty of the operator to ensure that premises are clean and sanitary. Such duty shall be fulfilled if the operator complies with the following cleaning procedures: 
a.  The operator shall maintain a regular cleaning schedule of at least two (2) cleanings per day, documented by appropriate logs. 
b.  The operator shall provide an employee to check all areas for garbage, trash, body fluids and excrement and to remove and clean all areas with a disinfectant. All solid waste generated by the business shall be collected from the premises for disposal at a lawful solid waste disposal facility at least twice each week. Prior to collection solid waste shall be stored in a manner that prevents access by animals or members of the public and which will not facilitate the creation of a health nuisance. 
c.  Thorough cleaning of the entire interior of any room providing patron privacy shall be done using a disinfectant. Cleaning shall include floors, walls, doors, seating, monitors, video cameras, and windows and other surfaces. 
(16)  The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises, including the interior of each viewing room but excluding restrooms, to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose. A manager's station shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. If the premises has two (2) or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
(17)  It shall be the duty of the operator or manager of the business to ensure that no sexually-oriented entertainment activity or visual depictions characterized by an emphasis on actual specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities are visible from a public right-of-way adjacent to the establishment. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-14. - Loitering and exterior lighting and monitoring requirements. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the operator of a sexually-oriented business to: 
(1)  Post conspicuous signs stating that no loitering is permitted on the premises; 
(2)  Designate one or more employees to monitor the activities of persons on such property by visually inspecting such property at least once every ninety (90) minutes or inspecting such property by use of video cameras and monitors; and 
(3)  Provide lighting of the exterior premises to provide for visual inspection or video monitoring to prohibit loitering. If used, video cameras and monitors shall operate continuously at all times that the premises are open for business. The monitors shall be installed within a manager's station. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-15. - Penalties. 
    Whoever knowingly or intentionally violates any provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or imprisoned for not more than sixty (60) days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-16. - Prohibited acts on sexually-oriented business premises generally. 
(a)  No person holding a sexually-oriented business license, and no employee of any such person, shall knowingly or intentionally do or permit any of the following acts to be done on or about the licensed premises: 
(1)  Serve or allow on the premises of a sexually-oriented business, any person under the age of eighteen (18) years, unless such person submits a valid photographic ID which, on its face, establishes the age of the person as eighteen (18) years or older, and there is no reasonable doubt as to the authenticity or correctness of the identification; provided, however, that the prohibition of this subsection shall apply only to the partitioned area for sexually-oriented activity of a dual purpose business. 
(2)  Allow alcohol on the premises except for those sexually-oriented business's properly licensed under the state and city alcoholic beverage ordinances. 
(3)  Intentionally entice, aid or permit any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to visit or loiter in or about any sexually-oriented business; provided, however, that the prohibition of this subsection shall apply only to the partitioned area for sexually-oriented activity of a dual purpose business. 
(4)  Permit any prostitute to frequent the licensed premises or to solicit patrons for prostitution on the licensed premises. 
(5)  Intentionally conduct illegal gambling as defined by law, on the premises described in the application for the license. 
(6)  Fail to keep the premises clean and sanitary, including any parking lot, sidewalk, vacant lot, or open or closed space within or contiguous to the licensed premises which is under the control of the permit holder by lease, ownership, or otherwise. 
(7)  Illegally distribute, sell, offer for sale, possess or permit the consumption or distribution on or about the licensed premises of any kind or type of narcotics or habit-forming drug. 
(b)  An act by an employee of a sexually-oriented business shall be imputed to the sexually-oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this section, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly allowed such act to occur on the premises, or if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises reasonably should have known that such act was occurring or likely to occur on the premises. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the issuance of a license by way of renewal, the chief of police or the city may request revocation or suspension of such license as prescribed by this chapter, for violations of this section occurring during the license period immediately preceding the issuance of such license. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-17. - Additional regulations concerning live public nudity. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a patron, employee, or any other person knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business, to appear in a state of nudity, regardless of whether such public nudity is expressive in nature. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for a person, knowingly or intentionally, in a sexually-oriented business to appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, shall be on a permanent immovable stage at least eighteen (18) inches from the floor. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any employee of a sexually-oriented business, while semi-nude, to knowingly or intentionally touch a customer or the clothing of a customer. 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to knowingly or intentionally touch an employee of a sexually-oriented business or such employee's clothing or costume, while such employee is semi-nude. 
(e)  A sign in a form to be prescribed by the chief of police and summarizing the provisions of subsections (a)-(d) of this section, shall be posted near the entrance of the sexually-oriented business in such a manner as to be clearly visible to patrons upon entry. It shall be a violation of this chapter for an operator to operate a sexually-oriented business at any time when the required sign is not posted and clearly visible to patrons entering the business. 
(f)  The interior of any business that regularly features persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station or from a hallway accessible to all patrons to all places (and all parts of any room) where patrons are permitted access, excluding restrooms, for any purpose. In any business that regularly features persons who appear in a state of semi-nudity, no separate room, other than a restroom, where any patron is allowed access for any purpose, shall have any door that precludes viewing of all parts of any such room from a manager's station or a hallway to which all patrons are permitted access. A manager's station as described in the preceding sentences shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area. The view required in this paragraph must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station or the hallway to all parts of the room in question. It is the duty of the operator to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is on the premises. It shall be the duty of the operator, and it shall also be the duty of any employees present on the premises, to ensure that the view area specified in this paragraph remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials or enclosures at all times that any patron is present on the premises. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to operate a business in violation of this paragraph. 
(g)  It is unlawful for a sexually-oriented business to knowingly violate the preceding regulations or to knowingly allow an employee or any other person to violate the preceding regulations. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-18. - Regulation of dual purpose businesses. 
    It shall be unlawful for the operator of any dual purpose business knowingly or intentionally to fail to comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  The operator shall maintain a physical barrier between any sexually-oriented entertainment activity and other activity of the business. The barrier shall consist of a permanent opaque wall or room divider, or a separate room. The barrier will be a minimum of six (6) feet high. The entrance to the separate sexually-oriented entertainment activity area will be configured as to not allow a patron of the business below the age of eighteen (18) years to view the contents of the sexually-oriented entertainment activity area from outside such area. 
(2)  The area containing sexually-oriented entertainment activity shall be clearly marked by signs, with bold-face lettering in type or handwriting no less than the equivalent of seventy (70) point type, stating that no persons under the age of eighteen (18) are allowed in the area. Such sign shall be not less than two (2) feet wide and one foot high, in letters sharply contrasting in color with the background of the sign. 
(3)  The operator shall insure that only employees holding sexually-oriented business employee cards and qualified patrons are permitted entry into the separate sexually-oriented entertainment area; provided, however, that bona fide maintenance or cleaning employees may be permitted entry into such area to perform their maintenance or cleaning responsibilities. 
(4)  Any employee of a dual purpose business will be required to have a sexually-oriented business employee card if the employee has any duties relating to the sale, rental, restocking, checking in and out of sexually-oriented entertainment materials, or taking inventory of any sexually-oriented entertainment material. 
(5)  The operator shall not advertise or display promotional materials for any of the materials or activities available in the partitioned sexually-oriented activities section on the exterior of the premises or within the interior of the premises not partitioned for sexually-oriented entertainment material. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-19. - Scienter required to prove violation or business licensee liability. 
    Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, for the purposes of this chapter, an act by an employee of a sexually-oriented business shall be imputed to the sexually-oriented business licensee for purposes of finding a violation of this chapter, or for purposes of license denial, suspension, or revocation, only if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises, knowingly allowed such act to occur on the premises, or if an officer, director, or general partner, or a person who managed, supervised, or controlled the operation of the business premises reasonably should have known that such act was occurring or likely to occur on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-20. - Applicability of chapter to existing businesses and employees. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the activities of all sexually-oriented businesses and sexually-oriented business employees described herein, whether such businesses or activities were established or commenced before, on, or after the effective date of this chapter. Any person possessing a sexually-oriented business permit as of the effective date of this chapter may operate under such permit until the expiration of such permit, subject to suspension or revocation as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Any person not possessing a sexually-oriented business permit or a sexually-oriented business employee card issued pursuant to sections 72-71, et seq., of this Code as of the effective date of this reenacted chapter, but who is engaged in a business or activity requiring a sexually-oriented business license or a sexually-oriented business employee card under this chapter shall apply for the appropriate license or card within thirty (30) days after the effective date of this chapter. If such person does not apply for the applicable license or card within such thirty-day period, the person or business shall not be entitled to operate a sexually-oriented business or be an employee of a sexually-oriented business (or an employee of a dual purpose business required to hold a sexually-oriented business employee card) after the expiration of such thirty-day period, and such person shall be subject to prosecution or other action for violation of this chapter. During the pendency of any application for a sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee card, and any appeal from the denial of any such license or card, the applicant is hereby granted a de facto temporary license or card, as the case may be, to continue operation or employment until the ultimate termination of the appeal process by completion or withdrawal of the appeal, subject to suspension or revocation as provided in this chapter. 
(c)  Within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this chapter, sexually-oriented businesses and dual purpose businesses must make any necessary changes to the interior configurations of the regulated business premises to conform to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-21. - Sexually-oriented business locations: measurements. 
    Any measurement required to be conducted by the provisions of this chapter shall be performed by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Sec. 29.5-22. - Severability. 
    Chapter 29.5, sections 29.5-1 to 29.5-22 and each section, subsection and provision of said chapter thereunder, are hereby declared to be independent divisions and subdivisions and, notwithstanding any other evidence of legislative intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling legislative intent that if any provisions of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining sections or provisions and the application of such sections and provisions to any person or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is hereby declared that such sections and provisions are severable and would have been passed independently of such section or provision so known to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 10,874, 12-23-08) 
Chapter 30 - SEWERS AND DRAINS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,163, adopted Mar. 8, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 30, Art. I,  30-1-30-20, Art. II, Div. 1,  30-21-30-23, Div. 2, 30-31-30-33, Art. III,  30-40-30-54 and enacted a new Ch. 30 as set out herein. The former Ch. 30 pertained to sewers and drains. For a complete derivation of the former Ch. 30, see the Code Comparative Tables at the end of this volume. 
Charter reference- Public works department,  4-06. 
Cross reference- Plumbing, Ch. 27; required improvements in subdivisions,  32-91 et seq.; water, Ch. 36. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Connections required to public sewer. 
    Where there is a public sewer in the street or alley within three hundred (300) feet, every house or building must be separately and independently connected with it, except as may otherwise be provided herein. Sewer connections shall be at the rate of one connection for each lot, unless the plumbing inspector grants a special permit for a different rate of connection. One sewer connection may be used where there is more than one house on one lot. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Cross reference- Further provisions concerning connections required to public sewers,  30-41(d). 
Sec. 30-2. - Surface privies and water closets. 
    All surface privies or water closets in the sewerage districts and on the banks of the Ouachita River, in the city, are declared to be a nuisance, and shall be abated, the use of surface privies or water closets in such districts is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-3. - Persons eligible to make sewer taps, cleanouts, etc. 
    No person except an employee of the public works department, or other department of the city having jurisdiction, shall, under any circumstances, tap the sewer mains of the city. The laying of the sewer line from the main to the existing or proposed curb line and the installation of the cleanout and the cleanout box just inside of the existing or proposed curb line shall be done by regular employees of the city except in cases where it may be found expedient by the planning and urban development director to grant plumbers special written permission to do the same. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-4. - Connection permit. 
    No connection shall be made to any sewer or drainage canal without a written permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-5. - Tap fees. 
    A fee shall be paid to the city for each sewer tap within the city, and this fee shall include the cost of laying sewer pipe to the existing or proposed curb line, the installation of a cleanout and cleanout box just inside the curb line, and inspection of the house sewer as called for elsewhere in this chapter. This fee shall not include costs for street cuts or street borings. The fee for each such sewer tap shall be eight hundred dollars ($800.00) for single-family dwellings, and seventeen hundred dollars ($1,700.00) for all others. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-6. - Prohibited discharges. 
(a)  The discharge of offensive or objectionable matter into the drainage canals is hereby forbidden. Water closets shall not be connected with such canals, and any existing connections of water closets shall be discontinued. 
(b)  Refuse from gas works or distilleries or other manufacturing waste giving off offensive odors or tending to putrefy in the canals or to form objectionable coatings on the sides or deposits in the bottom of the canals, shall not be discharged into such canals. 
(c)  The discharge of steam into the canals is prohibited. 
(d)  The discharge of condensing water or other water or liquid at a temperature of one hundred ten (110) degrees Fahrenheit is prohibited and the discharge of any liquid at a temperature of over one hundred (100) degrees Fahrenheit shall be temporarily stopped whenever any work is to be done in the canals which necessitates such action, upon twenty-four (24) hours' written notice, and for so long a period as may be required. 
(e)  No person shall introduce or discharge into any water closet, or any opening or fixture connected to the sewerage system, any rags, wastes, large wads of paper, strings or similar objects, or any solid objects which would tend to obstruct the soil waste or drainage lines, or cause same to be done. Soft or toilet paper in sheets not exceeding six (6) inches square only shall be used in water closets. 
(f)  No one shall connect any rainwater leader or any other opening carrying stormwater and very large discharges not specifically permitted, or any other than fouled household, business or manufacturing wastes, specifically permitted, with the sewers, or any lines thereto connected, or cause same to be done. 
(g)  The discharge or diversion of untreated or partially treated wastewater that pollutes surface and ground waters or threatens public health is prohibited. When discovered, the manager of the sewer division or a pretreatment representative of the public works department shall have city water service turned off to the affected location until the cause of the discharge or diversion is corrected. The user shall be notified by hanging door tags, which will include the reason for disconnection and a contact number. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-7. - Sewer rates. 
    Each user of the City of Monroe sewer system shall be billed monthly, as follows: 
(a)  Consumers inside city limits ..... $ 3.55 
(b)  Consumers outside city limits ..... 5.33 
    The above rates (the "rates") shall be adjusted upward on an annual basis for each fiscal year in the same proportion as the increase of the Consumer Price Index (as calculated by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics) compared to the prior Fiscal Year end date (April 30 th ). Commencing May 1, 2018 and annually as of each May 1 st thereafter, such adjustment shall be calculated and determined, and the adjusted Rates shall become effective as of the first day of the new fiscal year (May 1 st ). These rate adjustments shall be automatic and shall be calculated and determined administratively and shall not exceed four (4) percent in a year. 
    The Rates shall be reviewed by the council every five (5) years, with notice being taken that councilmembers have the right to review any ordinance at their discretion. 
    A lifeline utility rate is available only to sewer customers qualifying under the following criteria: 
(a)  The utility account shall be in the name of the individual owner or renter certifying eligibility for the lifeline utility rate. 
(b)  That individual shall be or exceed sixty-two (62) years of age at the time of filling or be permanently disabled as per SSI, SSDA or VA. 
(c)  In addition to the age and/or disability requirement stated above the applicant must meet the income limits set annually by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") concerning eligibility for HUD assisted housing programs, Section 8. 
(d)  Only one (1) sewer utility bill shall receive lifeline sewer rates for each applicant and for each property served. 
(e)  The service under which the lifeline sewer rate is assessed shall be for single-family residential purpose only. 
(f)  Individuals must apply for the lifeline sewer rate through the customer service department of the city's finance department located at Monroe City Hall. The application must be notarized and may [be] required to be submitted annually. 
(g)  Determination of eligibility under the above criteria shall be made by the city's finance director, or his or her designee, based upon the information given in the eligible customer's application. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11,349, 11-27-12; Ord. No. 11,363, 2-12-13; Ord. No. 11,837, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 30-7.1. - Use of sewer fees. 
    All proceeds of the sewer user fees shall be deposited in the water and sewer fund and shall be expended only as any of to the following: 
(1)  To defray the operational costs of the sewer treatment facilities and the sewer collection system. 
(2)  To defray the maintenance and repair costs of the sewer treatment facilities and the sewer collection system. 
(3)  To defray the debt service incurred by of the sewer treatment facilities and the sewer collection system. 
(4)  Transfers to the city general fund shall be limited to reimbursement for funds actually transferred to or advanced to of the sewer treatment facilities and the sewer collection system from the general fund. 
(5)  Administrative charge-backs to the general fund shall be limited to actual costs for the services rendered as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-8. - Septic tank cleaners. 
    Any person engaged in the business of pumping out, emptying, or otherwise cleaning septic tanks must first obtain a permit from the director of the parish health unit and must also obtain permission and directions from the director as to the proper disposal of such effluents. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-9. - Entering manholes, pumping stations, etc. 
    No person other than an employee of the appropriate city department or some person bearing a permit from an authorized agent of such department for a specified time or purpose shall open or enter, or deposit anything into or remove anything from any sewer manhole or an automatic sewerage pumping station, or cause the same to be done. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-10. - Service to properties adjacent to existing facilities. 
    Sewer service to properties adjacent to existing facilities involves three (3) separate construction activities: 
(1)  Modifications of the city's existing facilities. 
(2)  Construction of new sewer system components which cover a service area greater than the property area and which are proposed to be added to the service area of the city. 
(3)  Construction of new sewer system components which are exclusively needed for the property area and which are proposed to be added to the service area of the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-11. - Tie-in fee. 
(a)  All property owners shall pay a one-time tie-in fee of eighty cents ($0.80) per gallon of design capacity of the property. This fee shall increase or decrease based on American City and County Construction Cost Index as published monthly in "American City and County" after council action. 
(b)  The design capacity shall be based on use of the property. 
(1)  Residential unit: Three hundred fifty (350) gallons each. 
(2)  Other land use industrial sites: Shall be based on best estimates of sewage loading, either by BODs loading or flow, with a minimum of one thousand eight hundred seventy-five (1,875) gallons per acre (acreage shall include all street rights-of-way and easements). 
(c)  The above described tie-in fee shall be in addition to the fees established in sections 30-5 and 30-7 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-12. - Exceptions. 
(a)  These provisions are not intended to require property already serviced by the city's sewer system to pay a tie-in fee except as provided herein. 
(b)  Property already serviced by the city's sewer system is intended to mean property in which the owner or past owner directly participated in sewer improvements laid to the property in past years. Ad valorem taxes and sales taxes are not considered to be direct participation. 
(c)  The current land use of existing property within the city may change in the future. Therefore, design capacity of such existing property shall be three hundred fifty (350) gallons per residential lot or one thousand eight hundred seventy-five (1,875) gallons per acre for other land uses. 
(d)  All building permit applications shall include an evaluation of whether an additional tie-in fee is required. Payment of the fee is required prior to issuance of said building permit. The additional tie-in fee shall be the difference between the tie-in fee based on the proposed usage and the tie-in fee based on prior usage. Table 1-3 of "Wastewater Systems Engineering" by Homer W. Parker is included as part of this section by reference thereto to cover equivalent flow data of various land uses. Any other design capacity not covered in said Table 1-3 shall be provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-13. - Construction costs. 
    Construction costs shall include, but not be limited to, construction costs, engineering fees, legal fees, inspection fees, indebtedness costs, right-of-way, easement, land costs, etc. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-14. - Modification costs. 
    The city shall be responsible for covering all costs required as covered in subsection 30-10(1). 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-15. - Joint service-area costs. 
(a)  The construction covered in subsection 30-10(2) of this chapter shall be a joint project. The city is responsible for establishing the design capacity of the respective service area. The property owner shall pay his prorated costs. The city shall pay the costs for the other service areas. The city shall be reimbursed for said costs when the other areas connect to the city's sewer system in the future. 
(b)  In the future, other properties, which lie outside the improvement's service area, may connect to said improvements. The city shall enlarge the service area. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-16. - Property owner's responsibility. 
    The property owner shall be responsible for covering all costs required, as covered in subsection 30-10(3). The city shall determine the location of said connection. The property owner shall transfer to the city all sewer system improvements and necessary easements required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-17. - Utilization of funds collected. 
    All above payments to the city shall be dedicated to capital expenditures of pump stations, force mains, gravity trunk sewers, and treatment plants. The funds shall be deposited into a special account with any interest earned by this account to be utilized for the needed capital expenditures of the city's sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-18. - Advance payment of funds. 
    From time to time, the city may not have sufficient funds in the special fund established in section 30-17 to make the improvements which are needed and the city is required to provide. The property owner may advance funds to the city to cover the needed improvement. If the property owner is unwilling or unable to advance said funds, the city may not provide sewer service to the property at that time. The city shall arrange with the property owner a reimbursement plan on any advance. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-19. - Prior written agreement not exempt. 
(a)  Prior written agreements to provide sewer service by the city shall not be exempt from the fees established in these provisions. 
(b)  Prior and current written agreements that actually provide sewer service at the date upon which these provisions become effective shall not be affected by these provisions; provided, however, that any future expansion of the services provided under said contracts or agreements shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-20. - Payment of tie-in fees. 
(a)  The tie-in fees established in section 30-10 through 30-19 are to be paid by the following: 
(1)  All new sewer district assessment shall include these fees as part of the project costs. 
(2)  All new building construction where a tie-in fee is required must be paid prior to the issuing of a building permit where a sewer district assessment did not previously pay for these fees. 
(3)  All other situations where a tie-in fee is due, shall have tie-in fee paid prior to the tap being made, or if already connected, amount shall be added to the water bill. 
(b)  Additional payment may be required if additional construction and/or new type of business increases the design flow of the property. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Flood hazard reduction measures to be taken with reference to sewers,  13-56(5), (6). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 30-21. - Contract with registered engineer and bond. 
    The developer or other person undertaking the construction of any sewer or drainage improvement shall enter into a written contract with the registered engineer preparing the project plans and specifications and shall further enter into a written contract with the contractor who is to perform the construction, and copies of each of such contracts shall be furnished to the city engineer before any construction work is commenced. A copy of the contract between the developer or other person undertaking the improvement and the contractor, together with the customary contract bond, shall be filed in the office of the clerk of court of the parish before any construction is commenced. The contract shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) per cent of the contract price and shall name the city as an additional obligee. Such bond shall have as surety thereon a bonding company licensed to do business in Louisiana and rated AAAAA by Alfred B. Best & Company. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-22. - Inspections. 
    All work conducted under a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall be subject to the continuing inspection of the city engineer, who may employ, at the expense of the person making the improvement, the services of a private laboratory testing service for the purpose of making such tests as may be required to insure that the improvement, as work progresses, complies in all respects with the approved plans and specifications, as same have been or may be amended with the written approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-23. - Stopwork orders. 
    The city engineer shall be empowered to halt construction on an approved sewer or drainage construction project at any time, should he determine that there has been any deviation from, or failure to comply with, the approved plans and specifications. The city engineer may halt construction by serving on the foreman on the improvement project and/or the person who let the contract for the improvement a stop work order, and thereafter no further construction shall be made until the deficiency or deviation pointed out by the city engineer has been corrected or obviated. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Secs. 30-24-30-30. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 30-31. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, including any sewerage or drainage district or other political subdivision, to construct any sanitary sewer, artificial drain, storm sewer, conduit or culvert across private property or across or along any street or other public way in the City of Monroe and connect the same with the sanitary sewer or storm water drainage systems of the city, or to construct any sanitary sewer, artificial drain, storm sewer, conduit or culvert within the city and shown on a general subdivision plan submitted to and approved by the Monroe-Ouachita Regional Planning Commission for construction, unless a permit therefor has been obtained from the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-32. - Application, plans and specifications. 
    An application for the permit required by the provisions of this division shall be on such form or forms as may be provided by the city engineer and shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications for the proposed improvement, which shall be prepared and signed by a registered engineer licensed by the state. Such specifications shall provide for constant all-day supervision by a registered engineer or an experienced employee of such engineer during the course of construction. Any improvement for which a permit has been obtained from the city engineer shall be made in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted to the city engineer, and no deviation therefrom shall be made, and no change order shall be issued, except on the advance written approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-33. - Issuance. 
(a)  In the event a proposed sanitary sewer system cannot adequately handle or accommodate the anticipated collection of sewerage from the area to be served or if the collection of sewerage from the area to be served will overtax the collection or disposal facilities of the city, a permit shall not be issued pursuant to the provisions of this article by the city engineer. 
(b)  In the event a proposed artificial drain, storm sewer, conduit or culvert is inadequate to care for the drainage water falling from the watershed to be drained, or if the water from the watershed to be drained will overtax the drainage system of the city, or if any substantial part of the watershed to be drained is outside the boundaries of the city, a permit will not be issued pursuant to the provisions of this article by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Secs. 30-34-30-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER PRETREATMENT PROGRAM 

Sec. 30-40. - General provisions. 
(a)  Purpose and policy. This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the wastewater collection and publicly owned treatment works (POTW) for the City of Monroe and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws including the Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere with the operation of the POTW; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW; 
(3)  To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with applicable statutes and regulations; 
(4)  To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and to protect the general public; 
(5)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the POTW; 
(6)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and 
(7)  To enable the city to comply with its NPDES permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject. 
This article shall apply to all industrial users and existing and new commercial and nonresidential users and all multiple family dwellings where food is prepared, cooked, and/or dispensed that connect to the City of Monroe's Sanitary Sewer, when, in the opinion of the pretreatment coordinator (PC), it is necessary to prevent fats, oils, and greases (FOG) in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line restriction or necessitate increased sewer collection or POTW maintenance. The article authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits and commercial permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires industrial and commercial user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(b)  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the manager of the sewer department shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the manager may be delegated by the manager to other city personnel. 
(c)  Definition of terms. For the purposes of this section, all terms not defined herein shall take the meaning given in the article. (Some terms are repeated from the article for convenience.) The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article are, for the purposes thereof, defined as follows: 
(1)  Act or the act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act 33 (U.S.C. 1251, et seq.) as amended by Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of 1972 (P.L. 92-500) and subsequent amendments. 
(2)  Approval authority. The state director in a NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. 
(3)  City attorney. The attorney-at-law who is hired by the City of Monroe to represent it in the state court and the United States court. This term shall include any assistants to the city attorney. 
(4)  Assistant pretreatment coordinator. The person, who assists the pretreatment coordinator (PC), and in the absence of the pretreatment coordinator, is responsible for the enforcement of regulations intended to protect public owned treatment works (POTWs) and the environment. 
(5)  Authorized representative of industrial user. A corporate officer (president, vice-president, secretary or treasurer) if the user is a corporation; or a general partner or proprietor if the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, respectively; or a duly authorized representative who is responsible for the overall operation or for environmental matters of the facility and is designated by written authorization to the city from the corporate officer, partner or proprietor. 
(6)  BOD (biochemical oxygen demand). BOD is the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures of five (5) days at twenty (20) degrees Celsius, expressed in parts per million by weight, or milligrams per liter (mg/l). 
(7)  Building drain. Building drain is that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes (not including storm drains) inside the walls of the building and which conveys it to the building sewer, ending five (5) feet outside the inner fact of the building. 
(8)  Bypass. The intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of an industrial users treatment facility. 
(9)  Building sewer. Building sewer is the piping extending from the building drain to the point of connection with public sewer or other place of disposal. 
(10)  Categorical standards. National categorical pretreatment standards. 
(11)  City. City means City of Monroe. 
(12)  COD (chemical oxygen demand). COD is the quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of the chemically oxidizable carbonaceous contents found within the waste water sample, expressed in milligrams per liter (mg/l) or parts per million (ppm). 
(13)  Code. The code is the "Sanitary Code, State of Louisiana" as prepared by the division of health, and promulgated by the Louisiana Health and Human Resources Administration or their successors in function as printed January 1, 1974, and all revisions. 
(14)  Composite sample. The sample resulting from the combination of individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an increment of either flow or time. 
(15)  Cooling water. The water discharged from any use such as air-conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or to which the only pollutant added is heat. 
(16)  Control authority. The term "control authority" shall refer to the manager of the sewer department. (See subsection (a)(27) of this section). 
(17)  Dilution. An increase in the use of process waters or other waters as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the standards for wastewater discharge. 
(18)  Discharge limit. The maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time. 
(19)  Direct discharge. The discharge of treated or untreated waste water directly to the waters of the State of Louisiana. 
(20)  Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
(21)  FOG (fats, oils and grease). A liquid or solid material comprised primarily of fat. Oil or grease from animal or vegetable sources. 
(22)  Food service establishment (FSE). Any establishment that cooks, prepares and/or dispenses food. The term includes any such place regardless of whether consumption is on or off the premises and regardless of whether there is a charge for food. 
(23)  Garbage. Garbage is the solid waste matter resulting from the preparation, cooking, dispensing of food or from the handling, storage, or sale of produce or other food product. 
(24)  Grab sample. A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time. 
(25)  Grease interceptor. An interceptor of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) gallon capacity which is designed and installed so as to separate and retain grease and which is generally installed indoors entirely above grade. 
(26)  Grease trap. An interceptor of at least one hundred twenty-five (125) gallon capacity which is designed and installed so as to separate and retain grease and which is generally installed below grade outdoors with provisions for above grade accessibility for cleaning purposes. 
(27)  Health department. The health department is the commissioner and state health officer of the State of Louisiana or his duly authorized representative. 
(28)  Holding-tank waste. Any waste from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks. 
(29)  Indirect discharge. The introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Clean Water Act. 
(30)  Industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
(31)  Industrial waste. Industrial waste is the liquid waste resulting from industrial or other technical processes, trade, or business, distinct from sanitary sewage. 
(32)  Interference. The inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit. The term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with section 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1345) or a criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal of use employed by the POTW. 
(33)  Infiltration. Water, other than waste water, that enters a sewerage system (including sewer service connections) from the ground through such means as defective pipes, pipe joints, connections, or manholes. Infiltration does not include, and is distinguished from inflow. 
(34)  Inflow. Water, other than waste water, that enters a sewerage system (including sewer service connections) from sources such as roof leaders, cellar drains, yard drains, area drains, foundation drains from springs and swampy areas, manhole covers, cross connections between storm sewers and sanitary sewers, catch basins, cooling towers, storm waters, surface runoff, street wash waters, or drainage. Inflow does not include, and is distinguished from, infiltration. 
(35)  Infiltration/inflow. The total quantity of water from both infiltration and inflow without distinguishing the source. 
(36)  Manager of the sewer department. The manager of the sewer department is the person duly designated by the governing authority to oversee and supervise the activities incident to the operation, maintenance, and administration of the sewage works, or his authorized deputy, agency, or representative. 
(37)  National [federal] categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard. Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which applies to a specific category of industrial users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
(38)  National pollution discharge elimination system or NPDES permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
(39)  National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard. Any regulation developed under the authority of section 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, section 403.5. 
(40)  Natural outlet. Natural outlet is any outlet into a ditch, water course, pond, lake, or any other stream or body of surface water. 
(41)  New source. Any industrial user discharge from a building, structure, facility or installation, the construction of which commenced after the publication of a proposed categorical pretreatment standard, which will be applicable to the discharge, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site which no other user is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing user; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing user at the same site. 
(42)  Nuisance. Nuisance is that which is dangerous to human life or detrimental to health; whatever building, structure, or premises not sufficiently ventilated, sewered, drained, cleaned, or lighted in reference to intended or actual use; and whatever renders the air or human food, drink, or water supply unwholesome. 
(43)  Official notice. Official notice is any notice issued by the manager of the sewer system by the following means: 
a.  Certified U.S. Mail (return receipt). 
b.  Hand delivery. 
c.  Posting of such notice in a conspicuous place on premises. 
(44)  Pass through. A discharge which exits the wastewater treatment plant into receiving waters in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with other discharges, is a cause of violation of the city's NPDES permit. 
(45)  Payment of fees. The payment by check or money order with the check clearing the city's bank and made payable to the City of Monroe or to the city's successors in function. 
(46)  Person. Person includes any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, of their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by the context. 
(47)  pH. The logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions expressed in grams per liter of solution. 
(48)  Plumbing. The practice, materials, and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension, and alteration of all piping fixtures, appliances, and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities, the venting system and the public or private water supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure, or conveyance; also, the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension, or alteration of storm water, liquid waste or sewerage and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal. 
(49)  Pollution. The manmade or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water. 
(50)  Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. 
(51)  Pretreatment or treatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in waste water to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, process change, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR, section 403.6(d). 
(52)  Pretreatment coordinator. The person responsible for the enforcement of regulations intended to protect public owned treatment works (POTWs) and the environment. 
(53)  Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user. 
(54)  Pretreatment standard. A discharge prohibition as listed in section 30-45 of this article, or a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard or a National Prohibitive Discharge Standard. 
(55)  Properly shredded garbage. Properly shredded garbage is garbage that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half (1/2) inch in any dimension. 
(56)  Publicly owned treatment works (POTW). A treatment works as defined by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292), which is owned in this instance by the city. This definition includes any sewers that convey waste water to the POTW treatment plant, but does not include pipes, sewers or other conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the purposes of this article, "POTW" shall also include any sewers that convey waste waters to the POTW from persons outside the city who are, by contract or agreement with the city, users of the city's POTW. 
(57)  Public sewer. Public sewer is a sewer owned or controlled by the city to which property owners in the vicinity may have access. In general, the public sewer includes the main sewer in the street and the service branch, if any, to the curb or to the property line of the owner having access to the public sewer. 
(58)  POTW treatment plant. That portion of the POTW designed to provide treatment to waste water. 
(59)  SS (suspended solids). Suspended solids shall mean solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
(60)  Sanitary manner. Sanitary manner means the following: 
a.  Protect the public health, safety and welfare; 
b.  Prevent land, water or air pollution; 
c.  Prevent the spread of disease and the creation of nuisances; 
d.  Conserve natural resources; 
e.  Enhance the beauty and quality of the environment. 
(61)  Sanitary sewer. A sewer intended to only carry sanitary sewage or industrial wastes or a combination of both, and to which storm, surface, and ground water are not intentionally admitted. 
(62)  Sanitary sewage. 
a.  Domestic waste water with storm and surface water excluded. 
b.  Waste water discharging from the sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including apartment houses and hotels) office buildings, industrial plants, or institutions. 
(63)  Sewage. Sewage means combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface, and storm water as may be inadvertently present. 
(64)  Sewage normal. Sewage normal is sewerage having the following limiting characteristics: 
a.  BOD five (5) days, twenty (20) degrees centigrade: 200 mg/l (max.) 
b.  Chlorine demand fifteen (15) minutes sixty-eight (68) degrees Fahrenheit: 25 mg/l (max.) 
c.  Suspended solids: 200 mg/l (max.) 
d.  Hydrogen ion concentration (pH): 5.0 to 9.0 
e.  Grease: 100 mg/l (max.) 
f.  Temperature: 125F (max.) 
(64)  Sewer. The pipe or other conduit outside a building for conveying sewage. 
(65)  Sewage treatment plant. Sewage treatment plant is any arrangement of equipment, devices and structures used for treating sewage. 
(66)  Sewage works. Sewage works is any and all facilities for collection, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage. 
(67)  Significant industrial user. Any industrial user which: 
a.  Discharges twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons or more of wastewater (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater) into the sewage system per average workday; or 
b.  Has a discharge greater than five (5) per cent of the average dry weather flow or organic capacity of the city's wastewater treatment plant; or 
c.  Is regulated by the National Categorical Pretreatment Standards; or 
d.  Is found by the manager to discharge pollutants which have a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the sanitary sewer or the waste water treatment plant, or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. The manager may at any time on his own initiative, or in response to a petition from an industrial user, determine that an industrial user meeting the above criteria is not a significant industrial user; if it is found that there is no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(68)  Slug. Any substance release in a discharge of non routine or episodic nature which causes interference at the treatment plant, hydraulically overloads the sewer collection system or violates the prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5(b). This includes but is not limited to an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
(69)  Standard industrial classification (SIC). A classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. 
(70)  Standard methods. Standard methods are as contained in the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" published by the American Public Health Association, latest edition. All sampling and testing procedures required under provisions of this article shall be in accordance with "standard methods". 
(71)  Storm drain. (See subsection (a)(61) of this section). 
(72)  Storm sewer. Any sewer or natural or man-made drainage channel which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes, and other than unpolluted cooling water. 
(73)  Storm water. Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom. 
(74)  Substantial change in wastewater discharge. A twenty (20) per cent or greater increase or decrease in the volume of wastewaters discharged or in the quantity and character of pollutants discharged as a result of changes in the industrial processes which generate the wastewater. 
(75)  Toxic pollutant. Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the provision of the Clean Water Act (CWA) Section 307(a) or other acts. 
(76)  Upset. An exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with the categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the industrial user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation [40 CFR 403.16(a)]. 
(77)  User. Any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of waste water into the city's POTW. 
(78)  Waste water. The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are introduced into or permitted to enter the POTW. 
(79)  Watercourse. A channel in which a flow of storm, surface or ground water occurs continuously or intermittently. 
(80)  Water of the state. All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or any portion thereof. 
(81)  Words and phrases; how construed. Words and phrases shall be read with their contest and shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language. Technical words and phrases, and such others as may have acquired a particular and appropriate meaning in the law, shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. The word "may" is permissive; "shall" is mandatory. 
(d)  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
A.S.T.M. American Society for Testing and Materials. BOD Biochemical oxygen demand. CFR Code of Federal Regulations. CWA Clean Water Act. COD Chemical oxygen demand. EPA Environmental Protection Agency. ICR Industrial cost recovery. l Liter. mg Milligrams. mg/l Milligrams per liter. MGD Million gallons per day. NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. POTW Publicly owned treatment works. Q Flow in gallons per day. SIC Standard industrial classification. SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42, U.S.C. 6901, et seq. TSS Total suspended solids. U.S.C. United States Code.  
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-40.1. - Grease traps. 
    This section shall apply to all commercial and nonresidential users, that prepare, cook, and/or dispense food, and that connect to the city sanitary sewer, when in the opinion of the pretreatment coordinator (PC), it is necessary to prevent fats, oils, and greases (FOG) in quantities sufficient to cause sanitary sewer line restriction or necessitate increased sewer collection system or POTW maintenance. 
(a)  New establishments - are required to install a grease removal device (a minimum of one thousand (1,000) gallons)** prior to opening/and or initial discharge. 
(b)  Existing establishments. 
(1)  All establishments are required to install a grease removal device, within at timeline specified by the pretreatment coordinator after notification that such device is required. A grease removal device shall be required if: 
a.  The food service establishment (FSE) does not have a grease device and is discharging to the public owned treatment works (POTW) wastewater containing FOG, in quantities that can cause line restriction, or necessitates increased line maintenance. 
b.  The existing grease removal device in combination with best management practices, does not reduce the amount of FOG discharged that is sufficient to prevent line restriction or line maintenance. 
c.  The FSE changes in the nature or is renovated in such a manner that will increase the chances of FOG in quantities sufficient to cause line restriction or increased line maintenance. 
(2)  FSE (new or existing) that are unable to comply with the said requirements due to site or plumbing constraints which may make compliance impossible shall apply in writing to the PC for an exemption which may be granted by the PC at his sole discretion. The written request shall include the reasoning behind why the FSE cannot comply with this section and the steps the FSE will take to ensure and prevent sanitary sewer line restriction and increased P.O.T.W. maintenance. The PC shall submit a response within ninety (90) days. 
(c)  Multiple family dwelling units - required to have at least a one thousand-gallon grease trap. 
(d)  Grease removal device requirements. 
(1)  Grease traps. Unless otherwise exempted (subsection (b)(2) of this section), all FSE shall install grease traps. Grease traps shall be one thousand (1,000) gallon minimum capacity** and provide a thirty-minute retention time at a total peak flow and must be maintained and installed in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and all applicable laws. The maximum size shall be twenty-five hundred (2,500) gallons each based on cleaning and maintenance frequency. Grease interceptors shall be located to provide easy access for cleaning and inspection. 
**Note** (1) At the discretion of the PC and/or the pretreatment division personnel, an establishment may be allowed to install a grease removal device as specified by the Louisiana Department of Health on the basis of manufacturing process that contributes minimal FOG to the sanitary sewer system. 
(2)  Grease interceptors will not be allowed, unless otherwise exempted; See [subsection 30-40.1(b)(2)]. 
(3)  Best management practices. Food service establishments shall use best management practices designed to reduce the amount of wastewater containing fat, oils, and grease discharged into the POTW. These include: 
a.  Implementing a comprehensive employee training program on the problems associated with fats, oils, and grease and their proper disposal; 
b.  Disconnecting or minimizing the use of garbage disposals; 
c.  Installing a 1/8 th-inch or 3/16 th-inch mesh screen over all kitchen sinks mop sinks, and floor sinks; 
d.  Using "dry" clean-up methods, including scraping or soaking up fats, oil and grease from plates and cookware before washing; 
e.  Using pre-wash sinks to clean plates and cookware; 
f.  Recycling fats, oils and grease and beneficial food waste when possible; 
g.  Pouring remaining liquid fats, oils, and grease from pots, pans, and other cookware into containers to be disposed of in the trash once congealed; and 
h.  Posting BMPs in the food preparation and dishwashing areas at all times. 
(4)  Maintenance. 
a.  Grease removal devices shall be inspected, cleaned, and maintained in proper working order at all times by the user at its expense. 
b.  Grease trap maintenance. 
1.  Grease traps in active use shall be cleaned at least once every three (3) months or when the total accumulation of surface fats, oil, and grease (including floating solids) and settled solids reaches twenty-five (25) per cent of the grease interceptors overall liquid depth, whichever occurs first. 
**Accounting for twenty-five (25) per cent or more of its wetted depth as measured from that static water line to the tank bottom.** 
2.  In the event that a grease trap is larger that the capacity of a vacuum truck, the interceptor shall be completely evacuated within a twenty-four-hour period. The user's documentation shall accurately reflect each pumping event. 
c.  Grease interceptor maintenance. Grease interceptors shall be serviced at least one time per month or when the amount of waste captured reaches twenty-five (25) per cent of the trap's liquid depth whichever occurs first. Removable baffles shall be removed and cleaned during the maintenance process. 
d.  The PC may require that that require that a grease removal device be cleaned more frequently that set forth in chapter 30 of this Code if the cleaning frequency set forth herein is found to be inadequate. The PC may change the required maintenance frequency to reflect changes in actual operating conditions. 
e.  After each cleaning the food service establishment shall inspect the device to verify that: 
1.  The contents of the device have been fully evacuated and that no liquids, semi-solids, or solids were discharged back into the device after cleaning; and 
2.  The interior components of the device are in proper working order. 
f.  Food service establishments shall require the liquid waste hauler, transporter, or any other person cleaning or servicing a grease removal device to completely evacuate all contents, including floating materials, wastewater, bottom solids, and accumulated waste on the walls of the grease removal device. Waste must be disposed of in accordance with federal, state, and local laws. 
1.  Food service establishment shall be required to know at all times via waste haulers manifest the location of the contents of the grease removal device until disposal. (Cradle to grave) 
2.  The grease trap waste generator shall complete and sign the generator's section of the waste hauler's manifest, as appropriate, prior to removal of waste. 
These shall include: 
i.  Business name. 
ii.  Business address. 
iii.  Telephone number. 
iv.  Waste capacity of interceptor. 
v.  Date of delivery to transporter. 
vi.  Name and signature of manager or owner. 
It shall be the responsibility of the generator to ensure that the generator section and the transporter section of the manifest are complete and accurate, with signatures. A copy of the manifest shall be left with the generator. ** There must be a least two (2) (consecutive) copies of the waste haulers manifest on site. 
g.  Cleaning frequency variance. Any food service establishment desiring a cleaning schedule less frequent than that required in this chapter shall submit a request to the pretreatment coordinator along with the maintenance records for the last four (4) grease interceptor cleanings or at last eight (8) grease trap cleanings, including measurements of the thickness of the floating fats, oil, and grease and bottom solids layer, and total volume removed. A reduction in cleaning frequency may be granted by the director when it has been determined that the grease interceptor had adequate detention time for fats, oil, and grease removal. The cleaning frequency will depend on variables such as the capacity of the device, the amount of solids in the wastewater, and the degree of adherence to BMPs. 
(e)  Compliance monitoring. 
Inspection and sampling: 
(1)  The city shall have the right to enter the facilities of any commercial user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter, and any permit or order issued hereunder is being met and whether the commercial user is complying with all requirements thereof. 
a.  Any temporary (car, mulch, shrubbery) or permanent obstruction (cement or concrete) must immediately be removed to allow safe and easy access to the grease removal device via the manhole or lid. 
b.  Unreasonable delays (no longer that fifteen (15) minutes) in allowing city personnel access to the commercial user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter if the PC or APC has been refused access to the building, structure, or property or any part thereof, and if the PC or APC has demonstrated probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or there is a need to inspect as a part of a routine inspection program of the city designed to verify compliance with this chapter or any permit or order issued hereunder or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community a citation will be issued and the facility will be given fifteen (15) minutes to comply and allow access. 
(f)  Permit fees. Three hundred dollars ($300.00) (To be renewed every three (3) years) 
Any permit that lapse for non-payment of the permit fee required in this [chapter] will be reinstated upon payment of an additional fee of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each thirty-day period in which the permit has been allowed to lapse. After three (3) thirty-day periods, the said facility will have their water services disconnected. 
(g)  Grease trap conditions for citation issuance. 
Grease and/or solids at or above twenty-five (25) per cent rule. 
**Twenty-five (25) per cent rule is defined as when the grease trap has accumulated waste, both floatbale grease and settable food solids accounting for twenty-five (25) per cent or more of its wetted depth, as measured from the static water line to the tank bottom. 
Grease trap overflowing. 
Grease trap broken (i.e. baffles, outlets or cover damaged). 
(h)  Penalty assessment. 
(1)  Permit application and renewal. All applications for the FOG permit to be reviewed for initial permitting or renewal shall be submitted by December 1 of the application year. (In the event of an establishment opening after the permit application deadline, the applicant will be required to submit the application within thirty (30) days. 
-the annual permit fee is one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year. If the permit application is not received before the deadline, there will be a two hundred fifty dollar ($250.00) late fee, and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each month up to three (3) months in which there will be a disconnection of water services. 
(2)  Grease trap violation. 
a.  Citation (written) issued and facility is given ten (10) business days to have trap cleaned or repaired: 
1.  If overflowing facility given twenty-four (24) hours from the time of the citation. 
2.  If not cleaned after ten (10) days, three (3) additional days may be provided (Letter is sent). 
3.  One hundred dollars ($100.00) [per] day penalty for each day trap is not cleaned following the aforementioned (Letter is to be sent and fee added to the water bill). 
4.  Court/legal action including a cease and desist order, and termination of services with a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) penalty assessed to the facility (Matter handled by the city attorney). 
*** In the case of the restaurant's closing, the property owner is responsible for the final cleaning. *** 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11,254, 12-27-11; Ord. No. 11,306, 7-24-12) 
Sec. 30-41. - Required use of public sewers. 
(a)  It is unlawful for any person to cause to be deposited upon public or private property, any objectionable waste matter which may be harmful to the public health or which may create safety hazards, odors, unsightliness, or public nuisance. 
(b)  It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any sewage from a public sewage collection system, either publicly or privately owned, except where such discharge is from sewage treatment facilities constructed in accordance with this article and in a manner approved by the manager and the state agency of competent jurisdiction. 
(c)  Except as hereinafter provided, it is unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the treatment or disposal of sewage without approval of the health department and the manager. All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and operation of the above mentioned facilities shall be borne by the owners. 
(d)  The owner of all occupied houses, buildings, or properties situated within the city or abutting on any street, alley or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city, is hereby required, at his expense, to install suitable toilet facilities therein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within ninety (90) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within three hundred (300) feet of the property line or it is determined that extension of public sewer is economically feasible by city inspector and the manager. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface water, uncontaminated cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process water into any sanitary sewer. Refer to subsection 30-49(c) for penalties for failure to correct any discharge from private property. 
(f)  Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the manager. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, upon approval of the state agency of competent jurisdiction and upon receiving an annual discharge permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Cross reference- Further provisions concerning connection required to public sewer,  30-1. 
Sec. 30-42. - Building sewers, building drains and connections. 
(a)  It is unlawful to uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer appurtenance thereof belonging to the city without first obtaining a permit. 
(b)  There are three (3) classes of permits: 
(1)  For commercial service (commercial permit). 
(2)  For discharge of industrial wastes into sewer system (waste water discharge permit, renewed annually). 
(3)  For discharge of treated sewage into drainage system (storm sewer discharge permit, renewed annually). 
(c)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the manager and/or city plumbing inspector. Samples of the permit applications are contained in appendices, I, II, III, which are made a part of this article. More than one class of permit may be required where applicable sample permit forms are contained in appendices II, III, and IV which are made a part of this article. [3] 
(1)  Commercial users permit application includes hospitals, businesses, and all other based on water consumption. Users who can provide property maintenance (pretreatment) of grease, soil and oil traps may be categorized as commercial users. 
(2)  Industrial users permit applications will be required of all industrial users with indirect discharges as described in subsection 30-45(k). 
(3)  Storm sewer discharge permits shall be required for all discharges into city's storm sewer of nonstorm water flows. 
(d)  In the event no wye or service line is provided for the premises on which the new construction is to be made, the applicant shall apply to the manager for the sewer tap to the main sewer. The fee is covered in section 30-5. 
(e)  In the event that the applicant is unable to locate a service connection which is shown on the official records as provided for that lot, he shall refer the matter to the manager. 
(f)  All costs and expense incident to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage that may, directly or indirectly, be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(g)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building, except where one (1) building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one (1) building sewer. 
(h)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found to meet all requirements of this article. The city inspector may require the applicant to perform any prescribed test as needed. 
(i)  The building sewers and drains shall be standard weight cast-iron soil pipe, SDR 35 PVC or ABS, or approved equal. Joints shall be tight and waterproof. 
(j)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the city inspector. The building sewer shall be no less than four (4) inches in diameter. The slope of the building sewer shall in no event be less than one-eighth-inch per foot for four-inch pipe. 
(k)  The building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the lowest floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to and within three (3) feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost. The building sewer shall be laid to uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. 
(l)  Whenever possible, all tops of floors on new construction shall be not less than eighteen (18) inches above the highest crown of the street adjacent to that property in order to ensure the proper functioning of all plumbing fixtures. Plumbers are cautioned to advise their clients of this requirement prior to the permit application being submitted. The city cannot assure proper functioning of fixtures in buildings that do not conform to this requirement. Suitable lift pump may be required when less than eighteen (18) inches are provided. All sewer mains shall be placed in the street right-of-way. 
(m)  The Sanitary Code, State of Louisiana, plumbing, chapter X-A, and Standard Plumbing Code with latest revisions from Southern Building Code Congress International, Inc. are hereby adopted as part of this article. 
The requirements in the State Sanitary Code and other sections of this article take precedence to the requirements in the Standard Plumbing Code. 
(n)  Reserved. 
(o)  On the building sewer, a four-inch diameter (minimum) cleanout shall be provided with a cleanout box at the property line. As-built sketch will be required of all new plumbing with location of all cleanouts. 
(p)  In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewerage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer at the expense of the owner. The facilities shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuous, efficient operation at all times. 
(q)  All excavations required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the city inspector. Pipe laying and backfill shall be performed in accordance with American Society for Testing and Materials (A.S.T.M.) specifications (C-12) latest revision, inspected and official notice is given from the city inspector that the work can be backfilled. 
(r)  All joints and connections shall be made watertight. Bituminous and concrete joints shall be prohibited; cast-iron joints shall be the compression joint. This type of joint shall be made with a one-piece rubber gasket meeting the requirements of A.S.T.M. specification C-564. The spigot end of the pipe shall be plain and shall be pushed into the gasketed hub. 
(s)  The applicant for the building sewer and drain permit shall notify the city inspector when the building sewer and building drain are ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of this article. All such connections shall be made watertight. Any such deviation from the described procedures and materials must be approved by the city inspector before installation. 
(t)  All excavations for building sewer installation in public right-of-way shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(u)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources or surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is connected, directly or indirectly, to a public sanitary sewer. 
(v)  Existing rear property service lines, which do not travel in street right-of-way must be maintained by property owner at no cost to the city. The city will maintain just the sewer mains in areas with rear sewer services. 
(w)  The city shall maintain the service branches within street right-of-way where a cleanout with a cleanout box is provided at the property line. The responsibility of installing the cleanout is on the property owner without cost to the city. All other service branches are the responsibility of the property owner. Procedures in section 30-50 shall be followed where property owners request installation of a cleanout with a cleanout box. 
(x)  Any person who fails to comply with the conditions set forth in their commercial permit shall be required to obtain a waste water discharge permit and shall not be allowed to discharge his wastes through their commercial permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Appendices I, II, III, and IV referred to in  30-42(c) above, are not included herein, but are on file for inspection in the office of the city clerk. 

Sec. 30-43. - Plumbing work. 
    All plumbing work in the city must be performed by plumbers who are licensed by the Louisiana State Plumbing Board. Copy of all bonds and licenses shall be on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-44. - Permits (fees). 
(a)  Commercial permit. A commercial permit shall be required of any nonresidential facility where a grease, oil, or sand interceptor is required or where the manager determines a commercial permit is needed. The application for the permit shall be filed with the manager. An application fee of three hundred dollars ($300.00) shall be paid when the application for the permit is filed (nonrefundable). The permit shall be valid for a period of three (3) years. 
(b)  Waste water discharge permit. A waste water permit shall be required of any facility where a discharge contains any substance as covered in section 30-45 or where the manager determines a waste water permit is needed. The application for the permit shall be filed with the manager. An application fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall be paid when the permit is filed (nonrefundable). The permit shall be valid for a period established by the control authority but not to exceed five (5) years. 
(c)  Storm sewer discharge permit. A storm sewer discharge permit shall be required where nonstorm water is discharged into the city's storm sewer. The application fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid when the application is filed (nonrefundable). The permit fee shall be the same as the fee for a waste water discharge permit. Permits shall be valid for a period established by the control authority. 
(d)  Additional costs. In addition to the application fees as covered in subsections 30-44(a), 30-44(b) and 30-44(c), the permittee shall pay all costs of any inspections or samplings as covered in subsection 30-46(n) and any costs of work performed by the city which is directly related to any permittee. These costs are considered permit fees which are added to the monthly water bill or billed directly if no monthly water bill is utilized by the permittee. 
(e)  Renewal. All applications for above permit to be renewed shall be submitted by December 1 of each year. A penalty of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) shall be paid by any party a month late. The city shall disconnect water service and/or sewer service of any person whose permit expires unless a completed application is submitted with payment of all fees and penalties. 
(f)  Requirements. After enactment of this article for existing facilities, all waste water discharge permits must be obtained within one hundred eighty (180) days. All others shall be required within one (1) year. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11; Ord. No. 11,254, 12-27-11) 
Sec. 30-45. - Regulations. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not the user is subject to national categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to the POTW: 
(1)  Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or maybe, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosions or are injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two (2) successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five (5) per cent nor any single reading over ten (10) per cent of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the meter. In addition a user may not discharge any liquids, solids, or gases which exhibit a closed cup flashpoint quality of one hundred forty (140) degrees Fahrenheit using test methods specified in 40CFR 261.21. 
(2)  Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to, grease garbage with particles greater than one-half-inch in any dimension, animal tissues, egg shells, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshing, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble, dust, metal grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing wastes. 
(3)  Any wastewater having a pH less than five (5.0) or greater than nine (9.0), or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW. 
(4)  Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants to injure or interfere with ant wastewater treatment process constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, create a toxic effect in the receiving waters or the POTW or to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. 
(5)  Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a nuisance or hazard to life are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair. 
(6)  Any substances which may cause the POTW's effluent or any other product of the POTW such as residues, sludges, or scums to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharge to POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use of disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under section 405 of the act; any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed to the pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used. 
(7)  Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its LPDES and/or state disposal system permit or the receiving water quality standards. 
(8)  Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye waste and vegetable tanning solution. 
(9)  Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference. 
(10)  Any pollutants, including BOD and SS, released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause interference to the POTW; or a slug release of pollutants as defined herein. 
(11)  Any wastewater containing any radioactive waste or isotopes of such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(12)  Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance[s]. 
(13)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through. 
(14)  Any trucked or hauled wastewater unless specifically approved by the manager and only at discharge points designated by the manager. 
(15)  Altering or tampering with a grease removal device. 
(16)  Discharging or permitting another to discharge any liquid semi-solid or solid back in to the grease removal device at any time during maintenance or cleaning operations. 
(17)  Discharging or permitting another to discharge any grease removal device wastes into any drain, public or private other grease removal device. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or indirectly, any of the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes: 
(1)  Using hot water (>104 F (40 C)) or chemicals, bacteria, enzymes, or other products to emulsify fats, oils, and greases prior discharging wastewater into the POTW. 
(2)  Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of one hundred (100) mg/l or containing substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between thirty-two degrees (32) and one hundred four degrees (104). At the manager's discretion, this standard may be waived for commercial users which have installed approved grease interceptors and provide adequate maintenance. 
(3)  Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of three-fourths (3/4) horsepower or greater shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes, or concentrated plating solutions, if not neutralized. 
(5)  Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc, and similar objectionable or toxic substances, or wastes exerting an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works exceed limits established by the sewerage manager for such materials. 
(6)  Any water or wastes containing phenols or other-taste or odor-producing substances, in such concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the manager as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the health department or the EPA. 
(7)  Any radioactive wastes or isotopes. 
(8)  Unless otherwise approved by the manager, BOD exceeding one thousand (1,000) mg/l and total suspended solids exceeding fifteen hundred (1,500) mg/l. 
(9)  Discharge of toxic materials or heavy metals shall be limited as follows: 
a.  Waste discharges shall not exceed these concentrations: 
Milligrams per liter Arsenic 0.1 Cadmium 0.9 Chromium 6.4 Copper .8 Cyanide 2.0 Lead 0.4 Mercury 0.004 Nickel 6.0 Silver 1.6 Zinc 11.0  
b.  Solvents and organic substances shall not exceed: 
Methylene Chloride 4.15 mg/l 
(c)  Limits apply at the point where industrial waste is discharged to the POTW. These limits are based on a method for allocating pollutant loadings and are applied via the permitting system to affected industrial users. Changes in pollutant loading to the POTW may warrant changes in these limits. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal. 
(d)  Federal categorical pretreatment standards. Upon the promulgation of the federal categorical pretreatment standards for a particular industrial subcategory, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed under this article for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this article. The manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, section 403.12. 
(e)  Modification of federal categorical pretreatment standards. Where the city's waste water treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by federal pretreatment standards, the city may apply to the approval authority for modifications of specific limits in the federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the waste water treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five (95) per cent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in section 403.7(c) (2) of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, part 403, "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollutant:" promulgated pursuant to the Act. The city may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the federal pretreatment standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, part 403, section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. 
(f)  State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharge shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those in this article. 
(g)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the manager or PC, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the manager or PC and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, properly vented, watertight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, shall be airtight. All grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be maintained by the owner, at his expense, in continuously efficient operation at all times. Should such facilities fail, the owner shall immediately notify the manager of the failure. 
(h)  Control manhole requirement. The owner of a facility producing industrial waste shall install, at his expense, a suitable control manhole or other acceptable facility, together with such necessary meter, sampling equipment, and other appurtenances in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling, and other measurement of the wastes. Such manhole or facility and equipment shall be accessible and safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the owner, at this expense, so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
(i)  Manager access. The manager shall have the right to access to the control manhole of facilities at all times with authority to stop all flows of wastes into the public system when necessary. 
(j)  All measurement, test, and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be determined in accordance with the methods specified in subsection 30-46(l)(3). Analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(k)  An industrial wastewater permit shall be required prior to the following admission into the public sewers of any industrial waste having: 
(1)  Characteristics of a significant industrial user, 
(2)  A five-day biochemical oxygen concentration or a suspended solids concentration of greater than two hundred (200) mg/l. 
(3)  Pollutants which the manager determines may exceed the limits shown in [this section]. 
(l)  Proposed preliminary treatment facilities. The waste water discharge permit shall require plans and specifications or other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities be submitted for the approval by the manager and by the state and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approvals are obtained by official notice. 
(m)  Excessive concentrations. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the manager and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the manager, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. Section 30-52 of this article provides the basic method and rate structure for computation of surcharge. 
(n)  New connections. New connections shall be properly designed and constructed in such a manner that sources of inflow/infiltration will be prevented from entering the sewer system. 
(o)  City's right of revision. The city reserves the right to establish by ordinance more stringent limitations of requirements on discharges to the waste water disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in this article. 
(p)  Excessive discharge. No user shall ever increase the use of process water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the federal categorical pretreatment standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by the city or state. 
(q)  Accidental discharge-Slug discharge plans. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge and slug discharges of prohibited materials or other substances regulated by this article. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at user's own cost and expense. If requested by the manager, a user shall provide a slug control plan containing, at a minimum: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices including nonroutine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the manager of slug discharge, including any discharge that would violate a prohibition under this section, with procedure for follow-up written notification within five (5) days; and 
(4)  If necessary, procedures to prevent adverse impact from accidental spills, including inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including solvents), and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(r)  Treatment bypasses. A bypass of the treatment system is prohibited unless all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage: 
(2)  There was no feasible alternative to the bypass, including the use of auxiliary treatment or retention of the wastewater; and 
(3)  The industrial user properly notified the manager. 
Users must provide immediate notice to the manager upon discovery of an unanticipated bypass. If necessary, the manager may require the user to submit a written report explaining the causes(s), nature, and duration of the bypass, and the steps being taken to prevent its recurrence. 
A user may allow a bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation of the treatment system. Users anticipating a bypass must submit notice to the manager at least ten (10) days in advance. 
(s)  Treatment upsets. A user which experiences an upset in operations that places it in a temporary state of noncompliance, which is not the result of operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation, shall inform the manager thereof immediately upon becoming aware of the upset. Where such information is given orally, a written report thereof shall be filed by the user within five (5) days. 
A user which complies with the notification provisions of this section in a timely manner shall have an affirmative defense to any enforcement action for any noncompliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-46. - Administration. 
(a)  Waste water discharges. It shall be unlawful to discharge without a city permit to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, and/or to the POTW any waste water except as authorized by the manager in accordance with the provisions of this article. Any discharge of waste water shall be of equal quality as being discharged by the city's WPCC plant. 
(b)  Waste water contribution permits. (See subsections (c) through (j) of this section) 
(c)  General permits. All significant users proposing to connect or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain a waste water discharge permit before connecting to or contributing to the POTW. All existing significant users connected to or contributing to the POTW shall obtain a waste water contribution permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of this article. 
(d)  Permit application. Users required to obtain a waste water discharge permit shall compile and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee covered in section 30-44 of this chapter. Existing users shall apply for a waste water contribution permit within ninety (90) days after August 23, 1983, and proposed new users shall apply at least ninety (90) prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of this application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
(1)  Name, address, and location (if different from the address); 
(2)  SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended; 
(3)  Waste water constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in section 30-45 as determined by the reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, part 136, as amended; 
(4)  Time and duration of contribution; 
(5)  Average daily and three-minute peak waste water flow rates including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by the size, location and elevation; 
(7)  Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises including all materials which are or could be discharged; 
(8)  Where known, the nature and concentration of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any city, state or federal pretreatment standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required by the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards; 
(9)  If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc.). 
b.  No increment referred to in paragraph shall exceed nine (9) months. 
c.  Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the manager including, as a minimum, whether or not compiled with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which he expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more that nine (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the manager; 
(10)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and rate of production; 
(11)  Type and amount of raw materials processes (average and maximum per day); 
(12)  Number and type of employees, and hours of operation of the industry and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system; 
(13)  Any other information as may be deemed by the city to be necessary to evaluate the permit application. 
(e)  The city will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the city may issue a waste water discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided herein. 
(f)  Permit modifications. Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical pretreatment standard, the waste water discharge permit of users, subject to such standards, shall be revised to require compliance with such standards within the time frame prescribed by such standard. Where a user, subject to a national categorical pretreatment standard, has not previously submitted an application for a waste water contribution permit as required by subsection 30-47(b), the user shall apply for a waste water contribution permit within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the applicable national categorical pretreatment standard. In addition, the user with an existing waste water discharge permit shall submit to the manager within one hundred eighty (180) days after the promulgations of an applicable federal categorical pretreatment standard the information required by subsections (g)(8) and (g)(9) of this section. 
(g)  Permit conditions. Waste water discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain the following: 
(1)  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the waste water to be discharged to a public sewer system; 
(2)  Limits on the average and maximum waste water constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
(4)  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities; 
(5)  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types, and standards for test and reporting schedules; 
(6)  Compliance schedules; 
(7)  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports (see subsection (l) of this section); 
(8)  Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating to waste water discharge as specified by the city and affording the city access thereto; 
(9)  Requirements for notification of the city or any new introduction of waste water constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the waste water constituents being introduced into the waste water treatment system; 
(10)  Requirements for notifications of slug discharges as per subsections 30-45(q), and 30-45(r) of this chapter; 
(11)  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification and record keeping requirements, including an identification of the pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type, based on the applicable standards. 
(12)  Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such compliance schedule may not extend the compliance date beyond applicable federal deadlines. 
(13)  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city to ensure compliance with this article. 
(h)  Permit duration. Permits shall be issued for a specified time period not to exceed five (5) years. The permit period shall be determined by the manager and the permit may be stated to expire on a specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of sixty (60) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements, as identified in section 30-45 of this chapter, are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(i)  Permit transfer. Waste water discharge permits are issued to a specific operation. A waste water discharge permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the city. Any succeeding owner or user shall also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing permit. 
(j)  Baseline monitoring reports. Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a), whichever is later, existing significant industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (3), below. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the city a report which contains the information listed below. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also be required to report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. A new source shall also give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants discharged. 
The industrial user shall submit the information required by the permit application (subsection (d) of this section) and: 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits. A list of any environmental control wastewater discharge permits held by or for the facility. 
(2)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste-stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  Identify the categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the city) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long term average concentrations (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be collected and analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (l)(3) of this section. 
(4)  Certification. A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. The baseline monitoring report will be certified by the signature of an authorized representative of the user in a statement which conforms to 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). 
(k)  Compliance date report. Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of waste water into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these units in the user facility which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average and maximum daily flow for these units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatments standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional on technical information submitted by the user. 
(l)  Other industrial user reports. 
(1)  Periodic compliance reports. The manager may require that any user perform sampling and analyses of wastewaters to ensure compliance with the discharge standards. The results of all monitoring shall be submitted to the approving authority during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the categorical pretreatment standards or by the manager. At the discretion of the manager and in consideration of much factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the approving authority may agree to alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
(2)  The manager shall impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases, where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. Dilution of waste water to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements is strictly forbidden. In such cases, the report required by subparagraph (1) of this paragraph shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass, where requested by the manager, of pollutant contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. 
(3)  All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(g) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, part 136 and amendment thereto or with any other test procedure approved by the administrator. Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. (Comment: Where 40 CFR, part 136, does not include a sampling analytical technique for the pollutant in questions, sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures set forth in the EPA publication, "Sampling and Analysis Procedures for Screening of Industrial Effluents for Priority Pollutants, " April, 1977, and amendments thereto, or with any other sampling and analytical procedures approved by the administrator). 
(4)  Reporting violations. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation of any regulated parameter, the user shall notify the manager within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis for that specific pollutant and submit the results to the manager within thirty (30) days of becoming aware of the violation. 
(5)  Hazardous waste notification. Users shall notify the manager in writing of any discharge which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste, the EPA hazardous waste number, and type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). 
(6)  Report certification. Reports required in this section shall be certified by the signature of an authorized representative of the user in a statement which conforms to 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). These reports are subject to the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 1001 relating to fraud and false statements and the provisions of section 309(c)(2) of the Act governing false statements, representations or certifications in reports required under the Act. 
(7)  Records retention. The users subject to the reporting requirements of this section shall retain these reports and the information resulting from any monitoring activities for a minimum of three (3) years. The monitoring information shall include: sampling date, time, location, methods, and the name of the person collecting the sample. Analysis information shall include: analysis techniques, dates, results and who performed the analysis. These reports and this information shall be made available to the city and/or to state or EPA representatives for inspection and copying. The retention period shall be extended for the duration of any litigation or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. 
(8)  Notification of changed discharge. All users shall promptly notify the city in advance of any substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants in their discharge. 
(m)  Monitoring facilities. The city shall require, to be provided and operated at the user's own expense, monitoring facilities to allow inspection sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage systems. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the city may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
    There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
    Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification by the city. 
(n)  Inspection and sampling. The city shall inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met and all requirements complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where waste water is created or discharged shall allow the city or their representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, examination of the records as may be required in subsection (g)(8) of this section or in the performance of any of their duties. The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has a security measure in force which requires proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities. The manager or his designated agent shall be allowed immediate access to the control manhole for inspection for suspected harmful contributions as described in subsection (q) of this section. 
    If the manager has been refused access to a user's facility, and if the manager has demonstrated that there is a need to inspect as part of a routine inspection program designed to verify compliance with this article, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community; then upon application by the city, the city municipal judge shall issue a search and/or seizure warrant. 
(o)  Pretreatment. Users shall provide necessary waste water pretreatment as required to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all federal categorical pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal pretreatment regulations. Any facilities required to pretreat waste water to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review and shall be acceptable to the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions of this article. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes. 
    The city shall annually publish in the largest daily newspaper in Monroe the names of industrial users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were significantly violating applicable pretreatment standards or other pretreatment requirements. A significantly violating industrial user is defined in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vii), and is one which violates discharge limits, falls to meet compliance schedules, or fails to submit required reports. 
    All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of EPA upon request. 
(p)  Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from city inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information will be available to the public without restriction. 
(q)  Harmful contributions. The manager may suspend the waste water treatment service and/or a waste water discharge permit when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the manager in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or causes the city to violate any condition of its NPDES permit. 
    Any person notified of a suspension of the waste water treatment service and/or the waste water discharge permit shall immediately stop or eliminate the contribution. In the event of a failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary including immediate severance of the sewer connection, or prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to any individuals. Should it become necessary to immediately sever the sewer connection in order to stop the harmful contributions the manager shall be allowed immediate access to the control manhole if located on the premises of the user. The manager shall reinstate the waste water discharge permit and/or the waste water treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the manager within fifteen (15) days of the date of occurrence. 
(r)  Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the following conditions of this article or applicable state and federal regulations is subject to having his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this section: 
(1)  Failure of a user to factually report the waste water constituents and characteristics of his discharge; 
(2)  Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or waste water constituents and characteristics; 
(3)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring; or, 
(4)  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(s)  Notification of violation. Whenever the manager finds that any user has violated or is violating this article, waste water discharge permit, or any prohibition limitation or requirements contained herein, the manager may serve upon such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within thirty (30) days of the date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the manager by the user. Submission of the plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(t)  Show cause hearing. The manager may order any user who causes or allows an authorized discharged to enter the POTW to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the violation, the reasons why the action is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten (10) days before the hearing. Service may be made to any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(1)  The city council may conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer, or its attorney or employee of the sewerage department to: 
a.  Issue in the name of the city council notices of hearings requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
b.  Take the evidence; 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations, to the city council for action thereon. 
(2)  Transcript. At any hearing held pursuant to this article, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded stenographically or by tape. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party of the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(3)  Council's conclusions. After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment or pretreatment facilities, devices or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(u)  Consent orders. The manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such orders will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the orders. 
(v)  Legal action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or other wastes into the city's waste water disposal system contrary to provisions of this article, federal or state pretreatment requirements, or any order of the city, the city's attorney may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in a court of complete jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-47. - Damages and remedies. 
(a)  Any person, whether acting singly or in concert with others, who causes damages to persons or property of others or to any public property by reason of any violation of this article shall be liable for the damage so caused. 
(b)  Any person found to be violating any provisions of this article shall be served by the manager with official notice stating the nature of violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violation. 
(c)  The manager shall have the authority to post a notice at the principal entrances of any premises where a violation of this article is found, which notice shall set forth the nature of the violation and the sanitary facilities affected thereby and provide a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. It shall be unlawful for any person to use the said facilities beyond the time limit mentioned in the notice unless an extension of time has been obtained from the manager. The posted notice shall not be removed without official notice from the manager. 
(d)  The manager shall have authority to disconnect or order disconnection of sewerage service to any premises found to contain plumbing which is unsanitary or unsafe, or which is in violation of this article or of the Code. No person shall knowingly reconnect or use such facilities unless permission to reconnect has been given by the manager by official notice. The nonpayment of the user charge will be considered a violation of this article and the premises will be subject to disconnection of sewerage service. 
(1)  For the second and each subsequent inspection necessitated by defects in facilities for which a permit is sought under sections 30-42 and 30-44 of this chapter, a fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) will be assessed or actual costs whichever is greater. 
(2)  For the second and each subsequent inspection in which defects are found on premises within a year of the issuance of the notice pursuant to subsection (b) of this section (whether or not the notice has been temporarily complies with) a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) will be assessed or actual costs whichever is greater. 
(3)  For the disconnection of the sewerage service to a premise, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be assessed, in addition to any cost incurred by the city in effecting the disconnection and reconnection. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-48. - Waiver of provisions of this article. 
    The manager or any employee of the city shall not have the authority to waive any provision of this article which is covered by Environmental Protection Agency regulations without EPA approval. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-49. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who intentionally violates any provisions of this article or fails to comply therewith or with any of the provisions thereof, or violates a detailed statement or plans submitted and approved thereunder, shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during which any violation of the provisions of this article is committed or continued, and, upon conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction for any such offense, such persons shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisoned for not more than thirty (30) days or both. 
(b)  Foe every day the accidental discharge goes unreported it shall be deemed a separate offense as covered in subsection 30-45(q) of this chapter. 
(c)  In addition to penalties covered in subsection (a), above, the city shall have the right to enter onto private property, both within and outside the corporate city limits, to make repairs on any part of the property owner's system from which any amount of infiltration/inflow as defined in this article, whether permitted intentionally or unintentionally by the property owner, is discharging. The city shall give the property owner seven (7) days from receipt of official notification to comply before this section will take affect. 
(d)  The city shall charge any property owner where repairs are performed, as covered in subsection (c) of this section, by city crews for actual cost. This charge will be added to regular water bill. The sewer manager may arrange for a payment plan not to exceed five (5) years at a minimum interest rate of twelve (12) per cent. 
(e)  The sewer manager may utilize the methods covered in subsections (d) and (f) of this section. 
(f)  Any charge levied will be recorded in the courthouse as a lien on said property. Note that these requirements are in addition to the requirements found in subsection 30-46(q). 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-50. - Service branches installation. 
(a)  All costs and expenses for installation of cleanouts, as required in subsections 30-42(o) and 30-42(w) of this chapter, shall be borne by property owner(s). 
(b)  Single wye service branch. A fee shall be paid to the city for each cleanout and cleanout box installed at the property line within the city's street right-of-way. This fee shall not include costs for street, driveway, and/or sidewalk cuts. The fee for each cleanout installation shall be the actual cost of materials and labor or the sum of one hundred twenty dollars ($120.00), whichever is greater. The fee may be included in the water bill of the property owner for a period of twelve (12) months. If the property owner does not have a monthly water bill, then the fee shall be collected prior to installation. 
(c)  Double wye service branch. The fee, as covered in subsection 30-50(a) of this chapter, shall be split between two (2) property owners where a common service branch is provided. If one of the properties involved is a vacant or undeveloped lot, then that portion of the fee is delayed until service is provided. When either or both property owners refuse to agree to split the fee, then a new tap(s) should be required of both parties. Cost the new tap is covered in section 30-5 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-51. - Industrial user administration fee. 
    The city may charge fees to users for services rendered in administering the programs in this article. The fees shall be established through the manager and shall compensate the city for activities such as issuing permits, inspecting facilities, sampling and analyzing wastewater and conducting enforcement actions. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-52. - Excessive concentration surcharge. 
(a)  When BOD, SS, or other pollutant concentrations from a user exceed the range of concentration of these pollutants in normal domestic sewage, a surcharge shall be added to the user charge. The surcharge shall be computed by the following formula: 
Cs = (Bc (B)+Sc (S)+Pc (P))Vv 
Whereas: 
Cs = A surcharge for waste waters of excessive strength 
Vv = Volume contribution from a user per unit of time 
Bc = Operation and maintenance (O&M) cost for treatment of a unit of BOD 
B = Concentration of BOD from a user above a base level 
Sc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of SS 
S = Concentration of SS from a user above a base level 
Pc = O & M cost for treatment of a unit of any other pollutant 
P = Concentration of any other pollutant from user above a base level (base level for other pollutants will be determined by manager) 
(b)  Any connection in which a surcharge is required must have a waste water discharge permit. 
(c)  The values for the formula given in subsection (a) of this section shall be the following: 
Cs = Contained in each waste water discharge permit 
Bc = .0751 
B = Contained in each waste water discharge permit 
Sc = .1031 
S = Contained in each waste water discharge permit 
Pc = Contained in each waste water discharge permit as % of Bc 
P = Contained in each waste water discharge permit 
These values shall be reviewed and revised annually. 
(d)  The surcharge payment shall be considered revenue from sewer user charge to be used for operation and maintenance of the sewer system. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-53. - Limitations of funding operation and maintenance. 
    As required by EPA, all funds necessary for the operation and maintenance of the sewer system must be generated by user charge and by the surcharge as covered in section 30-52 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Sec. 30-54. - Administrative appeal. 
(a)  Any person aggrieved by the application of sections 30-46, 30-51, or 30-52 of this chapter has the right of an administrative appeal to the city council for a declaratory order. 
(b)  The aggrieved person shall serve notice on city council, in writing, within ten (10) days of the date of the cause of aggrievement. The notice shall include: 
(1)  A short and plain statement of the matters asserted. 
(2)  A reference to the particular section(s) of this article involved. 
(c)  Service may be by hand or by certified or registered mail, to the Office of the Monroe City Council, Second Floor, City Hall, Post Office Box 123, Monroe, Louisiana; if by mail, the official postmark of the U.S. Postal Service determines date of service. Failure to timely serve notice constitutes waiver of the right of an administrative appeal. Copies will be filed with the city attorney and manager of sewer department. 
(d)  The city council shall afford the opportunity for all parties to respond and present evidence on all issues of fact involved and arguments on all issues of law and policy involved and to conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. 
(e)  The city council shall notify the aggrieved person within not less than fourteen (14) days of the date, time and place of the administrative appeal. The administrative appeal may be heard at a regular or special meeting of the city council called for that purpose, in the opinion of the city council. 
(f)  Unless precluded, informal disposition may be made of any case on administrative appeal by stipulation, agreed settlement, consent order, or default. 
(g)  The record in a case on administrative appeal shall include: 
(1)  All pleadings, motions, intermediate rulings; 
(2)  Evidence received or considered or a resume thereof, if not transcribed; 
(3)  Offers of proof, objections, and rulings thereon; 
(4)  Proposed findings and exceptions; 
(5)  Any decision, opinion, or report by the officer presiding at the hearing. 
(h)  The city council shall make a full transcript of all proceedings at the administrative appeal prepared and furnished to any party or person upon payment of the cost thereof. 
(i)  The decision of the city council on the administrative appeal shall be based exclusively on the evidence and on matters officially notices. 
(j)  A final decision or order shall be in writing or stated in the record. A final decision includes findings of fact and conclusions of law. 
(k)  Parties shall be notified, in writing, of any decision or order together with the reasons thereof. 
(l)  A person who is aggrieved by a final declaratory order of the city council on an administrative appeal is entitled to a judicial review. 
(m)  Proceedings for review may be instituted by filing a petition verified in city court of this city, within thirty (30) days after mailing of notice of the final decision or order. Copies of the petition shall be served upon the city council and all parties of record. 
(n)  The filing of the petition does not itself stay enforcement of the decision or order. The city council may grant, or the reviewing court may order, a stay upon appropriate terms. 
(o)  Within thirty (30) days after the service of the petition, the city council shall transmit to the reviewing court the original or certified copy of the entire record of the proceeding under review. 
(p)  The review shall be conducted by the court without a jury and shall be confined to the record. In case of alleged irregularities in proceedings before the city council which are not shown in the record, proof thereon may be taken in the court. The court, upon request, shall hear oral arguments and receive written briefs. 
(q)  The court may affirm the decision or order or remand the case for further proceedings. The court may reverse or modify the decision, if substantial rights of the person have been prejudiced because of administrative findings, inferences, conclusions, or decisions are: 
(1)  In violation of constitutional or statutory provisions; 
(2)  In excess of the statutory authority of the city council; 
(3)  Made upon unlawful procedure; 
(4)  Affected by other error of law; 
(5)  Arbitrary or capricious or characterized by abuse of discretion or clearly unwanted [unwarranted] exercise of discretion; or 
(6)  Manifestly erroneous in view of the reliable, probative, and substantial evidence on the whole record. 
(Ord. No. 11,163, 3-8-11) 
Secs. 30-55-30-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STORM WATER DRAINAGE 

Sec. 30-61. - Interpretation. 
(a)  This article sets forth the administrative procedures, standards, and enforcement remedies which shall be used by the city in meeting the requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Phase II Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) general permit as promulgated by the NPDES permitting authority. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall be regarded as the requirements for the protection of the public health, safety, general welfare, and environment. 
(c)  This article is not intended to interfere or conflict with, abrogate, or annul any other regulation, ordinance, statute, or provision of law. 
(d)  Whenever a provision of this article and a provision of any other law, ordinance, resolution, rule, or regulation of any kind, including any other provision of this article, contains any restrictions covering the same subject matter, the more restrictive shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 11,268, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 30-62. - Intent and objectives. 
(a)  Intent. The intent of this article is to comply with regulations set forth by the Louisiana Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (LPDES) Master General Permit No. LAR040000. 
(b)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are protecting the quality of water in the city's drainage ways and subsequent receiving waters in accordance with federal, state and local regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 11,268, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 30-63. - Administration. 
    Except as otherwise provided herein, the public works director with cooperation from the building and code enforcement departments, shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted to, or duties imposed upon the public works director, may be delegated to an appointed representative. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-64. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision, or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-65. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall mean the following: 
(1)  BMP - Best management practice 
(2)  MS4 - Municipal separate storm sewer system 
(3)  NOTC - Notice of termination of construction 
(4)  NOI - Notice of intent 
(5)  NOV - Notice of violation 
(6)  NPDES - National Pollution Discharge Elimination System 
(7)  SWO - Stop work order 
(8)  SWP3 - Storm water pollution prevention plan 
(9)  LDEQ - Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality 
(10)  LPDES - Louisiana Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-66. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following shall mean: 
    Affidavit. A sworn statement in writing, submitted by a person, or persons, to a city official, that is to be used as a legal document committing the said person to a long-term maintenance agreement with the city for maintenance of post-construction control measures. 
    Agricultural storm water runoff. Any storm water runoff from orchards, cultivated crops, pastures, range lands and other nonpoint source agricultural activities, but not: discharges from concentrated animal feeding operations as defined in 40 CFR  122.23; discharges from concentrated aquatic animal production facilities as defined in 40 CFR  122.24; or discharges from residential irrigation or landscape watering. 
    Applicant. Any person that submits an application for a storm water permit and is: 
(1)  The owner of the property upon which construction is proposed or is taking place; or 
(2)  The lessee if the lessee undertakes development of the property under the terms of the lease. 
    Authorized representative. A person delegated authority to act on behalf of another for the purpose of complying with specified requirements of this article. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Schedules of activities; prohibitions of practices; maintenance procedures; material storage shelters or covers; drainage management; runoff control devices or structures; retention or detention structures; trapping, separating, or settling devices; spill prevention or control devices and tools; waste treatment plants and devices; managed waste disposal devices and procedures; and other management practices as approved by the city/county to prevent or reduce the pollution of waters of the U.S. 
    City. The City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    City official. Person appointed to a position within the city public works department, code enforcement department, law enforcement department, or the public works director's duly appointed representative. 
    City council. The City Council of the City of Monroe. 
    Closure activities. Activities, or the process thereof, that result in the final stabilization of a construction site and leave the site in good repair. 
    Commencement of construction. The first disturbance of soils associated with or caused by move-in of equipment, installation of access roads or trails, storage of materials or equipment, clearing, grading, demolition, building, excavation or similar activities at a construction site. 
    Compliance order. An order issued by a city official requiring a discharger to comply with this article by means specified in the order. 
    Consent order. An order issued by a city official to which a discharger agrees to bring the discharge into compliance to this article. 
    Construction. Activities involving any ground disturbance including clearing, grading, demolition, excavation, filling, or building of above and below ground structures and buildings, support and auxiliary facilities, transportation facilities, container and containment structures, above and below ground utilities and associated auxiliary facilities, pipelines and conveyances, and similar activities undertaken for public purposes or needs; for preparation of land, structures, or facilities for commercial purposes, use, or sale; or for preparation of land, structures, or facilities for industrial purposes, use, or sale. 
    Construction site. The entire location where any construction or construction related activities occur which are part of a common development or project. 
    Discharge. Any addition or introduction of any pollutant, or any other substance whatsoever into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) or into waters of the United States. 
    Discharge permit. A NPDES permit, a LPDES permit or other state or federally issued permit or license for the discharge of waste or storm waters to the water of the United States. 
    Discharger. Any person who causes, allows, permits, or is otherwise responsible for a discharge, including, without limitation, any operator of a construction site. 
    Emergency cease and desist order. An order issued by a city official requiring immediate cessation of a discharge because of imminent endangerment to the public or the environment. 
    Facility. Any building, structure, installation or area of activity from which there is or may be a discharge of a pollutant, excluding a construction or grading site. 
    Final stabilization. The condition, or the activities leading thereto, of a construction site wherein all soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and a uniform perennial vegetative cover, or equivalent permanent erosion prevention measures, has been established over at least seventy (70) per cent of all areas not paved or covered by permanent structures or impervious surfaces. 
    Garbage. Putrescible animal and vegetable waste materials from the handling, preparation, cooking or consumption of food, including waste materials from markets, storage facilities and the handling and sale of produce and other food products. 
    Guidance document. The guidance document is a document produced by the city that serves as the detailed technical specifications, procedures and other materials related to or required by the storm water permit and storm water quality plan. 
    Harmful. Causing pollution of waters in the state or waters occurring in the MS4. 
    Hazardous substance. Any substance listed in Table 302.4 of 40 CFR Part 302. 
    Illicit connection. Any connection to a storm water conveyance without storm water permit or exemption from prohibition of such connections as required by this article. 
    Illicit discharge. A discharge of liquid or solid wastes, or combination thereof, which is discharged to a storm water conveyance without storm water permit or exemption from prohibition of such discharge as required by this article. 
    Impervious. A condition of the land surface for which more than ninety (90) per cent of the rainfall on the land surface would be reasonably expected to run off. 
    Leachate. Any liquid that, in passing through matter, has dissolved or entrained environmentally harmful substances. 
    Leasee. The person who leases a construction site or industrial or commercial facility and acts as an owner in regard to the conduct of construction at a construction site or operation of the facility at an industrial or commercial facility. 
    Louisiana Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (LPDES) permit. Louisiana Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued by the LDEQ for the discharge of storm waters pursuant to authority delegated to the state by the EPA for issuance of LPDES permits. 
    LPDES permitting authority. The environmental agency that is responsible for the oversight and enforcement of the LPDES phase II MS4 storm water permit is the LDEQ. 
    Maintenance bond. Legally enforceable written agreement whereby an owner, lessee, or organization guarantees proper maintenance of drainage features or water quality control structures for a certain period of time. 
    Maximum extent practicable. A standard for water quality that applies to all MS4 operators regulated under the NPDES program. Since no precise definition of MEP exists, it allows for maximum flexibility on the part of MS4 operators as they develop and implement their programs to reduce the discharge of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable, including management practices, control techniques and system, design and engineering methods, and such other provisions as the administrator or the state determines appropriate for the control of pollutants. 
    MS4. The municipal separate storm sewer system, incorporating the entire system of storm water conveyances, but not sanitary or industrial wastewater sewers, or a single conveyance in such entire system, natural or man-made, lying within the boundaries of the city. 
    MS4 permit. The LPDES permit issued to the city and other co-permittees for the discharge of storm waters from the MS4. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). Storm water conveyances lying within the corporate limits of the city, including but not limited to, storm water sewers, inlets, catch basins, traps, gutters, drains, ditches, culverts, canals, ponds, and other storm water conveyances, both natural and man-made, designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water, and which are not used for collecting or conveying sewage. 
    Notice of intent. A written submission to the LDEQ director from an applicant requesting coverage under a general permit. 
    Notice of violation (NOV). A legal notice issued by a city official indicating a discharge is in violation of this article and that the violator must eliminate such discharge. 
    Open space design. A low impact site design technique that concentrates dwellings in a compact area in one portion of the development in exchange for open space and natural areas elsewhere on the site. Open space designs are used to reduce impervious surfaces, storm water pollutants, and the loss of natural areas on a site. 
    Operator of a construction site. The person or persons associated with a large or small construction activity that is an operator as defined below: 
(1)  The person or persons that have operational control over construction plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  The person or persons that have day-to-day operational control of those activities at a construction site that are necessary to ensure compliance with a storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3) for the site or other permit conditions (e.g., they are authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the SWP3 or comply with other permit conditions). 
    Outfall. The outlet of a body of water, in particularly, the point where a storm conveyance reaches its receiving water. 
    Owner. The person who owns a facility, property on which a facility occurs, part of a facility, or part of the property on which a facility occurs; in the case of a mortgaged facility or property, the person who has a mortgage on the property and who will obtain, upon proper payment to a financial institution, ownership of the property; in the case of a facility or property for which a person has an option to purchase and such person acts, in effect, as an owner. Also, the person who owns a site or facility and who has ultimate financial responsibility for activities conducted at the site or facility. 
    Person. Any individual; group of people by virtue of contract or mutual consent acting as a single entity; group of people assigned joint responsibility under requirements of this article; partnership; co-partnership; firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity; or the legal representatives, agents, or assigns of any person as defined in this paragraph. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    Petition for reconsideration. Written document submitted by a person to the public works director requesting reconsideration of a previously issued SWO; compliance order; remediation, abatement, and restoration order; or emergency cease and desist order. 
    Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical waste, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, sediment, and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharged into water. The term "pollutant" does not include tail water or runoff from irrigation or rainwater runoff from cultivated or uncultivated rangeland, pasture land, and farm land. 
    Pollution. The alteration of the physical, thermal, chemical, or biological quality of, or the contamination of, any water in the U.S. that renders the water harmful, detrimental, or injurious to humans, animal life, vegetation, property, or to the public health, safety, or welfare, or impairs the usefulness or the public enjoyment of the water for any lawful or reasonable purpose. 
    Receiving waters. Any water of the state that accepts storm water runoff as overland sheet flow, channelized flow from a man-made or natural drainage channel, or similar structure, and is considered to be the ultimate destination of the storm water. 
    Remediation, abatement, and restoration order. A legally issued order by a city official to correct or repair damage; stop, or otherwise control pollutant discharge; and/or to rehabilitate and return to original quality some condition in the environment. 
    Rubbish. Nonputrescible solid waste, excluding ashes, that consist of: 
(1)  Combustible waste materials, including paper, rags, cartons, wood, excelsior, furniture, rubber, plastics, yard trimmings, leaves or similar materials; or 
(2)  Noncombustible waste materials, including glass, crockery, tin cans, aluminum cans, metal furniture and similar materials that do not burn at ordinary incinerator temperatures (1600 to 1800 degrees Fahrenheit). 
    Runoff coefficient. A measurement of the amount of the precipitation that falls on a specific surface actually ends up as storm water runoff. 
    Scour velocity. The velocity, measured in feet per second, at which water has the ability to cause erosion. Scour velocities depend on topography, soils, and runoff rates. 
    Show cause hearing. A hearing for which a violator of this article must provide reason why a proposed enforcement action by a city official should not be undertaken. 
    Significant development/redevelopment. A development or redevelopment project that results in a net increase of impervious surface area by one or more acres. 
    Site. The land or water area where any facility or activity is physically located or conducted, including adjacent land used in connection with the facility or activity. 
    Solid waste. Any garbage, rubbish, refuse, sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, municipal, commercial, mining or agricultural operations, or from community and institutional activities. 
    State. The State of Louisiana. 
    Stop work order (SWO). A legal order issued by a city official to stop construction because of non-compliance to this article. 
    Storm water. Water derived solely and directly from rainfall or snowmelt runoff and appearing as overland flow, flow in drainage conveyances, or flow in natural watercourses and man-made waterways. 
    Storm water permit. Authorization issued by the city to conduct construction activities. 
    Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP or SWP3). A plan that describes the practices, and the procedures for their implementation, that are to be used to reduce the pollutants in storm water discharges associated with construction or other industrial activity at a facility. 
    Storm water quality plan. A plan describing how construction is to be performed and how the site closure is to be accomplished, including post-construction control measures, at a construction site. A storm water quality plan is required to obtain a storm water permit from the city. 
    Urban forestry. A low impact site design technique that utilizes environmentally sensitive practices and promotes the planting of trees and other vegetation to help control erosion and improve the quality of storm water runoff from construction sites within urbanized areas. 
    Warning notice. A notice issued by a city official stating that a discharge is in violation of this article and requesting that the cause of discharge be investigated and that any violations be stopped. 
    Waste, debris, trash. Solid waste composed of mixtures of floatables and nonfloatables derived from identifiable and ill-defined residential, industrial and commercial sources, commonly consisting of miscellaneous containers, bottles, cans, packaging, dead vegetation, discarded construction materials, soil, silt, yard waste, paper, cardboard, bottle and container caps and tops, oil and grease, paint and painting supplies, discarded auto parts or repair or maintenance tools or supplies, discarded clothes, discarded furniture, discarded household appliances or discarded parts of furniture or appliances. 
    Waters in the state (or water of the state). Any groundwater, percolating or otherwise, lakes, bays, ponds, impounding reservoirs, springs, rivers, streams, creeks, estuaries, marshes, inlets, canals, the Gulf of Mexico inside the territorial limits of the state, and all other bodies of surface water, natural or artificial, inland or coastal, fresh or salt, navigable or nonnavigable and including the beds and banks of all water courses and bodies of surface water, that are wholly or partially inside or bordering the state or inside the jurisdiction of the state. 
    Water quality standard. The designation of a body or segment of surface water in the state for desirable uses and the narrative and numerical criteria deemed necessary by the state to protect those uses as specified in the Louisiana Administrative Code, or in waters of the U.S. as specified by the federal Clean Water Act. 
    Waters of the U.S. All waters which are currently used, were used in the past, or may be susceptible to use in interstate or foreign commerce, including all waters which are subject to the ebb and flow of the tide; all interstate waters, including interstate wetlands; all other waters in which the use, degradation, or destruction would affect or could affect interstate or foreign commerce; all impoundments of waters otherwise defined as waters of the United States under this definition; all tributaries of waters identified in this definition; all wetlands adjacent to waters identified in this definition; and any waters within the federal definition of "waters of the United States" at 40 CFR 122.2; but not including any waste treatment systems, treatment ponds, or lagoons designed to meet the requirements of the federal Clean Water Act. 
    Wetland. An area that is inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and which under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
    Working day. Any calendar day, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., but not including Saturday, Sunday, any legal holiday recognized by the city or any day for which the city offices are closed for ordinary and general business. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-67. - Illicit discharges and connections. 
(a)  Discharge prohibitions. 
(1)  Prohibition of illicit discharges. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence, create, cause, introduce or contribute to creating, causing or introducing any discharge that causes and/or contributes to a violation of applicable water quality standards, except for a discharge or flow composed of one or more of the following: 
a.  Entirely of storm water; 
b.  Water line flushing or other potable water sources; 
c.  Landscape irrigation or lawn watering; 
d.  Diverted storm flows; 
e.  Rising ground water; 
f.  Ground water infiltration to storm drains; 
g.  Uncontaminated pumped ground water; 
h.  Foundation or footing drains (not including active ground water dewatering systems); 
i.  Crawl space pumps; 
j.  Air conditioning condensation; 
k.  Diverted stream flow or natural springs; 
l.  Non-commercial washing of vehicles; 
m.  Natural riparian habitat or wetland flows; 
n.  Swimming pool draining (discharge must be dechlorinated and salt free); 
o.  Firefighting/training activities; 
p.  Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to protect public health and safety; 
q.  Dye testing, provided there is a verbal notification to the city prior to the time of the test; and 
r.  Any non-storm water discharge permitted under a LPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the LPDES permitting authority, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that written approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
(2)  Prohibition of illicit connections. It is unlawful for a person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence, construct, use, maintain, or allow continued existence of an illicit connection to the MS4. 
(3)  Specific prohibitions. 
No significant discharge of pollutants. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any discharge that causes a significant discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the United States. 
a.  Prohibited releases. No person shall dump, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, leach, dispose or otherwise introduce or cause, allow or permit to be introduced any of the following substances into the MS4: 
1.  Any used or unused motor oil, fuel, antifreeze or any other motor vehicle fluid; 
2.  Any industrial waste; 
3.  Any hazardous waste, including household hazardous waste; 
4.  Any domestic sewage or septic tank waste, grease trap waste or grit trap waste; 
5.  Any yard waste (leaves, grass clippings, etc.), garbage, or rubbish; 
6.  Any wastewater from a car wash facility; from any vehicle washing, cleaning or maintenance at any new or used automobile or other vehicle dealership, rental agency, body shop, repair shop or maintenance facility; 
7.  Any wastewater from any washing, cleaning or maintenance of any business or commercial or public service vehicle, including but not limited to a truck, bus or mobile heavy equipment, by a business or public entity that operates or services more than two (2) such vehicles on a regular basis; 
8.  Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning, de-icing or other maintenance of aircraft; 
9.  Any wastewater from the washing, cleaning or maintenance of railway engines or other railway vehicles; 
10.  Any wastewater from floor, rug or carpet cleaning; 
11.  Any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of pavement that contains any harmful quantity of soap, detergent, surfactant, solvent, degreaser, emulsifier, dispersant or any other harmful cleaning substance; or any wastewater from the washdown or other cleaning of any pavement where any spill, leak or other release of oil, motor fuel or other petroleum or hazardous substance has occurred, unless all harmful quantities of such released material have been previously removed; 
12.  Any effluent from a cooling tower, condenser, compressor, emissions scrubber, emissions filter or the blowdown from a boiler that contains a significant source of pollutants; 
13.  Any ready-mixed concrete, mortar, ceramic, asphalt base material or hydromulch material, or discharge from the cleaning of vehicles or equipment containing or used in transporting or applying such material; 
14.  Any runoff or washdown water from any animal pen, kennel or fowl or livestock containment area that is used to contain or otherwise house animals, fowl or livestock for the purpose of private, commercial or industrial sale; 
15.  Any swimming pool water containing any harmful quantity of salt, chlorine, muriatic acid or other chemical used in the treatment or disinfection of the swimming pool water or in pool cleaning; 
16.  Any water from a water curtain in a spray room used for painting vehicles or equipment; 
17.  Any contaminated runoff from a vehicle or mechanical equipment wrecking yard; 
18.  Any substance or material that will damage, block or clog any portion of the MS4; 
19.  Leachate from landfills, dumps, industrial waste sites, etc. 
20.  Any release from a petroleum storage tank (PST), or any leachate or runoff from soil contaminated by a leaking PST, or any discharge of pumped, confined or treated wastewater from the remediation of any such PST release, unless the discharge satisfies all of the following criteria: 
i.  Complies with all state and federal regulations, standards and requirements; 
ii.  Contains no harmful quantity of any pollutant; 
iii.  Contains no more than fifty (50) parts per billion of benzene; five hundred (500) parts per billion combined total quantities of benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX); or fifteen (15) mg/l of total petroleum hydrocarbons (TPH); and 
iv.  Contains no more benzene, toluene, ethylbenzene and xylene (BTEX) than is allowed by state water quality standards applicable to those receiving waters to which such discharge may directly occur. 
b.  Erosion control. No person shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the MS4 any harmful quantity of sediment, silt, earth, soil or other material associated with clearing, grading, excavation or other construction activities in excess of what could be retained on site or captured by employing sediment and erosion control measures to the maximum extent practicable under prevailing circumstances. 
c.  Sanitary sewage. No person shall connect a line conveying sanitary sewage, domestic or industrial, to the MS4, or allow such a connection to continue. 
(b)  Suspension of MS4 access. 
(1)  Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. 
a.  A city official may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States or as described in section [30-71]. 
b.  If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, a city official may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to the public. 
(2)  Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. 
a.  Any person discharging to the MS4 in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. A city official will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the city for a reconsideration and hearing (See section [30-72] of this article). 
b.  It is unlawful for a person to intentionally, knowingly, recklessly or with criminal negligence reinstate MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior written approval of a city official. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 11,268, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 30-68. - Construction storm water management. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Construction related violations. 
a.  It is unlawful for a person to knowingly, intentionally, recklessly or with criminal negligence to engage in construction not conducted in accord with the requirements of this article. 
b.  It is unlawful for a person to knowingly, intentionally, recklessly or with criminal negligence to engage in construction not initiated or terminated within the time frame authorized by a city official by notice, permit or license when such authorization is required by this article. 
c.  It is unlawful for a person to knowingly, intentionally, recklessly or with criminal negligence to not comply with requirements for timely application for a storm water permit, a storm water quality plan and/or a storm water pollution plan (SWP3) as specified in this article. 
(2)  Pollution prevention requirements. 
a.  Any and all owners and/or operators of a construction site and any and all other persons undertaking construction activities as a contractor or subcontractor at a construction site shall use best management practices pursuant to the construction permit to control, reduce, and prevent, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 and/or waters of the U.S. 
b.  The discharge of pollutants to the MS4 and/or waters of the U.S. from activities conducted by said operator, contractor, or subcontractor include but is not limited to: sediment, silt, earth, soil, dirt, sand and gravel; lime, liquids, solids, and semi-solids used for soil treatment, preparation, or amendment; concrete, slurries, grout, tar, and asphalt; construction vehicle cleaning and wash waters; construction vehicle maintenance fluids such as hydraulic fluids, lubricants, fuels, brake fluids, and coolants; hazardous or extremely hazardous materials; materials resulting from repair, renovation, or demolition such as concrete, reinforcing bar, steel, wire, tar paper, roofing materials, sheet rock, plaster, wood, cellar dirt and carpeting; residual and surplus construction materials; paint, paint thinner, paint equipment cleaner and wastewater from the cleaning of painting equipment and supplies; waste construction material packaging and containers; and construction trash, debris, and waste. 
(3)  Stop work order (SWO). 
a.  Whenever a city official determines that the operation of a construction site has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, as it may pertain to the operation of the construction site, a city official may order that a SWO be issued. 
b.  When a SWO is issued, it shall be issued to the operator of the construction site for which construction is to stop, be posted at the site, and distributed to all city departments and divisions whose decisions affect any activity at the site. 
c.  Unless express written exception is made by a city official, the SWO shall prohibit any and all further construction activity at the site, and shall bar any further inspection or approval by the city of any work associated with a building permit, storm water permit, or any other city approval necessary to commence construction or to assume occupancy at the site. 
d.  Issuance of a SWO shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the construction site operator. 
(b)  Construction site. 
(1)  Site limits. A construction site is the location and all the areas wherein construction activity, which is all or part of a common development or project, are occurring, proposed to occur, or have occurred, irrespective of whether that construction is in compliance with this article, irrespective of whether that construction activity is ongoing or temporarily suspended for any purpose, and irrespective of whether a city official has granted authorization to undertake the construction activity. For purposes of this article, a construction site shall encompass: 
a.  All land and surface water areas where the construction activities of any type, including all areas of land surface disturbed by or as a consequence of the construction activities or other activities in support of the construction activities, are undertaken as part of a common plan of development or project; 
b.  All areas of land to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development or project, irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be undertaken in one phase or stage or different phases or stages and irrespective of whether such construction is undertaken or planned to be undertaken at different, separate, or simultaneous times; 
c.  All areas of land where the land is to be disturbed by construction of a common plan of development or project, irrespective of whether untaken at contiguous or separate locations within the general area encompassed by the common plan of development or project, provided such boundary lies on or is within the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one or more parties undertaking any or all of the construction activities; and 
d.  All areas of ongoing, temporarily suspended, yet-to-be undertaken, and completed construction encompassing the totality of the construction activities, irrespective of whether any or all the construction activities are within compliance with this article. 
(2)  Redefining of construction site limits. A city official shall have the right to redefine, for purposes of compliance with this article, the limits of a construction site in extent and amount necessary and sufficient in the judgment of a city official to prevent the actual or potential discharge of pollutants from the construction site to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. to the maximum extent practicable, provided the limits so defined lies on or within the boundary of property collectively owned or leased by one or more operators undertaking any or all of the construction activities at the site. 
(3)  Cessation of construction site. A construction site shall, for the purposes of this article, cease to be a construction site only at such time that all requirements for closure of the construction site as specified by this article have been met. 
(c)  Operators and applicants. 
(1)  Operator responsibility. A construction operator shall be fully responsible for compliance with all requirements of this article for construction activities, as may be applicable to the type of construction activities being conducted, proposed to be conducted, or that have been conducted by the operator at a construction site, including but not limited to making application for a storm water permit, preparing a storm water quality plan, and performing closure of the construction site. 
(2)  Change in operator. In the event that the operator of the construction site changes, all or in part, any and all storm water permits, and storm water quality plans for construction yet to be completed must name the new and continuing operators' names. Any permits, plans, or notices that have been issued or approved by the city for the construction to the original operator(s) must be reissued or re-approved, as appropriate, with the name(s) of the new operator(s) in the same manner as the original operator, such re-issuance or re-approval being obtained no later than ten (10) working days after such change. 
(3)  Applicant. For the purpose of any applications for construction activities that may be required by this article, an applicant is the person or persons making such application and is: 
a.  An operator at the property upon which construction is proposed or is taking place. 
(4)  Division of responsibility. In the event the operator of a construction site is more than one legal entity, the applicant/permittee shall be responsible and held liable for complying with the storm water permit. 
(d)  Construction activities. 
(1)  Types of construction activities. Construction activities are those activities which result in exposure of raw soil on a temporary or permanent basis and may include, but are not necessarily limited to, one or more of the following activities or practices when such activities are done for the purpose(s) of: 
a.  Smoothing. 
b.  Clearing. 
c.  Removing trees and vegetation. 
d.  Configuring or shaping the land surface or subsurface. 
e.  Modifying drainage, drainage patterns, drainage conveyances, or drainage facilities. 
f.  Removing, destroying, or demolishing existing structures, surfaces or facilities. 
g.  Preparing the land for construction of roads, highways, curbs, gutters, drainage devices, vehicle parking, buildings, structures, walls, roofs, floors, pads, foundations, tanks, basements, pipes, or utilities. 
(2)  Construction conduct. 
a.  Any construction at a construction site shall be performed so as to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable, the discharge of sediments and other pollutants from the construction site. 
b.  An owner and/or operator of a construction site shall maintain on-site and post any notice permit or license for construction, and any pollution control plan that may be required by this article or other state or federal regulation where it is safely and readily available for viewing by local, state and federal authorities. 
c.  Application for a storm water permit shall be submitted to the city building official for review at least ten (10) working days prior to beginning construction activities of any type, including clearing and leveling activities, for any construction site for which construction activities at the site will disturb in total four hundred fifty (450) square feet or more of land surface area. The storm water permit application must be approved by the building official prior to commencement of construction activities. 
d.  A storm water permit, issued by a city official prior to commencement of construction activities, shall be obtained for any construction site for which construction activities at the site will disturb in total four hundred fifty (450) square feet or more of land surface area. 
e.  A storm water quality plan shall be submitted to, and approved by, a city official prior to commencement of any construction activity at a construction site for which a storm water permit is required. 
f.  A city official shall require that a construction site of any size conform to any and all conditions of this article for construction activities if a city official determines that such requirements are necessary to prevent a significant discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4 or waters of the U.S., or are necessary because of imminent harm to the public or the environment. 
(3)  Closure and final stabilization of construction site. 
a.  Closure activities. Construction activities at a site, for the purposes of this article, shall not be complete until proper closure of the site has been accomplished. Until such time proper closure has been achieved, the operator of the site is subject to all applicable requirements for conduct and completion of construction activities at the construction site. Any operator of a construction site shall complete all construction activities at a construction site in compliance with the requirements of this article for proper closure. 
b.  Proper closure. Proper closure includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
1.  Final stabilization of the site. 
2.  Removal of all construction surplus and residual materials, supplies, packaging, drums, cans, and containers. 
3.  Removal of all surplus and residual soaps, cleaners, pastes, mastics, solvents, materials for soil amendment or preparation and similar construction materials. 
4.  Removal of all excess, surplus, and unused construction vehicle maintenance fluids, including lubricants, fuels, brake fluids, and coolants. 
5.  Removal of all wastes, trash, and debris. 
6.  Removal of any waste bins, enclosures, drums, or similar containers which are not intended to serve as permanent waste storage containers at the site. 
7.  Removal of all temporary storm water pollution control devices, structures, and materials. 
8.  If not intended for removal in city approved plans or specifications for the site, and to the extent a construction operator or their activities are responsible for the damage or loss of function or capacity of storm water conveyances and appurtenances: 
i.  Repair or replacement of damaged storm water conveyances and appurtenances; 
ii.  Repair or replacement of damaged drainage works and facilities; and 
iii.  Restoration of proper function and capacity of storm water conveyances, including removal of any silt/sedimentation build-up. 
(4)  Permit termination and expiration. A construction sites permit is terminated automatically when all of the requirements listed under proper closure section of this article is met. Permit coverage will automatically terminate two (2) years after the permit issuance date. If continued permit is needed beyond the termination or expiration date, a new permit must be issued. 
(5)  Inactive construction sites. A construction site for which active and ongoing on-site construction activities have halted for a period of twenty-one (21) continuous calendar days and for which proper closure actions as required by this article have not been conducted, shall be considered in violation of this article, unless the construction site owner and/or operator has demonstrated to the satisfaction of a city official that: 
a.  Such lack of active and ongoing on-site construction activity is a result of only temporary suspension of activities; and 
b.  Site conditions are and will be maintained in a condition satisfactory to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the city's MS4 or waters of the U.S. to the maximum extent possible during the period of temporary suspension of construction activities. 
(e)  Storm water permit. 
(1)  General provisions. 
a.  A storm water permit authorizes a construction owner and/or operator to conduct construction activities. Obtaining a storm water permit does not relieve an owner and/or operator of complying to any and all applicable requirements of this article exclusive of those dealing with construction. 
b.  A storm water permit shall be obtained prior to the start of any construction activity at a site by application to a city official by the owner and/or operator of the construction site at which construction occurs or is proposed, such application providing such information a city official may require. 
c.  Application for a storm water permit shall require the submission of a storm water quality plan developed in accordance with the guidance document to a city official for review, such plan shall provide information that will reduce the discharge of pollutants from the site to the maximum extent practicable. 
d.  The storm water permit must be obtained from a city official at least ten (10) working days prior to commencement of construction. Only that construction activity which is described in the storm water permit can be undertaken. 
e.  The storm water permit shall be posted at the construction site, and no construction activity can occur prior to the date of commencement, or after the date of termination, authorized by the storm water permit. 
f.  Construction must be started no later than one hundred eighty (180) calendar days after the issuance of the storm water permit. Failure to begin construction within the specified time frame will render the storm water permit void. 
g.  Application for a change in the date of commencement of construction or the date of termination of construction specified in a storm water permit, must be made at least two (2) working days prior to: 
1.  The date of the proposed change for commencement; and/or 
2.  The date of the originally specified termination date or latest previously approved date of extension. 
h.  If for any reason the storm water permit is suspended, revoked, terminated, or voided, construction activity at the site shall immediately cease. 
(2)  Contents of a storm water permit. 
a.  Address or other description of location of the construction site; 
b.  Name and address of the construction site owner and/or operator, either property owner or lessee, and name and address of general construction contractor, if different from property owner or lessee; 
c.  Name, address, and business telephone number of the construction site owner and/or operator's on-site representative; 
d.  Earliest date of commencement of construction activity; 
e.  Proposed dates of termination of construction activity, completion of final stabilization activities, and closure of the site; 
f.  Practices to be employed for site stabilization during the course of the construction; 
g.  Description of means by which the site is to be stabilized during suspension of construction activity for periods of fourteen (14) or more days and permanently stabilized by the time of completion of construction activities; 
h.  Any other information a city official may deem necessary, whether or not required of any other owner and/or operator making application for a storm water permit; and 
i.  Certification by the applicant for the storm water permit that the information provided on the storm water permit application is true and accurate. 
(3)  Amendment to storm water permit. 
a.  Application for amendment to a storm water permit can be made at any time ten (10) or more working days prior to the time identified in the storm water permit for completion of construction activities, provided the person(s) making application is not in violation of this article. 
b.  If the application for amendment to a storm water permit requires a change in the storm water quality plan in order for the storm water quality plan to remain true and accurate should construction be undertaken in accordance with the amendment, an appropriately modified storm water quality plan shall also be provided at the time of application for amendment to a city official. 
(4)  Late filing of amendment to a storm water permit. 
a.  If application for amendment to a storm water permit is made less than ten (10) working days prior to the time for which the activities or conditions described by the amendment are to occur, exist or come about, and such activities or conditions are not authorized by the storm water permit prior to application for amendment, the application shall be deemed to be a late filing of storm water permit amendment. 
b.  A late filing of storm water permit amendment shall meet all the same conditions and requirements as application submitted more than ten (10) working days prior to the time for which the activities or conditions described by the amendment are to occur, exist or come about, and include other such information a city official may require. 
c.  Construction to be undertaken in accord with a late filing of storm water permit amendment shall not be undertaken until such amendment is approved by a city official. 
d.  Approval by a city official of a late filing of storm water permit amendment or payment of any fees for such filing shall not relieve the applicant from any or all administrative enforcement remedies, judicial enforcement remedies, enforcement actions, or other remedies allowed by this article. 
(5)  Exemptions. Exemptions from requirements for a storm water permit and storm water quality plan shall apply for the following situations or conditions: 
a.  The construction activity undertaken for the sole purpose of yard maintenance, landscaping, gardening or other short term minor ground disturbance activities not normally associated with construction and not requiring a building permit. This exemption does not cover landscaping or other stabilization activities required to properly close a permitted construction site. 
b.  A city official determines the construction is necessary on an emergency basis because of imminent harm or endangerment to the public or environment, in which case the construction may by continued only so long as such imminent harm or endangerment or threat of harm or endangerment exists; 
(f)  Storm water quality plan. A storm water quality plan is required for a city storm water quality permit. The storm water quality plan shall be prepared in accordance with the guidance document and good pollution control practices. 
The main objective of the plan is to identify potential sources of pollution, including sediment, which may reasonably be expected to affect the quality of storm water discharges associated with construction and development. The plan must describe the implementation of best management practices (BMPs), which will be used to reduce the pollutants in storm water discharges associated with construction and post-development runoff. 
Storm water quality plans shall be retained on site during the course of construction and shall be available for inspection by the city upon request. 
(1)  Contents of storm water quality plan. 
a.  Site description. 
1.  A description of the construction activity; 
2.  A copy of any development plans; 
3.  A proposed construction schedule; 
4.  Total area of the site, and total disturbed area, including off-site staging/storage areas; 
5.  An estimate of the runoff coefficient before and after construction activities are completed, and existing data describing the soil and soil erosion potential; 
6.  A description of the existing vegetation at the site, including coverage; 
7.  The location of other sources of pollution, such as vehicle fueling, storage of chemicals, concrete washout areas, etc.; and 
8.  The name of the receiving water(s) and description of any outfalls (size, type, and location), if the discharge is to a MS4, the name of the system, the location of the storm sewer discharge, and the ultimate receiving water(s). 
b.  Best management practices (BMPs). The plan shall indicate locations for and descriptions of control measures that will be used. The plan should clearly describe the implementation of BMPs relevant to each phase of site development such as: 
1.  Before clearing and grading activities begin; 
2.  During all phases of construction; and 
3.  Post-construction/post development. 
c.  Control measures. 
1.  Construction phase. Construction phase control measures to be described in the storm water quality plan may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  Temporary sediment control measures. 
Silt fence 
Sand bag berms 
Hay bales 
Check dams 
Interceptor swales/dikes 
ii.  Temporary stabilization measures. 
Temporary seeding 
Erosion control blankets/matting 
Mulch/compost 
Temporary sodding 
iii.  Final stabilization measures. 
Permanent seeding 
Permanent sodding 
Impervious surfaces 
2.  Post-construction phase. Post-construction phase control measures should be incorporated into the storm water quality plan to preserve pre-development hydrologic regimes. Post-construction phase control measures to be described in the storm water quality plan may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
i.  Velocity dissipation measures. 
a.  Onsite. 
Vegetated swales 
Check dams 
Vegetated filter strips 
b.  Offsite. 
Surrounding local topography 
Concrete-lined drainage channels 
ii.  Predevelopment peak flow preservation. 
a.  Onsite. 
Detention basins/ponds 
Constructed wetlands 
Bio-retention 
Wet basins 
b.  Offsite. 
In-line detention 
Outfall pump systems 
iii.  Low impact development standards. For construction sites located within watersheds that are considered to be impaired by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality, or in buffer zones designated by the city, the owner and/or operator of the site, may be required, at the discretion of a city official, to utilize low impact development standards that include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Minimization of the width or size of: 
Roads/streets 
Sidewalks 
Cul-de-sacs 
Parking lots 
b.  Open-space design 
c.  Urban forestry 
d.  Roof drainage control 
iv.  Guidance documents for developers. The city will make available, upon request, a post-construction control measures guidance and low-impact development standards guidance for owners and/or operators, i.e. developers, of new and re-development projects. 
d.  Good housekeeping. The plan shall include inspection and maintenance procedures during the entire construction phase to ensure that BMPs are in good and effective operation condition. 
1.  Contractor inspections. 
i.  A contractor's inspection of the entire construction site shall be performed every fourteen (14) calendar days and following a rainfall of at least 0.5 inches or every seven (7) days. 
ii.  Complete an inspection report for each inspection performed. 
iii.  Inspection reports shall be retained on site as part of the storm water quality plan. 
2.  Contractor maintenance. 
i.  Maintenance shall be performed on applicable BMPs as soon as possible in areas identified in the inspection reports. 
ii.  Maintenance shall be performed in accordance with manufacturer's specifications or other sources determined by a city official to be acceptable. 
e.  Revisions to storm water quality plan. 
1.  The storm water quality plan shall accurately reflect site conditions and the construction activities proposed to be undertaken. Revisions necessary to maintain an accurate and up-to-date storm water quality plan shall be made in a timely fashion but in no case later than ten (10) working days after the occurrence of conditions or activities requiring such revisions. 
2.  If the conditions or activities described by a storm water quality plan revision will result in an increase in the actual or potential discharge of pollutants from the site, such revision must be approved by a city official prior to implementation of the proposed revision at least ten (10) working days prior to the implementation of activities described by the revision. 
3.  A city official shall have ten (10) working days to approve or reject a revision to a storm water quality plan after submittal of a proposed revision. If a city official does not issue an approval or rejection of the revision within ten (10) working days, the revision(s) shall be assumed to be not approved. 
(g)  Storm water pollution prevention plan (SWP3). 
(1)  For a construction site that is five (5) or more acres and that is required by state or federal regulation to have an SWP3, the SWP3 shall be prepared in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(2)  For a construction site that is one or more acres but less than five (5) acres and that is required by state or federal regulation to have an SWP3, the SWP3 shall be prepared in accordance with applicable state and federal regulations. 
(3)  Any storm water pollution prevention plan required by federal or state regulation shall be retained on site during all phases of construction and made available to inspection by the city upon request. Failure to produce such required SWP3s shall be grounds for issuance of a SWO. 
(4)  A city official shall request and receive at the time of, or after application for a storm water permit, a copy of any SWP3 required by federal or state regulation for discharge of storm waters from a construction site. Failure to provide such requested pollution control plan within ten (10) days of request shall be grounds for a SWO. 
(5)  A city official may require additional information, plans, or specifications are provided in an SWP3 for a construction site if a city official determines such additional information, plans, or specifications are necessary to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 11,268, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 30-69. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into storm water, the storm drain system, or waters of the U.S., said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials, said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify a city official in person or by phone or facsimile no later than the next working day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to a city official within three (3) working days of the phone notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the action taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least eight (8) years. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-70. - Citizen reports of violations. 
(a)  Report by any person. Any person shall have the right to report to a city official or an office designated by a city official, any spill, release, illicit connection or other instance of anyone (as may be identified by name, title, employing company, legal identity, commonplace name, or other description) discharging into the MS4 or waters of the United States, and any other violation of this article of which the person becomes aware. 
(b)  Action upon report. A city official or a designated city office shall receive all such reports by telephone, electronic mail transmission, in writing or in person. A written or electronic record of each such report will be maintained and kept on file for a period of at least eight (8) years by the city, and a copy of the city's record of the report will be furnished to the reporting person upon request at no charge. Also upon request, a city official will inform the person making such report of any action undertaken by the city in response to such report. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-71. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Warning notices. 
(1)  When a city official finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any other order issued hereunder, a city official may serve upon that person a written warning notice specifying the particular violation determined to have occurred and requesting the violator to immediately investigate the violation and initiate preventative or corrective actions to stop the conditions causing, contributing to or resulting in the violation. 
(2)  Investigation or resolution of the matter in response to the warning notice in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the warning notice. 
(3)  Nothing in this subsection shall limit the authority of a city official to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, prior to issuing a warning notice. 
(b)  Notification of violation (NOV). 
(1)  When a city official finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, a city official may serve upon that person a written NOV. Within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of such notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention of recurrence thereof, including specific required actions, shall be submitted by the alleged violator to a city official. If the alleged violator denies that any violation occurred, or contends that no corrective action is necessary, an explanation of the basis of any such denial or contention shall be submitted to a city official within ten (10) calendar days of receipt of the notice. 
(2)  Submission of an explanation or plan in no way relieves the alleged violator of liability for any violations of this article or any state or federal regulation occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. 
(3)  Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of a city official to take any action, including emergency action or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a NOV. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. A city official may order any person who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, to appear before the environmental court and show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the alleged violator specifying the time and place for the hearing, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action and a request that the alleged violator show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any representative of the alleged violator. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant to the rights and procedures specified in this article. 
(d)  Remediation, abatement and restoration orders. 
(1)  When a city official finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, and a city official has reasonable evidence to suspect that such a violation has adversely affected the MS4 or waters of the U.S., a city official may issue a remediation, abatement and restoration order to the violator directing said violator to undertake and implement any appropriate action a city official may designate to remediate or abate any adverse effects of the violation upon the MS4, and to restore any part of the MS4 within the city that has been harmed, provided such ordered actions are limited to actions lying within city boundaries. Such remediation, abatement, and restoration actions may include but shall not be limited to: 
a.  Monitoring, assessment, and evaluation of the adverse effects and determination of the appropriate remedial, abatement, or restoration actions; 
b.  Confinement, removal, cleanup, treatment, and disposal of any discharged or released pollution or contamination; 
c.  Prevention, minimization, or mitigation of any damage to the public health or the environment that may result from the violation; and 
d.  Restoration or replacement of city property or natural resources damaged by the violation. 
(2)  The remediation, abatement, and restoration order may direct that the remediation, abatement, or restoration be accomplished on a specified compliance schedule and be completed within a specified period of time. 
(3)  The cost for preparation, implementation, construction, and maintenance of any remediation, abatement, or restoration as may be ordered by a city official shall be borne by the person to whom a city official has issued such order. 
(4)  An order issued under this subsection does not relieve the violator of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. 
(5)  Issuance of an order under this subsection shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against any responsible party. 
(e)  Emergency cease and desist orders. 
(1)  When a city official finds that any person has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, or that the person's past violations are likely to recur, and that the violation(s) has caused or contributed to an actual or threatened discharge to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. which reasonably appears to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or to the environment, a city official may issue an emergency cease and desist order to the violator directing said violator to immediately cease and desist all such violations and directing the violator to: 
a.  Immediately comply with all ordinance requirements; 
b.  Terminate any discharges which a city official determines to present an imminent or substantial endangerment to persons or to the environment; and 
c.  Take such appropriate preventative action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including immediately halting operations, terminating the discharge or both. 
(2)  Any person to which an emergency cease and desist order has been directed, shall, upon receipt of such order, immediately take action to stop or eliminate the endangering discharge. In the event of said person's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with said order, a city official may take such action(s) as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize harm to the MS4 or waters of the U.S. or endangerment to persons or to the environment. Such actions may include, but are not limited to, immediate termination of water supply, sewer connection or other municipal utility service provided to said person; any facility owned, leased or operated all or in part by said person; or any site for which said person is all or in part an owner or lessee. 
(3)  A city official shall allow the person to whom an emergency cease and desist order has been issued to recommence discharges when a city official determines that the period of endangerment has passed, unless further termination proceedings are initiated against the person to whom the order was issued. 
(4)  A person that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a written statement, in a form as may be acceptable to a city official, describing the causes of the harmful discharge and measures taken or to be taken within a timely fashion to prevent any future occurrence, to a city official within fourteen (14) calendar days of receipt of the emergency order. 
(5)  Issuance of an emergency cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the violator. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-72. - Rights to reconsiderations, hearing and appeals. 
(a)  Reconsideration of and hearing of petitions. 
(1)  Any person subject to a stop work order; a remediation, abatement and restoration order; or an emergency cease and desist order may petition in writing the environmental court to reconsider the basis for the order within fourteen (14) calendar days of the original post mark of the affected person's order. The petition must be submitted to a city official for transmittal to the environmental court. 
(2)  Failure to submit a written petition for reconsideration within fourteen (14) calendar days of the original post mark of the affected person's order shall be deemed to be a waiver of any further right to administrative reconsideration or review of the order. 
(3)  In its petition for reconsideration, the petitioning party must indicate the provisions of the order objected to, the reasons for the objection(s), any facts that are contested, the evidence that supports the petitioner's view of the facts, any alternative terms of an order that the petitioner would accept, and whether the petitioning party requests a hearing on its petition. 
(4)  The effect of any remediation, abatement, and restoration order shall be stayed, pending the environmental court consideration of the petition for reconsideration, and any hearing thereon, unless the environmental court expressly makes a written determination to the contrary. the effectiveness of any emergency cease and desist order shall not be stayed pending the environmental court reconsideration, or any hearing thereon, unless a city official or the environmental court expressly and in writing stays the emergency cease and desist order. 
(5)  Within fourteen (14) calendar days of the submittal of a petition for reconsideration, the environmental court shall either: 
a.  Grant the petition and withdraw or modify the order accordingly; 
b.  Deny the petition, without hearing if no material issue of fact is raised; or 
c.  If a hearing has been requested and a material issue of fact has been raised, hold a hearing on the petition. 
(6)  Written notice of any hearing set by the environmental court as a result of a petition for reconsideration shall be served on the petitioning party personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) calendar days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the petitioning party. 
(7)  The environmental court may conduct the hearing and take evidence, or may designate any employee of the city or any specially-designated attorney or engineer to: 
a.  Issue the name of the city notices of hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in the hearing; 
b.  Take and gather evidence; and 
c.  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the environmental court for action thereon. 
(8)  At any hearing held pursuant to a petition for reconsideration, testimony taken shall be under oath and recorded. Any party is entitled to legal representation and may present his or her case or defense by oral or documentary evidence and may conduct such cross-examination as may be required for a full and true disclosure of the facts. 
(9)  After the environmental court has reviewed the evidence, the environmental court shall either: 
a.  Grant the petition; 
b.  Deny the petition; or 
c.  Grant the petition in part and deny it in part. 
The environmental court may modify the order giving rise to the petition for reconsideration as may be the appropriate based upon the evidence and arguments presented at the hearing and the environmental court's action on the petition. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  If a discharger or operator is penalized as a result of a stop work order; a remediation, abatement and restoration order; or an emergency cease and desist order, such discharger or operator may file a written appeal to the district court. The appeal must include evidence proving that the discharger or operator did not violate this article. The appeal must be filed within ten (10) working days of the discharger or operator receiving the penalty. 
(2)  Failure to submit an appeal within ten (10) working days of the discharger or operator receiving the penalty shall be deemed to be a waiver of further administrative review. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11; Ord. No. 11,268, 2-14-12) 
Sec. 30-73. - Civil and criminal penalties. 
(a)  Civil remedies. The city may invoke sections of the Louisiana Local Government Code and petition the courts of Ouachita Parish, Louisiana, through the city attorney or his designee, for injunctive relief or the civil penalties specified in this article, or both the specified injunctive relief and civil penalties. 
(b)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  Any person who has violated any provision of this article, or any order issued hereunder, shall be strictly liable for such violation and shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation, per day. 
(2)  Any person who has intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence made any false statement, representation or certification in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, or any order issued hereunder, or who has intentionally, knowingly, recklessly, or with criminal negligence falsified, tampered with, or rendered inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) per violation, per day. 
(c)  Determination of fines. In determining the amount of any fine imposed hereunder, the municipal court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the violation, corrective actions by the violator, the compliance history of the violator, the knowledge, intent, negligence, or other state of mind of the violator, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Civil penalties. Pursuant to the Louisiana Local Government Code, the city may recover a civil penalty as per the provisions thereof for each violation of any provision of this article, if the city proves that: 
(1)  The person was actually notified of the provisions of the ordinance; and 
(2)  After the person received notice of the ordinance provision, the person committed acts in violation of the ordinance or failed to take action necessary for compliance with the ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-74. - Right of entry. 
    A city official and/or their appointed representative may, where reasonable cause exists, with or without a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction, including the city's municipal court, enter upon any property for examination of the same to ascertain whether a violation of the requirements of this article and shall be exempt from any legal action or liability on account thereof. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-75. - Violators deemed public nuisance. 
    In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense including a possible lien on the property, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisances may be taken. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-76. - Remedies not exclusive. 
    The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state, or local law and it is within the discretion of a city official to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-77. - Exemptions. 
    Construction activities resulting from underground utility maintenance/repair by the state or city government are not required to obtain a city storm water permit or develop a storm water quality plan for those activities. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-78. - Fees. 
(a)  Implementation fees. The city shall adopt fees for reimbursement of costs of implementing this article, which costs may include, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures, including the cost of collecting and analyzing discharges and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by dischargers; 
(2)  Fees for issuance of permits; 
(3)  Fees for review of notices and plans for construction, termination of construction, and storm water pollution prevention control, irrespective of any acceptance or rejection of such notices or plans by a city official; 
(4)  Fees for conduct of site inspections by the city when requested by an operator of a site or facility, irrespective of whether such inspection is required by this article; 
(5)  Fees for site inspection by the city pursuant to determination of compliance to conditions of a conditional notice of termination of construction; 
(6)  Fees for responding to spills and releases of oil, hazardous and extremely hazardous substances, and other pollutants; and 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this article. 
(b)  Separation of fees. The fees described above relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
(c)  Fee summary. 
Item Minimum Amount, $ Incremental Amount, $ for each full or partial acre of a site in excess of one acre Storm Water Permit Fees On-time application for storm water permit $45.00 $45.00 Late filing of application for storm water permit 150.00 150.00 On-time amendment of storm water permit (with no net increase in site acreage) 45.00 0.00 On-time amendment of storm water permit (with net increase in site acreage)- unit rate applies only to the increase in acreage 45.00 45.00 
(for increase in acreage) Late amendment of storm water permit (with no net increase in site acreage) 90.00 0.00 Late amendment of storm water permit (with net increase in site acreage)- unit rate applies only to the increase in acreage 90.00 90.00 
(for increase in acreage) Lifting of stop work order 25.00 25.00 Other Fees City response to spill Direct cost + 25% of direct cost  
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Sec. 30-79. - Adoption of [article]. 
    This article shall be in full force and effect immediately after its passage, approval and publication, as provided by law. All prior ordinances and parts of ordinances in conflict with this article are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. No. 11,204, 7-26-11) 
Chapter 30.5 - SMOKE-FREE AIR ACT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,421, adopted Sept. 24, 2013, repealed ch. 30.5 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 30.5 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 30.5,  30.5-1-30.5-4, 30.5-10, 30.5-11, 30.5-15-30.5-25, 30.5-30-30.5-33, pertained to smokefree air and derived from Ord. No. 10,650, adopted Dec. 26, 2006. 
State Law reference- Louisiana Smokefree Air Act, R.S. 40:1300.51 et seq. 

Sec. 30.5-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
    Bar means an establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of those beverages, including, but not limited to, taverns, nightclubs, cocktail lounges, and cabarets. 
    Business means a sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation, or other business entity, either for-profit or not-for-profit, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold; professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural, or other professional services are delivered; and private clubs. 
    E-cigarette means any electronic oral device, such as one composed of a heating element, battery, and/or electronic circuit, which provides a vapor of nicotine or any other substances, and the use or inhalation of which simulates smoking. The term shall include any such device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, or under any other product name or descriptor. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
    Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed area means all space between a floor and a ceiling that is bounded on at least two (2) sides by walls, doorways, or windows, whether open or closed. A wall includes any retractable divider, garage door, or other physical barrier, whether temporary or permanent and whether or not containing openings of any kind. 
    Health care facility means an office or institution providing care or treatment of diseases, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including, but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, including weight control clinics, nursing homes, long-term care facilities, homes for the aging or chronically ill, laboratories, and offices of surgeons, chiropractors, physical therapists, physicians, psychiatrists, dentists, and all specialists within these professions. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
    Place of employment means an area under the control of a public or private employer, including, but not limited to, work areas, private offices, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, construction sites, temporary offices, and vehicles. A private residence is not a place of employment unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Playground means any park or recreational area designed in part to be used by children that has play or sports equipment installed or that has been designated or landscaped for play or sports activities, or any similar facility located on public or private school grounds or on parish grounds. 
    Private club means an organization, whether incorporated or not, which is the owner, lessee, or occupant of a building or portion thereof used exclusively for club purposes at all times, which is operated solely for a recreational, fraternal, social, patriotic, political, benevolent, or athletic purpose, but not for pecuniary gain, and which only sells alcoholic beverages incidental to its operation. The affairs and management of the organization are conducted by a board of directors, executive committee, or similar body chosen by the members at an annual meeting. The organization has established bylaws and/or a constitution to govern its activities. The organization has been granted an exemption from the payment of Federal Income Tax as a club under 26 U.S.C. Section 501. 
    Public place means an area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to, banks, bars, educational facilities, gaming facilities, health care facilities, hotels and motels, laundromats, public transportation vehicles and facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, shopping malls, sports arenas, theaters, and waiting rooms. A private residence is not a public place unless it is used as a child care, adult day care, or health care facility. 
    Restaurant means an eating establishment, including, but not limited to, coffee shops, cafeterias, sandwich stands, and private and public school cafeterias, which gives or offers for sale food to the public, guests, or employees, as well as kitchens and catering facilities in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere. The term "restaurant" shall include a bar area within the restaurant. 
    Service line means an indoor or outdoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the service involves the exchange of money, including, but not limited to, ATM lines, concert lines, food vendor lines, movie ticket lines, and sporting event lines. 
    Shopping mall means an enclosed public walkway or hall area that serves to connect retail or professional establishments. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted or heated cigar, cigarette, or pipe, or any other lighted or heated tobacco or plant product intended for inhalation, in any manner or in any form. Smoking also includes the use of an e-cigarette which creates a vapor, in any manner or in any form, or the use of any oral smoking device for the purpose of circumventing the prohibition of smoking in this chapter. 
    Sports arena means a place where people assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports or other events, including sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller rinks, and bowling alleys. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-2. - Application of city-owned facilities and property. 
    All enclosed areas, including buildings and vehicles owned, leased, or operated by the City of Monroe, as well as all outdoor property adjacent to such buildings and under the control of the City of Monroe shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-3. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed public places. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the City of Monroe, including, but not limited to, the following places: 
(1)  Zoos, galleries, libraries, and museums. 
(2)  Areas available to the general public in businesses and non-profit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, banks, laundromats, professional offices, and retail service establishments. 
(3)  Bars. 
(4)  Bingo facilities. 
(5)  Child care and adult day care facilities. 
(6)  Convention facilities. 
(7)  Educational facilities, both public and private. 
(8)  Elevators. 
(9)  Gaming facilities. 
(10)  Health care facilities. 
(11)  Lobbies, hallways, and other common areas in apartment buildings, condominiums, trailer parks, retirement facilities, nursing homes, and other multiple-unit residential facilities. 
(12)  Polling places. 
(13)  Public transportation vehicles, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of Ouachita Parish Police Jury, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transportation facilities, including bus, train, and airport facilities. 
(14)  Restaurants. 
(15)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(16)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings, under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the Monroe City Council or, a political subdivision of the state, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the City of Monroe. 
(17)  Service lines. 
(18)  Shopping malls. 
(19)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(20)  Theaters and other facilities primarily used for exhibiting motion pictures, stage dramas, lectures, musical recitals, or other similar performances. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-4. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed areas of places of employment without exception. This includes, without limitation, common work areas, auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, private offices, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, cafeterias, employee lounges, stairs, restrooms, vehicles, and all other enclosed facilities. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this chapter and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-5. - Prohibition of smoking in private clubs. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all private clubs. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-6. - Prohibition of smoking in enclosed residential facilities. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following enclosed residential facilities: None. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-7. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor public places. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in the following outdoor places: 
(1)  Within a reasonable distance of at least five (5) feet outside the main entrance, operable windows, and ventilation systems of enclosed areas where smoking is [prohibited so] as to prevent tobacco smoke from entering those areas. 
(2)  On all outdoor property that is adjacent to buildings owned, leased, or operated by the City of Monroe. 
(3)  In and within five (5) feet of outdoor serving areas of restaurants and bars wherein an outdoor service station is located and an employee is stationed at the location so would be subjected to prolonged exposure to secondhand smoke. 
(4)  In all outdoor arenas, stadiums, and amphitheaters. Smoking shall also be prohibited in, and within fifteen (15) feet of, bleachers and grandstands for use by spectators at sporting and other public events. 
(5)  In, and within fifteen (15) feet of, all outdoor playgrounds. 
(6)  In, and within fifteen (15) feet of, all outdoor public transportation stations, platforms, and shelters under the authority of the City of Monroe. 
(7)  In all outdoor service lines, including lines in which service is obtained by persons in vehicles, such as service that is provided by bank tellers and parking lot attendants. In lines in which service is obtained by persons in vehicles, smoking is prohibited by both pedestrians and persons in vehicles, but only within fifteen (15) feet of the point of service. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13; Ord. No. 11,449, 12-23-13) 
Sec. 30.5-8. - Prohibition of smoking in outdoor places of employment. 
(a)  Smoking shall be prohibited in all outdoor places of employment where two (2) or more employees are required to be in the course of their employment. This includes, without limitation, work areas, construction sites, temporary offices such as trailers, restroom facilities, and vehicles. 
(b)  This prohibition on smoking shall be communicated to all existing employees by the effective date of this chapter and to all prospective employees upon their application for employment. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-9. - Where smoking not regulated. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter to the contrary, smoking shall not be prohibited in private residences, unless used as a childcare, adult day care, or health care facility. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-10. - Declaration of establishment or outdoor area as nonsmoking. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of an establishment, facility, or outdoor area may declare that entire establishment, facility, or outdoor area as a nonsmoking place. Smoking shall be prohibited in any place in which a sign conforming to the requirements of subsection 30.5-11A. is posted. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-11. - Posting of signs and removal of ashtrays. 
    The owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or place of employment where smoking is prohibited by this chapter shall: 
(1)  Clearly and conspicuously post "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) in that place. 
(2)  Clearly and conspicuously post at every entrance to that place a sign stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(3)  Clearly and conspicuously post on every vehicle that constitutes a place of employment under this chapter at least one sign, visible from the exterior of the vehicle, stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(4)  Remove all ashtrays from any area where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, except for ashtrays displayed for sale and not for use on the premises. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-12. - Nonretaliation; nonwaiver of rights. 
(a)  No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, customer, or resident of a multiple-unit residential facility because that employee, applicant, customer, or resident exercises any rights afforded by this chapter or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this chapter. Notwithstanding section 30.5-14, violation of this subsection shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each violation. 
(b)  An employee who works in a setting where an employer allows smoking does not waive or otherwise surrender any legal rights the employee may have against the employer or any other party. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-13. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This chapter shall be enforced by the City of Monroe or an authorized designee. 
(b)  Notice of the provisions of this chapter shall be given to all applicants for a business license in the City of Monroe. 
(c)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this chapter may initiate enforcement with the City of Monroe. 
(d)  The health department, fire department, or their designees shall, while an establishment is undergoing otherwise mandated inspections, inspect for compliance with this chapter. 
(e)  An owner, manager, operator, or employee of an area regulated by this chapter shall direct a person who is smoking in violation of this chapter to extinguish the product being smoked. If the person does not stop smoking, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall refuse service and shall immediately ask the person to leave the premises. If the person in violation refuses to leave the premises, the owner, manager, operator, or employee shall contact a law enforcement agency. 
(f)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this chapter. 
(g)  In addition to the remedies provided by the provisions of this section, Monroe City Council or any person aggrieved by the failure of the owner, operator, manager, or other person in control of a public place or a place of employment to comply with the provisions of this chapter may apply for injunctive relief to enforce those provisions in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-14. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00). 
(b)  A person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment and who fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
(1)  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation. 
(2)  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year. 
(3)  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year. 
(c)  In addition to the fines established by this section, violation of this chapter by a person who owns, manages, operates, or otherwise controls a public place or place of employment may result in the suspension or revocation of any permit or license issued to the person for the premises on which the violation occurred. 
(d)  Violation of this chapter is hereby declared to be a public nuisance, which may be abated by restraining order, preliminary and permanent injunction, or other means provided for by law, and the City of Monroe may take action to recover the costs of the nuisance abatement per the Nuisance Abatement Ordinance of the City of Monroe. 
(e)  Each day on which a violation of this chapter occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-15. - Public education. 
    The department of health and hospitals shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this chapter to citizens affected by it, and to guide owners, operators, and managers in their compliance with it. 
    The program may include publication of a brochure for affected businesses and individuals explaining the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-16. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
    The Monroe City Council shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the City of Monroe to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this chapter. This includes urging all federal, state, parish, and school district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulations to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-17. - Other applicable laws. 
    This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-18. - Liberal construction. 
    This chapter shall be liberally construed so as to further its purposes. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-19. - Severability. 
    If any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this chapter which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Sec. 30.5-20. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be effective January 2, 2014. 
(Ord. No. 11,421, 9-24-13) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,421, adopted Sept. 24, 2013, set out the above provisions as  30.5-19. Inasmuch as there were already provisions so designated, the provisions have been redesignated as  30.5-20 at the discretion of the editor. 
Chapter 31 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public works department,  4-06; engineering services department,  4-07. 
Cross reference- Advertisements over streets,  3-1; obstruction of streets,  12-151 et seq.; obstruction of public passages,  12-152; sweeping litter in gutters,  21-5; playing ball in streets,  12-221; weeds,  24-16 et seq.; house numbering,  27-41; railroads, Ch. 29; installation and maintenance of railroad crossings,  29-4; construction of sewers,  30-21 et seq.; design standards for streets in subdivisions,  32-72; required improvements in subdivisions,  32-91 et seq.; construction of streets in subdivisions,  32-106 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 33; trees overhanging streets and sidewalks,  34-1; vehicles for hire, Ch. 35. 
State Law reference- Street improvements, R.S. 33:3675.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 31-1. - Wires, height above ground or street. 
(a)  No electric light, telephone, telegraph or other wire shall be strung or suspended lower than fifteen (15) feet from the ground or street. 
(b)  Any electric light, telephone, telegraph or other wire now suspended at a height less than that prescribed in this section shall be placed at such distance from the ground, after five-days' notice served on the owner or owners of such wires; and in the event the same is not placed at the prescribed distance from the ground, the public works director shall cause the wire to be suspended at the proper distance, at the expense of the owner or owners of such wire. 
(Code 1958,  23-20) 
Sec. 31-2. - Gates opening onto sidewalks, declared a nuisance. 
    All gates which are constructed so as to open towards and extend over the sidewalk to which they lead are declared to be nuisances; and all gates shall be so constructed so as to open towards the enclosure or in such a manner that they will not, when open, project to any extent over the sidewalk. 
(Code 1958,  23-21) 
Sec. 31-3. - Sidewalk and banquette construction. 
(a)  Paving of sidewalks and banquettes shall be made by laying not less than four (4) inches of concrete, according to plans and specifications furnished and approved by the city engineer; and all curbs shall be made of concrete and according to plans and specifications to be furnished and approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  All work of curbing or paving shall be laid according to a grade furnished by the city engineer upon application; and the city engineer shall have the right to reject any work not done according to plans and specifications furnished by him. 
(Code 1958,  23-28) 
Sec. 31-4. - Sidewalk repair. 
    Whenever, in the judgment of the public works director any sidewalk shall need repairs, such as filling in, relaying with brick or other incombustible substance, leveling or curbing, he shall notify, or cause to be notified, the owner or occupant of the property adjoining such sidewalk, to repair the same in a substantial and neat manner, within five (5) days from the service of such notice. In case the owner or occupant shall fail to comply with such notification so given, it shall be the duty of the public works director to cause such repairs or improvements to be made at the expense of the owner or occupant, the cost thereof to be recovered before any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Code 1958,  23-27) 
Sec. 31-5. - Gas, water, electric and sewer line extensions and installations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person including any public utility corporation, to extend or install any gas, water, electric, or sewer line, whether such line be aerial, surface or subsurface, across or along the streets, alleys, public ways or other municipal property within the city limits without first obtaining a certificate of approval for such extension or installation from the city engineer. It shall further be unlawful for any such person to connect any gas, water, electric, or sewer line to any dwelling house, building or other structure without first obtaining a certificate of approval for such connection from the city engineer. 
(b)  The planning and urban development director is authorized to immediately, and without notice disconnect and have removed, at the expense of the person who is required to secure a certificate of approval by this section, any extension, installation or connection made without a certificate of approval. 
(Code 1958,  23-29) 
Secs. 31-6-31-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCAVATIONS AND STREET CUTS 

Sec. 31-21. - Permit and cash, deposit. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cut or break any pavement on any street or sidewalk of the city, or to make any excavation therein, without first obtaining a written permit from the city public works director. In the event any pavement is to be cut or broken such person shall also deposit in cash with the appropriate city department or agency as specified elsewhere herein (or, if not so specified, with the director of administration) the amount certified by the city public works director to be necessary to pay the cost of replacing or repairing the pavement to be damaged. 
(b)  In the event of any other excavation within any street right-of-way the public works director may require a cash deposit with the director of administration to cover the estimated cost of any repair work which may be made necessary as a result of such excavation. If the person making such excavation fails to refill the same in a proper manner or fails to maintain the same for a reasonable period satisfactory to the city official in charge of streets, then such official shall cause the work to be done and the cost thereof shall be charged against the deposit; any remaining balance shall then be returned to the depositor. If the excavation is properly repaired by the person making the same, his deposit shall be returned to him by the director of administration upon authorization of the city official in charge of streets. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any portion of the curbing to the sidewalks of the city or any portion of the sidewalks for the removal or insertion of telegraph or telephone poles, or for any other purpose, without a permit issued by the public works director. 
(Code 1958,  23-22, 22-23, 22-32) 
Sec. 31-22. - Restoration generally. 
    Any person who shall have displaced any portion of the streets or sidewalks or the curbing thereto pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article shall replace the same and repair such curbing, street or sidewalk in such a manner as shall be approved by the public works director. 
(Code 1958,  23-24) 
Sec. 31-23. - Trenches. 
    All trenches across the sidewalks and streets of the city shall be kept in thorough repair for six (6) months by the person who dug or caused same to be dug; and in case the earth with which same is refilled sinks, or holes occur therein, the sinks or holes shall be filled by the person who caused the trench to be dug, the filling of sinks or holes in trenches to be made by the person who dug or caused same to be dug for six (6) months after the trench is dug. 
(Code 1958,  23-25) 
Sec. 31-24. - Lights and barricades. 
    No person shall leave any trench or part of trench across a sidewalk or street open during the nighttime, unless adequately barricaded and lighted to prevent injury to persons and vehicles using the streets and sidewalks. 
(Code 1958,  23-26) 
Secs. 31-25-31-60. - Reserved. 
Chapter 32 - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,443, adopted Nov. 12, 2013, repealed Ch. 32 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 32 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 32,  32-1-32-8, 32-21-32-26, 32-41-32-44, 32-56-32-58, 32-71-32-75, 32-91-32-94, 32-106-32-128, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the Code of 1958,  23-31-23-35; Ord. adopted June 20, 1960,  I-X; Ord. No. 7264, adopted March 24, 1981; Ord. No. 7368, adopted March 23, 1982; Ord. No. 9476, adopted Nov. 8, 1984; Ord. No. 7789, adopted April 22, 1985; Ord. No. 7830, adopted Aug. 27, 1985; Ord. No. 7914, adopted May 27, 1986; Ord. No. 9906, adopted April 13, 1999; Ord. No. 10,335, adopted Aug. 12, 2003; Ord. No. 10,756, adopted Oct. 23, 2007; Ord. No. 10,778, adopted Feb. 12, 2008; Ord. No. 10,783, adopted Feb. 26, 2008; Ord. No. 10,920, adopted April 28, 2009. 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08; engineering services department,  4-07. 
Cross reference- Buildings, Ch. 9; special provisions for flood reduction in subdivisions,  13-59; planning, Ch. 26; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; zoning, Ch. 37. 
State Law reference- Subdivision regulations, R.S. 33:111 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PURPOSE AND AUTHORITY 

Sec. 32-1. - Subdivision regulations, short title. 
    These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations" of the City of Monroe in the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-2. - Purpose. 
    The purposes of these regulations are: 
(1)  To provide for an expeditious and efficient process for the review of proposed subdivisions; 
(2)  To assure new development in the City of Monroe meets the goals and conforms to the policies of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and the Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance; 
(3)  To assure the comfort, convenience, safety, health and welfare of the people of the City of Monroe; 
(4)  To protect the environment and conserve the natural and cultural resources identified in the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan as important to the community; 
(5)  To assure that a minimal level of services and facilities are available to the residents of new subdivisions and that lots in subdivisions are capable of supporting the proposed uses and structures; 
(6)  To minimize the potential impacts from new subdivisions on neighboring properties and on the city; and 
(7)  To promote the development of an economically sound and stable community. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-3. - Authority. 
    These subdivision regulations are adopted under the authority granted by the provisions of Act 139 of 1956, Louisiana Revised Statute 33:101-33:120 [33:120.1], as amended. The Monroe Planning Commission (hereinafter referred to as the "planning commission") has fulfilled the requirements set forth in these statutes as prerequisite to the adoption of such regulations. Whereas said laws prohibit the subdivision of land into more than two (2) lots unless an accurate map, plan, and plat of such subdivision shall have been approved by the planning commission and shall have been certified and recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-4. - Jurisdiction. 
    From the date of adoption, this chapter shall regulate all subdivision of land within the corporate limits of the city. All developments shall meet minimum standards and requirements of these regulations, as amended. Any owner of land within the limits of said subdivision jurisdiction wishing to subdivide land shall present to the planning commission at a duly advertised public hearing a tentative, preliminary and final plat of the subdivision that will result in more than two (2) parcels and that establishes, introduces or extends utilities, roadways and drainage. No plat of subdivision lying within such territory or part thereof shall be filed and recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court, and no petitioner may proceed with sale of lots in a subdivision until the final plat of such subdivision shall have been approved by the planning commission. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-5. - Severability. 
    If any part or provision of these regulations or the application thereof is judged invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such judgment shall be confined to the part, provision or application directly involved in the controversy in which the judgment shall be rendered and it shall not affect or impair the validity of the remainder of these regulations or the application thereof. The planning commission hereby declares that it would have enacted the remainder of these regulations even without any such part, provision or application that is judged to be invalid. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-6. - Interpretation. 
    In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Whenever the provisions of this chapter requires higher standards than are required in any other applicable statute, ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall govern; whenever other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations require higher standards than the provisions of this chapter, such other applicable statutes, ordinances or regulations shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-7. - Amendments. 
    These regulations are based on the comprehensive plan, the comprehensive zoning ordinance, and other adopted development regulations for the City of Monroe, as well as the need for uniform standard of design and construction for subdivisions and improvements to carry out the objective of a sound, stable and desirable development. However, from time to time it is recognized that for the purpose of protecting the public health, safety and general welfare, the planning commission may amend these regulations. The planning commission shall hold public hearings on all proposed amendments in the manner prescribed by law. Amendments to this chapter may be requested by any person concerned with or affected by the application of this chapter. A request for amendment shall state the name, address and interest of the person requesting the amendment, the nature and purpose of the amendment requested and the need therefore. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 32-8-32-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 32-20. - Rules of interpretation. 
    The following rules of interpretation shall apply to the text of this subdivision ordinance: 
(1)  The particular controls the general. 
(2)  In the case of any difference in the meaning or implication between the text of these subdivision regulations and any caption or illustration, the text controls. 
(3)  "Shall" is always mandatory and not discriminatory. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense include the future; and words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly states the contrary. 
(5)  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(6)  "Person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
(7)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and" or "or", the following shall apply: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
(8)  Terms not defined in this chapter have the meaning customarily assigned to them, or a meaning to be assigned by a designee of the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, these terms and words are hereby defined as follows: 
    Alley: A dedicated right-of-way twenty (20) feet or less in width that affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Block: A parcel of land entirely surrounded by streets, streams, railroad rights-of-way, parks or other public spaces or by a combination thereof. 
    Block length: The distance as measured along rear property lines between intersecting streets. 
    Building official: A person employed by the city who is charged with the administration and enforcement of building codes. 
    Building setback line: The line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line and that establishes the area within which the principal structure may be erected or placed. 
    Capital improvements program (CIP): The city's proposed schedule of future projects, not including street and drainage improvements, listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. 
    Capital infrastructure plan: The city's proposed schedule of future street and drainage projects listed in order of construction priority together with cost estimates and the anticipated means of financing each project. 
    City: The City of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
    City council: The chief legislative body of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    Comprehensive plan: The text, maps, charts and other descriptive material that is part of the comprehensive plan for the City of Monroe, as adopted by the planning commission, including future land use plan and any subsequent supplemental plans adopted. 
    Conceptual sketch plan : A conceptual representation of a proposed subdivision survey prior to the preparation of the preliminary plat (or final plat in the case of minor subdivision) sufficient for a tentative subdivision application. The conceptual sketch may be drawn to scale in architectural freehand style to enable the petitioner to save time and expense in reaching general agreement with the city regarding the objectives of these regulations but accurately representing the size and proposed dimensions of lots and the extent of any public facilities that are proposed for dedication and which is accompanied by a site features map and conceptual drainage study. 
    Consolidation: The act of joining together one or more lots of record to create a new single lot of record. 
    Construction: Any act or process that requires a building permit and that adds an addition onto an existing building, erects a new principal or accessory structure on a lot, or installs public infrastructure that is subject to design standards, the provisions of chapter 13 (drainage and flood control), or chapter 33 (storm water quality) of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances for the district in which the property is located. Excavation, fill, paving, drainage, and similar activities shall be considered part of construction. 
    Construction, commencement: The first day that any physical improvement of land in accordance with a permit issued by the building inspector of the City of Monroe, including clearing and site preparation, the pouring of slabs or footings, or the first permanent framing or assembly of a structure or any part thereof. 
    Construction, substantial completion: The date at which the work or building project, or a designated portion of the work or building project is sufficiently complete, in accordance with approved construction plans, so that the owner may use or occupy the work or building project, or designated portion thereof, for the intended use for which it is originally designed and intended for. This would include the completion of all life safety systems, a weather-tight envelope, and adequate protection of building occupants and or equipment from hazards posed by additional or possible construction activities or other potential harmful conditions that may exist or become evident during the final work effort to complete the project. This date is then certified by the architect to the owner or client. From this date a number of other provisions are started such as warranty, guaranties and liabilities. 
    Dedicate/dedication: The intentional appropriation or conveyance of land or an interest in land by the property owner to the city for public use. 
    Designee: Person or persons designated by the mayor and/or department head to check, review and comment on all submissions regarding their nonconformance to these regulations. 
    Development: The act of installing site improvements, building structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling or other activity on improved or unimproved real estate. 
    Drainage and utility impact statement: A plan showing proposed site drainage features for controlling storm water runoff and conveying it to public outfalls. A drainage and utility impact statement shall also include runoff calculations and storm water pollution control (as needed) for engineering review, evidence that the drainage and utility impact statement has been submitted to and reviewed by the storm water drainage authority with jurisdiction over the site, and that the drainage and utility impact statement and storm water pollution control plan (as needed) has been approved by said authority. 
    Driveway: A private access way, not classified as a street, road or highway, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is located. 
    Easement: The right, granted by the property owner, to use a portion of a parcel of land for specified purposes, such as public utilities, drainage and other public purposes, the title of which shall remain with the property owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the easement (See Servitude). 
    Engineer, city: Any registered professional engineer hired or retained by the city, either as staff or on a consulting basis, and recognized as responsible for approving construction design of public works such as streets, roads, drainage systems and bridges in the city. 
    Engineer, professional: A professional civil engineer in good standing registered by the Louisiana Professional Engineering and Land Surveying Board. 
    Engineering construction plans: The drawings on which the proposed subdivision improvements are shown and which, if approved, will be used for construction of the improvements. 
    Fill: Any material including, but not limited to, dirt and concrete that is placed above natural grade. 
    100-Year Flood: The highest level of flood that, on the average, has a one-per cent chance of occurring in any given year. 
    Floodplain: The special flood hazard lands adjoining a watercourse, whose surface elevation is lower than the base flood elevation, that are subject to periodic inundation during floods. 
    Floodway : The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point determined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
    Frontage: That portion of a lot abutting a street right-of-way measured along the property line of the public right-of-way and the private property. 
    Grade: The average level of the surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 
Grade, finished: The final elevation of the average ground surface adjoining a building at all exterior walls after man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling or excavating. 
Grade, natural: The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling or excavating. 
    Height : The vertical distance of a structure measured from the average elevation of the proposed finished grade to the highest point of the roofline. No height limitation in this ordinance shall apply to any of the following structures: silos, barns and other agricultural structures; church spires; cupolas; domes; monuments; water towers; smoke stacks; flag poles; solar energy facilities; air conditioning equipment; elevator penthouses and similar structures required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 
    Lot: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separated owned, used, developed or built upon. 
    Lot area: The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
Lot, corner: A lot or parcel of land abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection or on two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Lot coverage: The area of the lot covered by a structure or impervious surfaces. 
Lot depth: The average horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, through: A lot having frontage on two (2) approximately parallel streets or places. 
Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined below: 
Front lot line: The line separating the lot from the street on the narrow side. Where no method determines conclusively the front of the lot, the planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall select one frontage as the front. 
Rear lot line: The line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a triangle or otherwise irregularly shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Side lot line: A lot line other than the front or rear lot line. 
Lot of record: A lot that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed as recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. 
Lot width: The distance parallel to the front lot line measured between side lot lines. 
    Meander line: A line used to measure the natural, uneven, winding property line formed by rivers, streams and other watercourses bordering a property. 
    Metes and bounds: A description of land prepared by a registered land surveyor providing measured distances and courses from known or established points on the surface of the earth. 
    Parish: Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
    Pedestrian pathway: A public right-of-way ten (10) feet or more in width between property lines, which provides pedestrian access to adjacent properties. 
    Planned unit development (PUD): A residential, commercial or mixed-use development guided by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision regulations, other than use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and location, in accordance with general guidelines. 
    Planning and zoning director: A person who is responsible for reviewing and providing recommendations on all zoning, rezoning, subdivision, re-subdivision, variance, and appeals requests to the city planning commission, the Heritage Preservation Commission and/or the board of adjustment. 
    Planning commission: The term "planning commission" shall mean the Monroe Planning Commission created under R.S. 33:101 et seq., which shall have the powers provided for by Louisiana law and as may be provided for in chapter 32, subdivision regulations of the city. 
    Plat: A survey of a tract of land showing the boundaries, dimensions and location of individual lots and streets, survey monuments, topographic data, easements, servitudes, rights-of-way, existing structures, and significant natural features. For purposes of these regulations the term plat is not to be construed as a site plan. 
Plat, final: A subdivision survey in substantial conformance with the approved preliminary plat and the provisions of these regulations, submitted to, and approved by the planning commission to be signed by the required city officials and recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. 
Plat, preliminary: A preliminary subdivision survey plat, accompanied by engineering construction plans and specifications for the construction of any and all public and private improvements shown or required, submitted for the purpose of preliminary consideration and approval. 
    Principal building: A structure in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
    Property line: The lines forming the boundary of a lot, whether those lines are determined by metes and bounds, single lot or combination of lots or portions of lots of record. 
    Public improvement: Any drainage ditch, storm sewer or drainage facility, sanitary sewer, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or for which the local government responsibility is established. 
    Reserve strip: The strip of land smaller than a lot retained in private ownership for the purpose of controlling access to land dedicated or intended to be dedicated to a street or other public use. 
    Revocation: The intentional termination of a public interest in land by the city, with conveyance or sale to a property owner for private use. 
    Right-of-way: The term used to describe the publicly owned improved or unimproved areas between property lines. This area is dedicated for use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and may include elements such as streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street furniture, bus stops, utility poles, landscaping and signage. 
    Servitude: Same as easement. 
    Setback : The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the related front, side, and rear property lines. For the purpose of this section, the setback will be measured to the nearest point of the building wall. A roof overhang or projection not to exceed two (2) feet will be allowed to project past the building wall. 
    Setback line: The line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line and that establishes the area within which the principal structure may be erected or placed. 
    Shoreline: The line along which a large body of water such as a bayou, river or lake, meets the land. 
    Sidewalk: A paved pedestrian footpath within the public right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines. 
    Site improvements: Construction of, or improvements to, streets, access roadways, parking facilities, sidewalks, drainage structures and utilities in connection with any development. 
    Streets: A public right-of-way or private thoroughfare, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. All streets will be within dedicated rights-of-way that have been properly processed, approved and recorded. The following shall be used to classify all streets: 
Arterial streets: Public thoroughfares that serve the major movements of traffic within and through the City of Monroe. 
Collector streets: Public thoroughfares that serve to collect and distribute traffic primarily from local residential streets to arterial streets. 
Local streets: Facilities that are used primarily for direct access to abutting properties and leading into the collector street system. 
Frontage road or service road: A street adjacent to a interstate, expressway or an arterial street separated therefrom by a dividing strip and providing ingress and egress from abutting property. 
Cul-de-Sac: A street having an outlet at one end only and having the other end permanently closed with facilities permitting vehicles to turn around. 
Dead-end street: A street having an outlet at one end only and terminated at the other end by undeveloped property. It may or may not have facilities permitting vehicles to turn around. 
Public streets : A road, thoroughfare, alley, highway, or bridge under the jurisdiction of a government agency. 
Private streets : Private streets are owned by residents, who must pay the fees to support upgrades and maintenance of said streets. The City of Monroe shall provide police and fire protection, as well as trash removal services. The residents shall pay for maintaining or paving sidewalks and street surfaces, maintaining or planting trees, and maintaining or installing streetlights and entry gates. Private streets must meet minimum design standards for drainage and storm water regulations, pedestrian safety regulations, and fire/emergency street design requirements. 
Major state or interstate highway : Those highways, which have an average daily total of at least twenty-five thousand (25,000) vehicles at the intersection or section nearest to the use in question. 
    Subdivider: Any person, group or corporation acting as a unit, or any agent thereof, dividing or proposing to divide land so as to constitute a subdivision as defined herein. 
    Subdivision: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided. 
    Substantial completion: The degree of completion of construction of required infrastructure improvements necessary for such improvements to operate and function appropriately as designed and to be utilized for the purpose for which it is intended and permitted. Substantial completion considers construction, installation, testing, inspection and approval or permitting when applicable. Whenever a subdivision is approved in phases, the substantial completion requirement shall apply to each phase independently. 
    Surveyor: A land surveyor in good standing registered by the Louisiana Professional Engineering and Land Surveying Board. 
    Tentative approval: The approval by the planning commission of the preliminary plat as such approval is required by this chapter. 
    Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of structure upward except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard to determine the width of a yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the maximum permissible main building shall be yard dimension. 
Yard, front: A yard extending across the full width of a lot between the side lot lines and between the front property line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the building site. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the right of way line. On corner lots, the planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall select one frontage as the front yard. 
Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between a rear lot line and the rear of the maximum main building. The rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. However, on through lots fronting two (2) streets, two (2) front yards shall be provided. 
Yard, required: The minimum open space between a lot line and the building setback line within which no structure is permitted to be located as provided in this chapter. 
Yard, side: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot lines within which no structure is permitted to be located as provided in this chapter. 
Yard, through: A through yard is any single zoning lot that is not a corner lot and that connects two (2) generally parallel streets. On through yards fronting two (2) streets, two (2) front yards shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 32-22-32-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
    Any subdivider desiring to subdivide any lot, tract or parcel of land or to change or rearrange any such lot, tract or parcel of land within the city shall comply with the procedures established in this article and other applicable sections of this chapter in the sequence specified. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 

Sec. 32-30. - General. 
    The procedure for review and approval of a subdivision by the planning commission consists of three (3) consecutive steps, as follows: 
(1)  Preparation and submission of a conceptual sketch plan of the subdivision, along with the attendant items required herein. Submission of a sketch plan is not mandatory, but this step is recommended as a means of identifying and solving design and other subdivision problems. 
(2)  Preparation and submission for review and tentative approval of a preliminary subdivision plat, together with the attendant items required herein. 
(3)  Preparation and submission for review and final approval of a final plat, together with the attendant items required herein. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-31. - Filing deadlines. 
    For purposes of these regulations the deadlines for submissions of all subdivisions shall be in accordance with the planning commission's current adopted calendar. A list of deadlines for submission of applications for each year, based on the current rules of procedure shall be available from the planning and zoning office. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-32. - Notice requirements. 
    Public notices are required to ensure that the owners of nearby property, and other interested members of the community, are informed of subdivision proposals and may be concerned with various aspects of the proposal. 
(1)  Notice of public hearing. All notices for public hearing shall contain: 
a.  The date, time and place of the hearing; 
b.  The name of the applicant; 
c.  A brief description of the location of any land proposed for subdivision and the subject matter to be considered at the hearing. 
(2)  Written notice of public hearing. At least ten (10) days prior to a public hearing written notice shall be sent by the city to each property owner within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed subdivision. 
(3)  Posted notice of public hearing. In addition to notification by mail, the city shall may post an on-site sign or signs notifying the public of the scheduled public hearing. The sign(s) shall be erected on the property proposed for subdivision at least seven (7) consecutive days prior to the public hearing, and shall be prepared, furnished and placed by the planning and zoning director or a designee on street frontage of the effected property. 
(4)  Published notice of public hearing. Notice of the time and place of a public hearing shall also be published three (3) times starting ten (10) days before the hearing in the official journal, if designated, or a newspaper of general circulation in the area. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,589, 7-28-15) 
Sec. 32-33. - Common review procedures. 
(a)  Pre-application conference. Before submitting an application, an applicant must schedule a pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval in accordance with this chapter and other applicable city codes. 
(b)  Application forms. Applications, containing all requested information, and any additional information must be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by this chapter. All applications must be complete and sufficient for processing before they will be reviewed. 
(c)  Fees. As per section 32-40 of this chapter, no applications shall be reviewed, and no permit, certificate, or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full. When an application is submitted on behalf of the City of Monroe, no fees shall be required. 
(d)  Complete applications. An application is complete when it contains all the information necessary to decide whether or not the subdivision as proposed will comply with all of the requirements of this chapter. Details for each application are included in following sections of this article. The presumption is that all of the information required in the application forms is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this chapter. However, it is recognized that each application is unique, and more or less information may be required according to the needs of the particular case. The applicant may rely on the determination of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee as to whether more or less information may be submitted. 
(e)  Concurrent applications. Applications may be filed and reviewed concurrently, at the option of the applicant. However, applications submitted concurrently that require a variance or other zoning amendment are subject to approval of the variance or other zoning amendment application(s) prior to the processing of the subdivision request; denial or disapproval of any concurrently submitted application shall stop consideration of any related applications until the denied or disapproved application is resolved. 
(f)  Modification of application. An application may be modified at the applicant's request following the approval of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee before the request is advertised. Any modification after the request has been advertised shall require a new hearing. 
(g)  General subdivision requirements. All subdivision plats and associated construction plans for public improvements, when applicable, shall comply with the following rules, laws and regulations for shall be subject to disapproval: 
(1)  All applicable statutory provisions; 
(2)  All applicable provisions of these regulations and all other applicable laws, ordinances and codes of the City of Monroe; 
(3)  Any rules of the Louisiana Department of Health and Hospitals and/or appropriate state agencies, with such rules providing minimum standards to be met by all subdivision plats; 
(4)  The requirements of the Louisiana Department of Transportation and Development when and if the subdivision or any lot contained therein abuts a state highway or connecting street; 
(5)  All applicable standards and regulations adopted by the city and all boards, commissions, agencies and officials of the city, and; 
(6)  The current adopted rules of procedure of the planning commission available from the planning and zoning director or a designee. 
(h)  Appeals. 
(1)  Any decision on a subdivision plat may be appealed by the applicant by filing a written notice of said appeal with the planning commission or the city council within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
(2)  Upon receiving notice of appeal, the planning commission shall transmit to the city council a certified copy of the proceedings in the case upon which the appeal is taken. 
(3)  Written notices shall be sent to property owners within three hundred (300) feet of the subject property. 
(4)  The city council may overrule such disapproval by a recorded vote of not less than two-thirds ( 2/3 ) of its entire membership. 
(5)  Upon such overruling, the city council shall notify the planning commission, directing the issuance of a certificate of approval to permit the recording of the plat. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-34. - Conceptual sketch plan review. 
(a)  Scope. The purpose of the conceptual sketch plan review is for the applicant and the city to evaluate and discuss the basic concepts for development of the proposed subdivision, and to consider whether there are any alternative concepts the applicant should explore. Once a conceptual sketch plan has been submitted, a determination is made whether or not the proposal complies with current zoning regulations, is consistent with the Monroe Comprehensive Plan and is generally compatible with surrounding land uses. Review of the conceptual sketch plan also provides opportunity to reach agreement on such issues as the appropriate range of and intensity of development; the general locations intended for development; areas planned to remain undeveloped; and general access alignment. The outcome of sketch plan review should be an identification of issues and concerns the applicant must adequately address if the project is ultimately to receive preliminary plat approval from the planning commission. 
(b)  Application specifications. A conceptual sketch plan, which may be drawn freehand in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and including the required number of prints for review at a scale of not less than 1"=200' and including the following: 
(1)  Information block indicating the proposed name of the subdivision, scale of drawing, date, north arrow, and total acreage; 
(2)  Proposed layout, including proposed number of lots and preliminary dimensions of lots and blocks; 
(3)  Street layout in and adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
(4)  Topographic contours at five-foot intervals and all easements or rights-of-way necessary for drainage within or outside the boundaries of the subdivision; 
(5)  Significant natural features of the site including streams, lakes, natural drainage lines, vegetation type, and other similar features; 
(6)  Man-made features such as existing buildings, irrigation ditches, utility lines and easements, bridges, culverts, and drainage systems; 
(7)  Zoning district boundaries; 
(8)  General land use divisions into residential types, commercial, industrial, community facilities, and open space including proposed boundaries of public use or common areas; parking area, total number of dwelling units and total square footage of non-residential space; 
(9)  Type and layout of water supply and sewage treatment system proposed; 
(10)  In cases of major, multi-phased subdivision, phases within the development; 
(11)  The name and location of a portion of adjoining subdivisions shall be drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines or ghost lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivisions; where adjacent land is not subdivided, the name of the owner of the adjacent tract; 
(12)  A legal description of the property being developed. 
(c)  Approval procedure. 
(1)  After reviewing and discussing the conceptual sketch plan, other submitted materials and all other reports submitted by other agencies and/or officials, the planning and zoning director or a designee will advise the petitioner of necessary amendments to the plan before the applicant(s) submits a preliminary plat to the planning commission for review. 
(2)  Approval or conditional approval of the conceptual sketch plan by the planning and zoning director or a designee shall be effective for a period of six (6) months from the date of the meeting at which the planning and zoning director or a designee gives such approval. Failure to apply for preliminary approval within the effective time of the conceptual approval shall render the approval of the conceptual sketch plan null and void, and the petitioner shall be required to resubmit a new application and plan for conceptual review that shall be subject to all land use regulations of the city effective after the expiration. 
(d)  Appeal. The planning and zoning director or a designee shall have the authority to grant or deny conceptual sketch plan approval and any other matters brought before it where its purview and jurisdiction prevails; however, any person claiming to be aggrieved by the decision of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee may appeal such decisions to the planning commission as outlined in subsection 32-33(h) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-35. - Preliminary plat application. 
(a)  Scope. The purpose of the preliminary plat review is to permit complete and accurate presentation of technical data and preliminary engineering drawings in such as manner as to allow complete review and evaluation of the proposed development and its impact on both the site and the surrounding area. The preliminary plat shall be based on the general design presented in the conceptual sketch plan, if applicable, together with the recommended or required changes. The outcome of preliminary plat review should be an identification of issues and concerns the applicant must adequately address if the project is ultimately to receive preliminary plat approval from the planning commission. 
(b)  Application. A preliminary plat application, drawn in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and including the required number of prints for review shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Nine (9) 81/2"x11" reductions of the plat, four (4) 24"x36" plats, and a digital copy of the plat in a format to be determined by the city engineer and at a scale of not less than 1"=200' and including the following: 
a.  General information. 
1.  Information block indicating the name of the subdivision, scale of drawing, date, north arrow, and total acreage; 
2.  Name and address of landowner(s); 
3.  Name and address of applicant, if different than landowner; 
4.  Name, address and Louisiana registration numbers and seals of surveyor and engineer. 
b.  Site information. 
1.  Legal description of the property being platted including the descriptive boundaries of the subdivision based on an accurate traverse and giving accurate angular and linear dimensions; 
2.  Names and owners of adjacent property, names of adjacent subdivisions, and identification of publically owned land drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines or ghost lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivisions; 
3.  Existing improvements including location, width and name of existing platted streets, sidewalks, railroads, utility rights-of-way, parks and other public open spaces, and permanent buildings within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision; 
4.  Existing utilities including sewers, water mains, gas mains, culverts or other underground installations within or adjacent to the proposed subdivision, showing pipe size, grades and locations; 
5.  Natural features such as water courses, wooded areas, lakes (surface area), and topographic contours at five-foot intervals within or adjacent to the boundaries of the subdivision; 
6.  For any waterways or bodies of water within or adjacent to the plat, the present shoreline locations (relative to the meander line); 
7.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodway and identification of the base flood elevation with appropriate floodplain notation; 
8.  Proposed surface drainage and utility impact statement and erosion/sedimentation control plan; 
9.  Courses and distances of the perimeter of the land proposed for platting, based on field survey; 
10.  Names and rights-of-way widths for all streets within land proposed for platting; 
11.  Names and rights-of-way widths for all adjacent public streets; 
12.  Radii, deltas and lengths of all curves based on arc definitions; 
13.  Location and use of all existing and proposed easements; 
14.  Building setback lines in the front and side streets with dimensions; 
15.  Any sites proposed for dedication or reservation for public purposes, including parks, sidewalks, and conservation areas; 
16.  Block and lot numbers arranged in a simple system; 
17.  Location of monuments, bench mark and markers installed within the subdivision; 
18.  Vicinity map at a scale of not less than 1"=500'. 
(c)  Approval procedure. 
(1)  After reviewing and discussing the preliminary plat, site plan, other submitted materials and all other reports submitted by other agencies and/or officials, the planning commission will advise the petitioner as to approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of the application and the reasons therefore. Planning commission approval or conditional approval of the preliminary plat shall constitute authorization to the petitioner to prepare and submit a final plat to the planning commission for approval. 
(2)  In the case of a conditional approval requiring amendment of the preliminary plat, the petitioner shall resubmit the required number of copies of the application documents with the amendments required for approval by the planning commission prior to submission of the final plat. 
(3)  Failure to submit amended documents sufficient to meet the conditional approval requirements of the planning commission in the prescribed time period shall constitute a failure to meet the conditions of approval and shall cause the application as disapproved. 
(4)  The planning commission must approve the preliminary subdivision plat before the petitioner(s) can submit plats for final review. 
(5)  Approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse, unless a final plat of at least the first phase of the development based thereon is submitted within twenty-four (24) months from the date of such approval, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. Future phases of development that extend beyond the twenty-four-month limit shall be subject to review by the city engineer to determine if specifications and design standards meet current regulations. 
(d)  Appeal. The planning commission shall have the authority to grant or deny preliminary subdivision and any other matters brought before it where its purview and jurisdiction prevails; however, any person claiming to be aggrieved by the decision of the commission may appeal such decisions to the city council as outlined in subsection 32-33(h) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-36. - Construction of project. 
(a)  All materials for construction of project shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. 
(b)  Applicant shall submit in writing monthly progress reports to planning commission regarding the construction of improvements. 
(c)  All required tests shall be made in the presence of the city engineer or a designee at the expense of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-37. - Final plat application. 
(a)  Scope. The purpose of the final plat review process is to allow all agencies that commented on the project in the preliminary plat stage to determine if the applicant has met all requirements set forth in these regulations. Once the process has been completed, the plat is officially approved by the city council and filed with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. 
(b)  Application specifications. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved; and, if desired by the applicant, it may constitute only that portion or phase of the approved preliminary plat that is proposed to be recorded and developed at the time, provided that such portion or phase conforms to all requirements of these regulations. The final plat application, drawn in accordance with the provisions of these regulations and including the required number of prints for review shall include at a minimum the following: 
(1)  Nine (9) 81/2"x 11" reductions of the plat, four (4) 24"x36" plats, and a digital copy of the plat in a format to be determined by the city engineer and at a scale of not less than 1"=200' and including the following: 
a.  General information. 
1.  Name and address of landowner(s); 
2.  Information block indicating the name of the subdivision, scale of drawing, date, north arrow, and total acreage; 
3.  Name and address of owner's agent, if applicable; 
4.  Name, address and Louisiana registration numbers and seals of surveyor and engineer; 
5.  Signature lines for the chairman of the planning commission and city engineer. 
b.  Site information. 
1.  Legal description of the property being platted including the descriptive boundaries of the subdivision based on an accurate traverse and giving accurate angular and linear dimensions; 
2.  Names and owners adjacent property, names of adjacent subdivisions, and identification of publically owned land drawn to the same scale and shown in dotted lines adjacent to the tract proposed for subdivisions; 
3.  Natural features such as water courses, wooded areas, lakes (surface area), and topographic contours at five-foot intervals within or adjacent to the boundaries of the subdivision; 
4.  For any waterways or bodies of water within or adjacent to the plat, the present shoreline locations (relative to the meander line); 
5.  Delineation of the 100-year floodplain and floodway and identification of the base flood elevation with appropriate floodplain notation; 
6.  Courses and distances of the perimeter of the land proposed for platting, based on field survey; 
7.  Names and rights-of-way widths for all streets within land proposed for platting; 
8.  Names and rights-of-way widths for all adjacent public streets; 
9.  Radii, deltas and lengths of all curves based on arc definitions; 
10.  Location and use of all existing and proposed easements; 
11.  Building setback lines in the front and side streets with dimensions; 
12.  Any sites proposed for dedication or reservation for public purposes, including parks, sidewalks, and conservation areas; 
13.  Block and lot numbers arranged in a simple system; 
14.  Location of monuments, bench mark and markers installed within the subdivision; 
15.  Vicinity map at a scale of not less than 1"=500'. 
c.  Certificates. 
1.  Certificate of ownership and dedication and/or reservation of all land and interests in land for public purposes, signed by the owner(s) of the property; 
2.  Six (6) sets of as-built drawings and one digital file of as-built drawings for all improvements required by these regulations, with certification by the city engineer and the director of public works that the applicant has complied with the following: 
i.  Substantial completion of all improvements in accordance with the requirements of these regulations. 
ii.  Upon substantial completion of the improvements as certified by the city engineer, the applicant shall post a performance bond, letter of credit, or other surety for completion of any remaining required improvements. For any bond, letter of credit or other surety, there shall be submitted with the plat a determination by the city attorney or a designee as to the sufficiency of the bond offered. 
iii.  A maintenance bond in an amount sufficient to cover any costs that might be incurred by the city for the maintenance and/or repair to the required improvements for a period of two (2) years after completion. 
iii.  Certificate by a professional surveyor and/or engineer certifying to accuracy of survey and plat; 
iv.  Other certificates and endorsements as required by these and other regulations as determined by the city engineer or a designee. 
(c)  Approval procedure. 
(1)  After reviewing and discussing the final plat, other submitted materials and all other reports submitted by other agencies and/or officials, the planning commission will advise the applicant as to approval or disapproval of the application and the reasons therefore. Planning commission approval of the final plat shall constitute authorization to the petitioner to prepare and submit a final plat to the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Courts for recording. 
(2)  In the case of a disapproval requiring amendment of the final plat, the applicant shall resubmit the required number of copies of the application documents with the amendments required by the planning commission for review by the planning and zoning director or a designee for review and approval. 
(3)  Failure to submit amended documents to the planning and zoning director or a designee sufficient to meet the amendment requirements of the planning commission in the prescribed time period shall constitute a denial of the application. 
(4)  Failure by the planning commission to act on this final plat within sixty (60) days shall be deemed approval of it. 
(5)  The planning commission must approve the final subdivision plat and the city council must accept all dedications before the applicant may file the plat with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Courts. 
(d)  Dedications and reservations. The planning commission shall have the authority to grant or deny the final subdivision plat; however, the city council shall accept all dedications and improvements relative to the final plat and to the subdivision. Upon such acceptance, the applicant shall file the final plat with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Courts. 
(e)  Appeal. The planning commission shall have the authority to grant or deny the final subdivision plat and any other matters brought before it where its purview and jurisdiction prevails; however, any person claiming to be aggrieved by the decision of the commission may appeal such decisions to the city council as outlined in subsection 32-33(h) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-38. - Recording of plats. 
    No plat of a subdivision of land shall be filed or recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Courts until it has been submitted to, and approved by, the planning commission and the approval of such commission endorsed in writing on the plat by the chairman of the planning commission and the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-39. - Replat of approved plats. 
(a)  Procedure. An applicant for a replat to a previously approved plat shall, in accordance with section 31-31 (filing requirements) of this chapter, request to be placed on the planning commission's agenda. If the replat involves the creation of additional lots, the procedures for preliminary plat approval shall be followed. If the replat involves only modifications of the approved plat, without the creation of additional lots, the approval process may be completed administratively. 
(b)  Submissions. The applicant shall submit a copy of the approved plat as well as the required number of and four (4) copies of the proposed replat. The application shall also include enough supporting information to allow the planning and zoning director to make a determination that the proposed revisions meet the standards of these regulations. The revised plat shall indicate that it is the revision of a previously approved and recorded plat and shall show the title of the subdivision and any identifying information from the original plat as recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. 
(c)  Scope of review. The commission's or planning and zoning director's scope of review shall be limited to those portions of the plat proposed for revision. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-40. - Consolidation of lots. 
(a)  General. A lot consolidation may be used to remove lot lines for a use/structure and/or to satisfy required setbacks from two (2) or more contiguous land tracts/lots of record under common ownership, provided the consolidation does not circumvent other requirements in this chapter or create additional non-conformities under the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(b)  Planned unit developments. If any portion of the site is within a planned unit development (PUD), an amendment to the PUD is also required. The amendment to the PUD must be reviewed concurrently with the lot consolidation. 
(c)  Submissions. An application for a lot consolidation shall contain the following: 
(1)  Two (2) copies of the completed application form including an accurate legal description and location of the property. 
(2)  The name, address, telephone number, and original signatures of the applicant and the property owner, and the nature of the applicant's interest in the property if he/she is not the property owner. 
(3)  A survey of the site prepared, stamped and signed by a surveyor registered in the State of Louisiana and shall show all showing the following: 
a.  All existing property lines and structures; 
b.  All boundaries of the consolidated lot; and 
c.  If the site is part of an existing plat, a copy of the recorded plat. 
(d)  Standards. A lot consolidation must meet the standards of subsection 32-71(b) and must follow the requirements of the zoning district the lot is located. 
(e)  Procedure. An applicant for a lot consolidation shall, in accordance with section 31-31 (filing requirements) of this chapter, request to be placed on the planning commission's agenda. If the lot consolidation involves eleven (11) or more lots, the request shall be heard by the planning commission. If the lot consolidation involves ten (10) or fewer lots, the approval process may be completed administratively. 
(f)  Submissions. The applicant shall submit a plat of survey as well as the required number of copies showing the new lot lines that shall be prepared by a surveyor registered in the State of Louisiana and shall show all boundary lines of the original lots affected, the linear distances from the corners of the original lot lines, show all visible and recorded utility easements and/or servitudes, and indicate any encroachments on or across the lot lines of the subject properties. The plat of survey shall be submitted to the planning commission and the city engineer for review and signature, and shall include signature lines for the chairman of the planning commission and city engineer. 
(g)  Recordation of plat. Once the lot consolidation is approved, the plat shall be recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court and copies filed with the planning and zoning director and the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-41. - Planned unit developments. 
    For the purpose of encouraging an improved level of aesthetics; safety and environmental sensitivity; and design flexibility in conjunction with a site plan for one unified development site, the city shall facilitate planned unit developments through combination of the conceptual plan as per section 37-60 of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance and preliminary subdivision approval processes outlined in section 32-35 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-42. - Dedications and reservations. 
(a)  Rights-of-way. The rights-of-way for all new streets, sidewalks and pedestrian pathways shall be dedicated to the City of Monroe for public use. 
(b)  Easements. Easements for utilities and drainage shall be provided as required herein, together with the right of ingress and egress. 
(c)  Parks, recreation areas and school sites. 
(1)  Where a park, recreation area or school site proposed in the comprehensive plan and/or the capital improvements plan is located in whole or part in a subdivision, the planning commission shall require the dedication or reservation of said area within the subdivision for public use. 
(2)  In general, the required dedications shall be in a reasonable amount not to exceed ten (10) per cent of the gross area of the tract to be subdivided. 
(3)  The planning commission may determine that land for school sites shall be dedicated for a fixed period of time based upon the future needs of the school system. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-43. - Fees. 
    All costs and expenses required by these regulations shall be borne by the applicant. The Monroe City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for applications, appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. This schedule of fees shall be available from the planning and zoning director's office and may be altered or amended only by the city council. No proposed subdivision shall be considered unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-44. - Penalties. 
    Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located within a subdivision, transfers or sells, or agrees to sell any land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat of a subdivision before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court shall pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lot or parcel so transferred or sold or agreed or negotiated to be sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the purpose of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from the remedies herein provided. The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by injunction brought in any court of competent jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-45. - Gated communities. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards for the development and maintenance of gated communities. The City of Monroe recognizes that gated communities may be appropriate in certain locations in certain limited circumstances such as planned unit developments and subdivisions. 
(b)  Requirements. Gated communities shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The general provisions of the subdivision regulations and other City Codes as they relate to development, streets, and utilities will apply to all such development. A vehicular turn around shall be provided at entry gates to allow vehicles that have been denied entry the ability to exit without having to backup. All plans concerning gated communities are subject to review and approval by the Monroe Fire Department. 
(2)  The definition of a "subdivision," "planned unit development," and "street", as contained in the zoning and subdivision ordinances, will apply to all subdivisions, planned unit developments or streets, whether public or private. All streets within a gated community shall be private. 
(3)  Plats for the subdivision shall depict all fences, gates, private streets and alleys, and all utilities. 
(4)  Design and construction standards. Private streets shall conform to the same standards regulating the design and construction of public streets. These standards shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  City of Monroe street standards. 
b.  Street naming and addressing policy. 
c.  Streets excluded. The Monroe Planning Commission may deny the creation of any private street if in the commission's judgement the private street would negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets or impair access to property either on-site or off-site to the subdivision, impair access to or from public facilities including schools, parks and libraries, or delay the response time of emergency vehicles. 
d.  Private street lot. Private streets and alleys must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the homeowners or property owners association. This lot must conform to the city's standards for public streets and alley rights-of-way. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the city providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and the maintenance of same. This right shall extend to all utility providers operating within the city. The easement shall also provide the city with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access. 
e.  Construction and maintenance cost. The city shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street. 
f.  Plans and improvements. Developments proposed with private streets must submit to the city the same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements prior to the final plat approval shall apply. The city may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency access. All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(5)  Any gate installation must conform to the following provisions; 
a.  No gate shall be allowed on a public street. If a subdivision is converted to a gated community, the dedicated rights-of-way must be revoked prior to the final plat approval of the subdivision. 
b.  All gate installations shall be approved by the fire department and the traffic engineering division prior to installation. The access code must be provided to the traffic engineering division who will provide the code to the fire and police department and any other services that require access. The installation must be completed and tested prior to the city's approval of the subdivision plat. 
c.  Emergency access may be provided by siren activation and key pad or another method as approved by the fire marshal. 
d.  The gate shall be delineated by standard traffic control devices (signs and permit markings) as determined by the traffic engineering division. 
e.  If the gate does not open properly and causes a back-up into the street, the traffic engineering division can cancel approval or take whatever other action is necessary to ensure proper access from the public roadway. 
f.  Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum gate width of twenty-four (24) feet. If the entrance will incorporate a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate widths may be reduced if approved by the fire marshal, but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than eighteen (18) feet. 
g.  If a gate design incorporates any overhead obstruction, said obstruction must be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet above the finished road surface. 
h.  Approach and departure areas on both sides of a gated entrance must provide adequate setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded passage of emergency vehicles through the entrance area. 
i.  All components of the gate system must be maintained in an approved operating condition, with all components services and maintained on a regular basis as needed to ensure proper gate operation. A proper power supply shall be maintained to all electrical and electronic components at all times. 
j.  Gates must release and open upon electrical power failure or equipment malfunction and remain open until the problem is resolved. 
k.  Failure to meet requirements. Each security gate regulated under this section will be subject to a performance test on a regular basis as determined by the fire marshal. Upon failure of a performance test, the security gate system shall be disabled and maintained in the open position until repaired, and shall not be placed back in service until tested and authorized by the fire marshal. 
l.  Owner's responsibility. The person or corporation in control of the property is responsible for, and liable for, any violations of this section. This includes, but is not limited to, the developer, property owner, the homeowners or property owners association and its officers, if applicable, or others who may own or exercise control over the property. 
(6)  Homeowners or property owners association required. Subdivisions developed with private streets and alleys must have a mandatory homeowners or property owners association which includes all property served by the private streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. The association documents must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of streets and other improvements. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable city ordinances. The documents shall be filed of record prior to the approval of the final plat. Lot deeds must convey membership in the association and provide for the payment of dues and assessments required by the association. The association my not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city. No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of the private streets and alleys and assessments therefore may be amended without he written consent of the city. 
(7)  City utilities. Water, sewer, drainage facilities, street lights and signs placed on the private street and alley lot shall be installed to city standards and dedicated to the city prior to approval of the final plat. All city regulations relating to infrastructure financing, developer cost participation and capital cost recovery shall apply to developments with private streets with the exception of those applying to street construction. 
(8)  Petition to convert to public streets. The homeowners or property owners association documents shall allow the association to request that the city accept private streets and alleys and the associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and the favorable vote of fifty-one (51%) per cent of the membership. However, in no event shall the city be obligated to accept said streets and alleys as public. Should the city elect to accept the streets and alleys as public, the city may inspect the private streets and assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the city's acceptance of the streets and alleys. The city will be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The city may also require, at the association's expense, the removal of guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot. The association documents shall provide for the city's right to such assessment. Those portions of the association documents pertaining to the subject matter contained in this paragraph shall not be amended without the written consent of the city. 
(9)  Hold harmless. On the subdivision final plat shall be language whereby the homeowners or property owners association, as owner of the private street and appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, any governmental entity, and public utility for damages to the private street occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the city, governmental entity or public utility; for damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the city, governmental entity or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and for damages and injury (including death) arising out of an use of the subdivision by the city, governmental entity or public utility. Further such language shall provide that all lot owners shall release the city, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and injuries. The indemnification's contained in this paragraph apply regardless of whether or not such damages and injury (including death) are caused by the negligent act or omission of the city, governmental entity or public utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents. 
(10)  Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with city standards for all lots adjoining streets and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary. Sidewalk construction may be delayed until development of the lots. 
(11)  Drainage and storm sewers. 
a.  General requirements. All plats shall conform to the city's standards for drainage facilities. 
b.  Design of facilities. Design of storm sewer systems shall be in accordance with the city's standards for such systems. Materials and construction shall conform to the city's standard specifications. 
(c)  Existing subdivisions. 
(1)  Existing subdivisions may be converted to gated communities if the following requirements are met: 
a.  The subdivision has only one entrance. 
b.  Seventy-five (75%) per cent of the property owners must approve the conversion to a gated community. The home or property owners association will bear the expense of liability, installation, and maintenance. The gates must have access for all emergency vehicles. 
c.  Any dedicated rights-of-way will need to be revoked before the subdivision is finally approved. 
(2)  Subdivision application requirements as per section 32-35 preliminary plat application and section 32-37 final plat application will need to be followed to convert an existing subdivision into a gated community. 
(Ord. No. 11,641, 1-12-16) 
Secs. 32-46-32-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - INSPECTIONS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 32-60. - Inspection of required improvements. 
(a)  At least five (5) business days prior to commencing construction of required improvements, the subdivider or builder shall notify the city engineer or a designee in writing of the time when (s)he proposes to commence construction of such improvements to arrange for inspections to assure that all specifications, requirements, and conditions of approval are met during the construction of required improvements, and to assure the satisfactory completion of said improvements and utilities. 
(b)  If the inspecting official finds upon inspection of the improvements that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed by the subdivider, the inspecting official shall so report in writing to the city engineer or a designee and the subdivider and builder. The city engineer or a designee shall take any steps necessary to assure compliance with the approved plans. 
(c)  If at any time it appears necessary or desirable to modify the required improvements before or during the construction of the required improvements, the inspecting official is authorized to approve minor modifications due to unforeseen circumstances. The inspecting official shall issue any approval under this section in writing and shall transmit a copy of the approval to the director of planning and zoning. For major modifications, such as relocation of rights-of-way, property boundaries, or substantial changes of grade, the subdivider shall obtain permission from the commission to modify the plats. 
(d)  Prior to the sale of any lot, the subdivider shall provide the city engineer or a designee with a letter from a professional land surveyor, stating that all monumentation shown on the plat has been installed. 
(e)  Upon completion of street construction and prior to the dedication of the public right-of-way by the city council, a written certification signed by a professional engineer shall be submitted to the city engineer, certifying that the proposed public way meets or exceeds the design and construction requirements of these regulations. If there are any underground utilities, the servicing utility shall certify in writing that they have been installed in a manner acceptable to the utility. "As-built" plans shall be submitted to the city engineer and the director of public works. 
(f)  The subdivider shall be required to maintain all improvements until acceptance of the improvements by the city, or control is placed with a homeowners' association for private streets. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-61. - Violations and enforcement. 
(a)  No subdivision plan shall be recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court until a final plat has been approved by the planning commission in accordance with these regulations. 
(b)  A person shall not convey, offer or agree to convey any land in a subdivision that has not been approved by the planning commission and recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. 
(c)  A person shall not sell, lease or otherwise convey any land in an approved subdivision which is not shown on the plat as a separate lot. 
(d)  No public utility, water district, or any utility company of any kind shall serve any lot in a subdivision for which a final plat has not been approved by the planning commission. 
(e)  Development of a subdivision without planning commission approval shall be a violation of law. 
(f)  No lot in a subdivision may be sold, leased, or otherwise conveyed before the street upon which the lot fronts is completed in accordance with these regulations up to and including the entire frontage of the lot. No unit in a multi-family development shall be occupied before the street upon which the unit is accessed is completed in accordance with these regulations. 
(g)  Violations of the above provisions of this section shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 32-44 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 32-62-32-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PERFORMANCE AND DESIGN STANDARDS 

Sec. 32-70. - Purpose. 
    The performance and design standards in this article are intended to clarify the expectations of the City of Monroe with regard to basic subdivision and public improvement criteria. In reviewing a proposed subdivision, the planning commission shall review the application for conformance with the following performance and design standards and make findings that each has been met prior to the approval of a final plat. In all instances, the burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to present adequate information to indicate all performance and design standards and statutory criteria for approval have been or will be met. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-71. - Basic subdivision layout. 
(a)  Blocks. 
(1)  General. The arrangement of blocks shall be such as to provide for convenient access, circulation, control and safety of street traffic. Blocks intended for commercial and industrial purposes shall be designated specifically for such uses with space set aside for off-street parking and loading and/or unloading facilities. Parking requirements shall conform to the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
(2)  Length. In general, block lengths should not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet or be less than three hundred (300) feet. Where street lengths exceed eight hundred (800) feet between intersections with other streets, the planning commission may require a utility and/or pedestrian easement, at least twenty (20) feet in width, to provide for underground utility crossings and/or a pedestrian pathway of at least ten (10) feet in width constructed in accordance with design standards for sidewalks in subsections 32-73(a) and 32-71(c)(2). Pedestrian pathways shall also be provided where necessary for convenient access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers and other community facilities. Maintenance obligations of the easement shall be included in the written description of the easement. 
(3)  Width. The width of blocks should ordinarily be sufficient to allow for two (2) tiers of lots with easements as required, except for double frontage lots as permitted in these regulations and those lots that abut natural buffer zones such as streams, bayous or golf courses. 
(4)  Blocks for commercial or industrial development. Blocks designed for commercial and industrial uses shall be of a length and width determined suitable for the proposed use and to accommodate anticipated development. Blocks intended to be used for commercial or industrial purposes shall be designed specifically for such uses with space set aside for buffer, off-street parking and loading and unloading facilities as required by these regulations. Specific design standards and construction standards shall be in accordance with the recommendation of the city engineer and/or the planning and zoning director and the standards of this article. 
(b)  Lots. 
(1)  Lot arrangement. The lot arrangement shall be such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for reasons of topography or other conditions, in securing building permits or other applicable permits to build on all lots. The design and layout of lots shall be such that: 
a.  No remnants of property shall be left that do not conform to lot requirements, that are not required for a private or public utility purpose, or that are not accepted by the city and/or any other appropriate public body for an appropriate use. 
b.  When land is subdivided into very large parcels they shall be of such shape and dimensions as to render possible the subdivision of any such parcels at some later date into lots and streets that meet the requirements of these regulations. 
c.  Lots shall be laid out so that drainageways are near the edge of lots and not near the center of a lot. Lots shall be laid out so that drainageways are located appropriately with regard to natural or man-made drainageways, including those existing and planned for the proposed development. Property lines, where feasible, shall be laid out so that the lines follow the centerline of any drainageway, except when such drainageway is greater than twenty-five (25) feet in width and is required to be dedicated to the city. 
d.  Except where permitted by the planning commission and city council in accordance with a planned unit development, or as provided by these regulations, no lot shall be laid out so that it does not have access to, and frontage on, a dedicated public street according to the requirements of these regulations. 
e.  No lot may be created that is so narrow or irregularly shaped that it would be impracticable to conform to district setback regulations or to construct a building that could be used for purposes that are permissible in that zoning district. 
(2)  Lot area and dimension. 
a.  Lot dimensions shall comply with the minimum standards of the comprehensive zoning ordinance. 
b.  In general, side lot lines shall be perpendicular to the street, or radial to curving street lines, unless a variation from this rule will give a better street-to-lot plan. 
c.  Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough to allow for erection of buildings, observing the minimum front yard setback from both streets. 
d.  Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for business, commercial or industrial purposes shall be adequate to provide for the buffering, off-street parking and loading facilities required for the type of use and development proposed. 
(3)  Soil preservation, grading and seeding of lots. In order to preserve soils and prevent unnecessary erosion of lots created, both the area of and the time during which the development and individual lots are exposed to potential erosion shall be kept to the minimum possible. During site preparation and construction of facilities to be dedicated to the public, it is the responsibility of the petitioner to maintain stable soil conditions of lots draining to public areas. All unsold lots affected by grading and clearance during preparation of the subdivision shall be properly stabilized prior to approval of the final plat or release of the performance bond. 
(c)  Streets. 
(1)  Generally. 
a.  Street patterns shall minimize the overall length of local streets, and shall improve efficiency and connectivity while preserving neighborhood character. 
b.  Roadways shall be surfaced for their entire width and shall have roll-type, valley-type or vertical curb and gutter at each edge. 
c.  Whenever possible, street patterns shall be compatible with, and connected to, existing street grids. 
d.  Local streets shall be so arranged that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
e.  Closed-end streets (cul-de-sacs) shall not be longer than six hundred (600) feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround. 
f.  Alleys shall be provided in commercial and industrial subdivisions. However, the planning commission may waive this requirement where other definite and assured provisions are made for service access, including off-street loading, consistent with and adequate to the uses proposed. 
g.  Closed-end alleys shall be avoided, but when deemed unavoidable, shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround. 
h.  Provisions shall be made for the construction, extension or widening of any public streets where justified by the anticipated traffic volume and circulation needs determined by the planning director or his/her duly authorized representative and the planning commission. 
(2)  Intersections. 
a.  Street centerlines shall intersect as nearly as possible to a ninety-degree angle, but in no case shall the angle of the intersection be less than seventy-five (75) degrees or greater than one hundred five (105) degrees. 
b.  Property lines at intersections shall be rounded with a minimum radius of twelve (12) feet, or otherwise set back to permit curb construction of desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at the street corner to less than normal width. 
c.  Submission of a grading plan showing existing and proposed contours at one-foot intervals and a detailed design for the intersection may be required by the city engineer or a designee. 
d.  Where a subdivision borders a contained or controlled access highway, the planning commission may elect to require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lot with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. In cases where a controlled access street fronts or passes through a commercial area and marginal access streets are required, commercial facilities may be allowed to front on the marginal access streets. 
e.  Each intersection shall have signs on diagonally opposite corners identifying the streets that form the intersection. Construction and installation of the street signs shall be in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer or a designee. 
TABLE 5.1: MINIMUM ROADWAY AND RIGHT-OF-WAY STANDARDS 1 Street Type Minimum Right-of-Way Width, in Feet Minimum Roadway/Sidewalk Width, in Feet, Measured to Back of Curb   Arterial 2 100 TBD Collector 80 36 Marginal Access 
or Service 50 20 Local 45 25 Cul-de-sac Turnaround 
(diameter) 100 80 Alley 20 20 Pedestrian Pathway 10 5 Collector Street Sidewalk N/A 5 Other Sidewalks N/A 4 1 Upon receipt of a subdivision application, the Director of Planning and Zoning and/or the city Engineer may require the petitioner to conduct a Traffic Impact Study to mitigate adverse impacts of the proposed development on the city's roadway system. 2 Minimum roadway widths for arterial streets shall be determined by the governing body or agency responsible for their construction and/or maintenance.  
(3)  Sidewalks. 
a.  Sidewalks shall be provided on both sides of all subdivision streets except where they are determined not to be feasible by the planning commission. 
b.  Sidewalks shall include a ramp-to-street grade at each intersection constructed in accordance with ADA standards to facilitate wheelchair accessibility throughout the subdivision. 
c.  Construction of sidewalks shall be the responsibility of the applicant. 
d.  The applicant shall be required to construct the sidewalk for each lot in the subdivision after construction on the lot has been completed to avoid damaging sidewalks during construction. 
(4)  Street names. 
a.  Continuations of existing streets shall be known by the same name. 
b.  Written notice that the proposed new street names are acceptable shall be obtained from the Ouachita Parish 911 Addressing Officer and submitted to the planning commission. 
c.  At least two (2) street name signs shall be placed at each four-way street intersection and one at each "T" intersection. 
d.  Signs shall be free of visual obstruction. The design of street name signs should be consistent, of a style appropriate to the city, of a uniform size and color, and erected in accordance with city standards. 
e.  Private streets shall be provided with street name signs in conformance with this section. The plan shall note that it is the responsibility of the applicant to pay for the sign and installation of the street name signs for private streets. 
(e)  Utility/public servitudes. 
(1)  All electric, telephone, cable, and other utility distribution lines servicing new developments should be provided by underground wiring within servitudes or dedicated public rights-of-way, installed in accordance with the prevailing standards and practices of the utility or other companies providing such services. 
(2)  Lots which abut existing servitudes or public rights-of-way where overhead electric or telephone distribution supply lines and service connections have heretofore been installed may be supplied with electric and telephone service from those overhead lines, but the service connections from the utilities' overhead lines shall be installed underground. 
(3)  Where overhead lines are permitted as the exception, the placement and alignment of poles shall be designed to lessen the visual impact of overhead lines. Trees shall be planted in open areas and at key locations to minimize the view of the poles and the alignments. 
(4)  Where stub-outs are provided for gas and/or water service to lots within the subdivision, they shall extend from the main to points outside of the roadway to avoid cutting pavement or roadway when service connections are made. 
(f)  Permanent markers. 
(1)  Permanent markers consisting of a metal pipe one-half (1/2) inch in diameter and two (2) feet long shall be set at all lot and block corners. 
(2)  Permanent markers consisting of either concrete blocks six (6) inches square and thirty (30) inches long or with metal pipes two (2) inches in diameter and four (4) feet long shall be placed where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, at angle points, points of curve in each street, and at intermediate points as required by the city engineer. The top of the monument shall be set flush with the finished grade. A land surveyor registered in the State of Louisiana shall do all survey work. 
(3)  For all subdivisions of twenty (20) lots or more, a permanent benchmark shall be accessibly placed, the elevation of which shall be based on mean sea level datum as determined by the U.S. Geological Survey and accurately noted on the subdivision plat. Such permanent benchmarks shall be concrete with a minimum dimension of four (4) inches square, three (3) feet long, with a flat top. The top of the monument shall have permanently affixed a brass disc inscribed with the elevation and location and shall be set flush with the finished grade. 
(g)  Preservation and public use. 
(1)  General requirements. Existing features that would add value to residential development or to the city as a whole, such as trees required to be preserved by these regulations, watercourses, cultural resources, and similar irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design of subdivisions or other developments. No trees shall be removed from any neither subdivision, nor the grade of the land within the subdivision be altered, until approval of the preliminary plat has been granted. If certain trees on the plat are to be retained, they shall be preserved and the area of land within their drip lines shall be protected against any change of grade. 
(2)  Preservation. 
a.  If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated by the comprehensive plan as open space or environmentally sensitive, that portion shall be reserved for open space preservation. 
b.  If any portion of the subdivision is located within an area designated as a conservation area by the comprehensive plan, the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources, or the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, or a similar agency, the plat shall indicate appropriate measures for the preservation of the values which qualify the site for such designation. 
c.  If any portion of the subdivision is designated a site of historic or prehistoric importance by the comprehensive plan, National Register of Historic Places, or the Louisiana Office of Cultural Development, appropriate measures for the protection of the historic or prehistoric resources shall be included in the plat. When the historic features to be protected include buildings, the placement and the architectural design of new structures in the subdivision shall be similar to the historic structures. The commission may seek the advice of the Monroe Heritage Preservation Commission in reviewing such plats. 
(3)  Preservation. 
a.  The subdivision shall reserve sufficient undeveloped land to provide for the recreational needs of the occupants. The per centage of open space to be reserved shall depend on the identified needs for outdoor recreation in the portion of the city in which the subdivision is located according to the comprehensive plan, the proposed lot sizes within the subdivision, and the site characteristics, but shall constitute no less than five (5) per cent or more than ten (10) per cent of the area of the subdivision. In determining the need for recreational open space the commission shall also consider the proximity and accessibility of the subdivision to neighboring dedicated open space or recreation facilities, as well as the type of development. Sites selected primarily for scenic or passive recreation purposes shall have such access as the commission may deem suitable and no less than twenty-five (25) feet of road frontage. 
b.  A site intended to be used for active recreation purposes, such as a playground or a play field, should be relatively level and dry, have a total frontage on one or more streets of at least two hundred (200) feet, and have no major dimensions of less than two hundred (200) feet. 
c.  Land reserved for open space purposes shall be of a character, configuration and location suitable for the particular use intended. 
d.  Reserved open space land may be dedicated to the City of Monroe. 
e.  Where land within the subdivision is not suitable or is insufficient in amount, and when suggested by the comprehensive plan, a payment in lieu of dedication may be substituted for the reservation of some or part of the open space requirement. Payments in lieu of dedication shall be calculated based on the per centage of reserved open space that otherwise would be required and that per centage of the projected market value of the developed land at the time of the subdivision, as determined by the tax assessor. The payment in lieu of dedication shall be deposited into a municipal land open space or outdoor recreation facility acquisition or improvement fund. 
(h)  Water supply. 
(1)  All subdivisions shall make provisions for connection to the public system that does not generate a demand on the source, treatment facilities or distribution system beyond the capacity of those system components, considering improvements that are planned to be in place prior to occupancy of the subdivision. 
(2)  The applicant shall be responsible for paying the costs of system improvements to the public system as necessary in order to facilitate connection. 
(3)  When a subdivision is to be served by a municipal water system, the complete supply system within the subdivision including fire hydrants shall be installed at the expense of the applicant. 
(4)  The size and location of mains, gate valves, hydrants, and service connections shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the public works director and/or the City of Monroe Fire Chief or a designee. 
(5)  Fire hydrants connected to a public water supply system shall be located no further than three hundred (300) feet apart or five hundred (500) feet from any building. 
(i)  Erosion and sedimentation and impact on water bodies. 
(1)  The proposed subdivision shall prevent soil erosion and sedimentation from entering water bodies, wetlands, and adjacent properties. 
(2)  The procedures outlined in the erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be implemented during the site preparation, construction, and clean-up stages. 
(3)  Cutting or removal of vegetation along water bodies shall not decrease water quality or result in shoreline erosion or sedimentation. 
(4)  Topsoil shall be considered part of the subdivision and shall not be removed from the site except for surplus topsoil from roads, parking areas, and building excavations. 
(j)  Sewage disposal. 
(1)  All subdivisions shall make provisions for connection to the public sewage system that does not generate a demand on the treatment facilities or collection system beyond the capacity of those system components, considering improvements that are planned to be in place prior to occupancy of the subdivision. 
(2)  The applicant shall be responsible for paying the costs of system improvements to the public system as necessary in order to facilitate connection. 
(3)  The complete collection system within the subdivision including manholes and pump stations shall be installed at the expense of the applicant. 
(4)  The public works director or a designee shall certify that providing service to the proposed subdivision is within the capacity of the system's existing collection and treatment system, or that improvements planned to be complete prior to the construction of the subdivision. 
(5)  The size and location of laterals, collectors, manholes, and pump stations shall be reviewed and approved in writing by the public works director or a designee. 
(k)  Floodplain management. When any part of a subdivision is located in a special flood hazard area as identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency: 
(1)  All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damages. 
(2)  Adequate drainage shall be provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(3)  The plat shall include a statement that structures in the subdivision shall be constructed with their lowest floor, at least one foot above base flood elevation (BFE). 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-72. - Storm water management requirements. 
    Necessary facilities for drainage of all surface water generated by the subdivision shall be provided and installed by the applicant. In order that the surface storm water from the subdivision is accommodated so as not to create adverse downstream drainage or flooding impacts, the applicant shall provide suitable means to temporarily retain storm water on site until it can be released into the public storm sewer system without adverse impact. The size of the on-site retention/detention system shall be based on a twenty-five-year storm event. The city engineer shall review and approve proposed on-site temporary storm water retention method(s). 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-73. - Improvement standards. 
(a)  General. Unless otherwise stated in these regulations, the following accepted standards will be enforced by the city engineer during the review and inspection of all new infrastructures: 
(1)  AASHTO Standards, ASTM Standards or DOTD Test Procedures; 
(2)  State of Louisiana, Department of Transportation and Development, Standard Specifications for Roads and Bridges (LSSRB), current edition; 
(3)  State of Louisiana, Department of Transportation and Development, Location and Survey Manual , current edition; 
(4)  State of Louisiana, Department of Transportation and Development, Roadway Design Procedures and Details , current edition; 
(5)  State of Louisiana, Department of Transportation and Development, Hydraulics Manual , current edition; 
(6)  State of Louisiana, Department of Transportation and Development, Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices , current edition; 
(7)  State of Louisiana, Department of Transportation and Development, Traffic Signal Design Manual , current edition; 
(8)  National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 U.S.C. 4321 et seq.) (NEPA). 
(b)  Street improvements. 
(1)  Permit. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for any person to surface or improve with gravel, rock, concrete, asphalt, or other paving or surfacing material any dedicated street within the city or any street within the city shown on a general subdivision plan submitted to and approved by the planning commission for construction, unless a permit has been obtained from the city engineer. 
b.  Application for such permit shall be on such forms as may be provided by the city engineer and shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications for the proposed improvement, which shall be prepared and signed by a civil engineer registered and licensed by the state. Such specifications shall provide for constant all-day supervision by a registered civil engineer or an experienced employee of such engineer during the course of construction. 
(2)  Engineering contract. 
a.  The applicant or other person undertaking the improvement of streets for which a permit is required by the provisions of this article shall enter into a written contract with the civil engineer registered and licensed by the state preparing the project plans and specifications, and a copy of such contract shall be furnished to the city engineer before any construction work is commenced. 
b.  The engineering contract shall provide that the civil engineer will engage and use the services of a private laboratory testing service, which shall be selected by the city engineer but paid by the applicant, contractor or civil engineer, for the purpose of making such tests as may be required by the city engineer to insure that the improvement, as work progresses, complies in all respects with the approved plans and specifications, as the same have been or may be amended with the written approval of the city engineer. 
c.  Such contract shall further provide that copies of the reports of the laboratory testing service shall be furnished by such testing service to the city engineer without charge to the city. 
(3)  Construction contract. 
a.  The applicant or other person undertaking the improvement project for which a permit is required by the provisions of this article shall also enter into a written contract with the contractor who is to perform the construction, and a copy of such contract shall be furnished to the city engineer before any construction work is commenced. 
b.  A copy of the contract between the applicant or other person undertaking the improvement and the contractor, together with the customary construction contract bond, shall be filed in the office of the clerk of court of Ouachita Parish before any construction is commenced. The contract bond shall be in the amount of one hundred (100) per cent of the contract price and shall name the city an additional obligee. 
c.  A copy of the bond, with a certificate of power of attorney, shall be furnished to the city engineer before any construction is commenced. 
(4)  Stop work orders. The city engineer or a designee shall be empowered to halt construction on an approved street improvement at any time, should he determine that there has been any deviation from, or failure to comply with, the approved plans and specifications. The city engineer may halt construction by serving on the foreman on the improvement project and/or the person who let the contract for the improvement a stop work order, and thereafter no further construction shall be made until the deficiency or deviation pointed out by the city engineer has been corrected or obviated. 
(5)  Certificate of approval. No street for which an approved construction permit has been issued shall be opened for public traffic, and no building permit for the construction of any building fronting thereon shall issue, unless and until a certificate of approval has been issued by the city engineer after completion of the construction of such street. Such certificate shall be issued only if the city engineer determines that the approved plans and specifications for the construction of such street have been fully met and complied with; provided that building permits may be issued for the construction of buildings on a dedicated street for which an approved construction permit has been issued as provided for in this article and such street may be opened to public traffic, provided that the city has been furnished a surety bond, satisfactory to the city engineer, insuring that the street improvement project proposed will be completed in accordance with the plans and specifications submitted to the city engineer and within such time limit as the city engineer may set. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 32-74-32-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES 

Sec. 32-90. - Guarantees of performance. 
(a)  The planning commission shall not approve the final plat of any subdivision unless the improvements required by this chapter have been installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the appropriate officials and agencies and their approval has been certified by the planning commission. 
(b)  In lieu of the completion of improvements prior to the submission of the final plat for approval, the planning commission may accept a bond in the amount and with surety and conditions satisfactory to it providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the commission and expressed in the bond. 
(c)  At no point shall construction of structures on approved lots commence unless the improvements required by this chapter have been installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the appropriate officials and agencies. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-91. - Types of guarantees. 
    With submittal of the application for final plat approval, the applicant shall provide one of the following performance guarantees for an amount adequate to cover the total construction costs of all required improvements, taking into account the time span of the construction schedule and the inflation rate for construction costs: 
(1)  Either a certified check payable to the city or a savings account or certificate of deposit naming the city as owner, for the establishment of an escrow account; 
(2)  A performance bond payable to the City of Monroe issued by a surety company, approved by the director of administration or a designee; or 
(3)  An irrevocable letter of credit, as determined by the director of administration, from a financial institution establishing funding for the construction of the subdivision, from which the City of Monroe may draw if construction is inadequate, approved by the director of administration or a designee. 
(4)  The conditions and amount of the performance guarantee shall be in an amount determined by the city engineer, director of public works, director of administration, and all other applicable city agents. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-92. - Contents of guarantee. 
    The performance guarantee shall contain a construction schedule, cost estimates for each major phase of construction taking into account inflation, provisions for inspections of each phase of construction, provisions for the release of part or all of the performance guarantee to the applicant, and a date after which the applicant will be in default and the city shall have access to the funds to finish construction. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-93. - Escrow account. 
    A cash contribution to the establishment of an escrow account shall be made by either a certified check made out to the City of Monroe, the direct deposit into a savings account, or the purchase of a certificate of deposit. For any account opened by the applicant, the city shall be named as owner or co-owner, and the consent of the city shall be required for a withdrawal. Any interest earned on the escrow account shall be returned to the applicant unless the city has found it necessary to draw on the account, in which case the interest earned shall be proportionately divided between the amount returned to the applicant and the amount withdrawn to complete the required improvements. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-94. - Performance bond. 
    A performance bond shall detail the conditions of the bond, the method for release of the bond or portions of the bond to the applicant, and the procedures for collection by the city. The bond documents shall specifically reference the subdivision for which approval is sought. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-95. - Letter of credit. 
    An irrevocable letter of credit from a bank or other lending institution with offices in the region shall indicate that funds have been set aside for the construction of the subdivision for the duration of the project and may not be used for any other project or loan. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-96. - Phasing of development. 
    The planning commission may approve plans to develop a major subdivision in separate and distinct phases. This may be accomplished by limiting final approval to those lots abutting that section of the proposed subdivision street which is covered by a performance guarantee. When development is phased, road construction shall commence from an existing public way. Final approval of lots in subsequent phases shall be given only upon satisfactory completion of all requirements pertaining to previous phases. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-97. - Release of guarantee. 
    Prior to the release of any part of the performance guarantee, the planning commission shall determine to its satisfaction, in part upon the report of the city engineer or a designee and any other agencies and departments who may be involved, that the proposed improvements meet or exceed the design and construction requirements for that portion or phase of the subdivision for which the release is requested. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-98. - Default. 
    If upon inspection, the city engineer or a designee finds that any of the required improvements have not been constructed in accordance with the plans and specifications filed as part of the application, he/she shall so report in writing to the planning and urban development director, the city attorney, the public works director, and the applicant. The city shall take any steps necessary to preserve the city's rights. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-99. - Improvements guaranteed. 
    Performance guarantees shall be tendered for all improvements required to meet the standards of these regulations and for the construction of the streets, storm water management facilities, public sewage collection or disposal facilities, public water systems, and erosion and sedimentation control measures. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 32-100-32-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WAIVERS 

Sec. 32-110. - Waivers of certain improvements authorized. 
    Where the planning commission makes written findings of fact that due to special circumstances of a particular lot proposed to be subdivided, the provision of certain required improvements is not requisite to provide for the public health, safety or welfare, or are inappropriate because of inadequate or lacking connecting facilities adjacent to or in proximity of the proposed subdivision, it may waive the requirement for such improvements, subject to appropriate conditions, provided the waivers do not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan, the comprehensive zoning ordinance, or these regulations, and further provided the performance standards of these regulations and the criteria of the subdivision statute have been or will be met by the proposed subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-111. - Waiver of procedural steps. 
(a)  The commission, either directly or through a designee, may allow an applicant to combine the final plat and preliminary plat application steps into one procedure, upon making all of the following written findings of fact: 
(1)  No new streets are proposed and no change in existing or proposed street rights-of-way is required; 
(2)  The proposal requires moving a property line between two (2) or more existing adjacent lots or parcels without creating a new lot; 
(3)  No additional non-conformities will be created under the comprehensive zoning ordinance; and 
(4)  The application contains all other applicable submissions required for both the preliminary and final plat steps, except for those items for which a waiver of a required submission has been requested and granted. 
(b)  Upon granting waivers in accordance with subsections 32-111(a), 32-111(b) and 32-111(c) of this chapter, the commission shall set conditions so that the purposes of these regulations are met. 
(c)  A plat of survey showing the new lot lines shall be prepared by a surveyor registered in the State of Louisiana and shall show all boundary lines of the original lots affected, the linear distances from the corners of the original lot lines, show all visible and recorded utility easements and/or servitudes, and indicate any encroachments on or across the lot lines of the subject properties. 
(d)  The plat of survey shall be submitted to the planning commission and the city engineer for review and signature, and shall include signature lines for the chairman of the planning commission and city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 32-112. - Waivers to be shown on final plat. 
    When the commission grants a waiver to any of the requirements of these regulations, the final plat, to be recorded with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court, shall indicate the waivers granted and the date on which they were granted. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Chapter 32.5 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 32.5-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations governing the installation of wireless communications in the City of Monroe and to create a rational policy for the siting of wireless communications systems within the City of Monroe while protecting the public against adverse impacts on the public welfare and the city's aesthetic resources. 
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 32.5-2. - Definitions. 
    Communication tower means a tower, pole, or similar structure which supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purpose above ground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building or other structure. 
    Height of tower means the distance from the ground elevation of the base of the structure to the top of the structure or any attached wireless transmission or relay equipment. 
    Residential setback means the distance from the property line of any residential use to the base of the tower of a wireless facility. 
    Telecommunications means the transmission, between or among points specified by the user, of information for the user's choosing, without change in the form or content of the information as sent and received. 
    Wireless communication site includes the property or land owned or leased for use by a telecommunications carrier for the purpose of operating a wireless facility, and all other improvements thereon, including parking and ingress and egress and any other related easements. 
    Wireless facility includes the tower, antennae, relay equipment, perimeter fences and any other equipment or buildings necessary for the operation of wireless reception and transmission. 
    Wireless transmission and relay equipment means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs, or similar devices used for the transmission or reception of telecommunication signals external to, inside or attached to the exterior of any building or other structures. 
    Wireless site plan includes any documentation required to support an application for location of a wireless communication site, set forth in section 32.5-15, application requirements, and section 32.5-16, conditions, of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 32.5-3. - Administration. 
    A communications tower and/or antenna, or wireless transmission and relay equipment may be permitted upon determination that all of the applicable conditions in this chapter are met. 
    Every permit issued for a communications tower and/or antenna, wireless transmission and relay equipment and a wireless facility shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within six (6) months after the date of issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of six (6) months after the time work is commenced. One extension of time, for a period not to exceed six (6) months, may be allowed for the permit. The extension shall be requested in writing to the zoning administrator and justifiable cause demonstrated. Extensions shall be determined by the planning director. 
    Wireless transmission and relay equipment located in or on existing structures are exempt from the following height and residential setback requirements. 
    Zones in which uses are permitted through Planning Approval of a Wireless Site Plan are: 
Zones Maximum Height Minimum Setback 
to Property Line of 
Residential Use I-2 None 200 feet I-1 None 200 feet B-4, B-3, O-L 260 feet 200 feet B-5, B-2  85 feet 200 feet  
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Secs. 32.5-4-32.5-14. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - APPLICATIONS 

Sec. 32.5-15. - Application requirements. 
    The applicant for a building permit for construction of a communications tower, wireless facility, wireless communication site, or for location or co-location on an existing structure must file an application for certificate of occupancy with the planning and zoning office and with the inspections office. 
    An application for location and/or co-location on an existing structure, or replacement of an existing tower, wireless facility, or wireless communication site will be reviewed by the division of planning and zoning. For such an application to be approved, all requirements outlined in this chapter must be met to the fullest extent possible by the owner/lessor of the wireless communication site, and/or the owner/lessor of the wireless facility. 
    The applicant for a wireless site plan approval by the planning commission will file an application for planning approval with the office of planning and zoning. 
    The following documents must be included in all applications submitted, to the extent applicable: 
(a)  One copy of typical specifications for proposed structures and antennae, including description of design characteristics and material. 
(b)  A site plan drawn to scale showing property boundaries, tower location, tower height, guy wires and anchors, existing structures, photographs or elevation drawings depicting typical design of proposed structures, required parking, fences, and landscape plan. A survey from a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer should indicate the distance from any existing residential land uses on adjacent property to the wireless facility. 
(c)  A current map, or update of an existing map on file with the city, showing locations of the applicant's antennae, facilities, and existing towers serving any property within the city. 
(d)  A certificate from a licensed structural engineer of tower capacity by type and number of the communication tower, and a certification that the tower is designed to withstand winds in accordance with ANSI/EIA/TIA 222, latest revision, standards. 
(e)  Identification of the owners of all antenna and equipment to be located on the site. 
(f)  Written authorization from the site owner, or authorized agent, allowing applicant to submit the application. 
(g)  If required, certification by the applicant that the proposed activity is in compliance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements. 
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 32.5-16. - Conditions. 
    Applicants for a new wireless facility must show that all applicable conditions are met. 
(a)  The proposed communications tower, antenna or accessory structure will be placed in a location which will minimize the visual impact on the surrounding area and allow the facility to function in accordance with minimum standards imposed by applicable communications regulations and applicant's technical design requirements. Priority shall be given applications which desire locations on existing structures, property zoned for industrial use and property dedicated for public use. 
(b)  Prior to consideration of a permit for location on private property, applicant must show that available sites dedicated for public use and available privately owned sites occupied by towers or existing structures, within the search area that the new site would serve, are unsuitable for operation of the facility under applicable communication regulations and applicant's technical design requirements. 
(c)  Applicant must show that a proposed communications tower to be located in zoning districts I-2, I-1, O-L, B-5, B-4, B-3 and B-2 for which a height variance has been applied, is designed to accommodate additional antennae and wireless transmission and relay equipment for similar telecommunication services of another provider, and must make space on the proposed tower when technically feasible. Applicant must cooperate and negotiate fairly with other telecommunications providers regarding co-location lease agreements, and must offer available space to other telecommunications providers at a reasonable rate. 
(d)  A permit for a proposed communications tower within one thousand (1,000) feet of an existing tower or a permitted communication tower site shall not be issued unless the applicant certifies that the existing tower does not meet applicant's structural specifications and/or applicant's technical design requirements, that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable, or that a co-location agreement could not be obtained. 
(e)  All wireless facilities must adhere to regulations contained in the City of Monroe Code, including, but not limited to site development regulations, visibility, fencing, screening, landscaping, parking access, lot size, exterior illumination, sign, and storage. In addition, the applicant must verify that a sign will be posted on the wireless facility in a reasonably visible location no larger in size than that which is necessary to list the name, address, local telephone number and an emergency response number of the applicant or subsequent owner of the facility. In no circumstances shall any advertising signs or displays be allowed on any wireless facility. No lighting shall be allowed except for aesthetic purposes or as required by FAA regulations or other applicable authorities. 
(f)  Wireless facilities shall not be located within any residential subdivision or zone which allows residential usage without prior variance approval. 
(g)  Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable. 
(h)  The entire facility must be aesthetically and architecturally compatible with its environment. 
(i)  Walls or fences constructed of wood, brick, or masonry at least six (6) feet in height shall be used to secure the site and provide an opaque barrier. Such walls or fences shall be used in combination with landscaping to provide security or increase the buffer to other land uses. Other types of fences shall be allowed only if used in conjunction with evergreen shrubs or hedges when upon maturity are equal to or greater than the height of the fence and are a minimum of four (4) feet in height at planting, for the purposes of providing an opaque barrier. 
(j)  The communications tower, wireless transmission and relay equipment, antennas, and support structures shall be constructed of a material with a neutral color and shall be designed to blend in with the surrounding landscape, building and uses, unless otherwise required by federal or state laws. 
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 32.5-17. - Notification. 
    The planning and zoning office will notify all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the site for any proposed new facility or application for structural additions to any existing facility, and will notify all other telecommunications providers which have registered with the planning commission. The planning commission must post signs similar to rezoning signs at least ten (10) days prior to the required public hearing on the application and advertise the public hearing in the newspaper as required in zoning cases. 
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Secs. 32.5-18-32.5-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS 

Sec. 32.5-25. - Abandonment. 
    In the event the use of any communication tower has been discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the director of planning who shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the communication tower owner/operator regarding the issue of tower usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an additional one hundred eighty (180) days within which to (1) reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower for the purpose intended, or (2) dismantle and remove the tower and associated facilities. At the earlier of one hundred eighty-one (181) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, all permits issued for the communication towers and wireless facilities shall expire and a penalty in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) a day shall be imposed upon the record owner of the tower until the date of removal. 
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Sec. 32.5-26. - Variances. 
    Variances from the conditions of the telecommunications ordinance, including but not limited to setback, height, fencing, and zoning, may be granted only after hearing and joint approval of the Monroe City Council through a wireless site plan for wireless facilities review. Applications should be submitted to the division of planning and zoning four (4) weeks prior to the city council hearing date. 
(Ord. No. 9792, 4-14-98) 
Secs. 32.5-27-32.5-40. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES 

Sec. 32.5-41. - Purpose. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to establish policies and procedures for the placement of small wireless facilities in City of Monroe rights-of-way within the incorporated city limits which will provide public benefit consistent with the preservation of the integrity, safe usage, and visual qualities of the city' s rights-of-way and the city as a whole. 
(b)  Intent. In enacting this article, the city is establishing uniform standards to address issues presented by small wireless facilities, including without limitation, to: 
(1)  Prevent interference with the use of streets, sidewalks, alleys, parkways and other public ways and places; 
(2)  Prevent the hindrance of public safety; 
(3)  Prevent the creation of or adverse impact on visual and physical obstructions and other conditions that are potentially unsafe or hazardous to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
(4)  Prevent interference with the facilities and operations of facilities lawfully located in rights-of-way or public property, as well as public safety vehicles; 
(5)  Protect against environmental damage, including damage to trees; 
(6)  Preserve the character of the neighborhoods in which facilities are installed; and 
(7)  Facilitate rapid deployment of small cell facilities to provide the benefits of advanced wireless services. 
(c)  Conflicts with other chapters. This chapter supersedes all chapters or parts of chapters adopted prior hereto that are in conflict herewith, to the extent of such conflict, except wherever possible this chapter shall be interpreted to reconcile with all chapters applicable to public rights-of-way adopted prior hereto. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  1, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-42. - Definitions. 
    The terms below have the following meanings for purposes of this article. 
    Antenna means communications equipment that transmits or receives electromagnetic radio frequency signals used in the provision of wireless services. 
    Applicable codes means uniform building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or mechanical codes adopted by a recognized national code organization or local amendments thereto lawfully adopted to protect health and safety or other public purpose. 
    Applicant means any person who submits an application and is a wireless provider. 
    Application means a City of Monroe small wireless facility application which is a request submitted by an applicant (i) for a permit to collocate small wireless facilities; or (ii) to approve the installation or modification of a utility pole or wireless support structure. 
    City owned pole means (i) a utility pole owned or operated by the city in the rights-of-way, including a utility pole that provides lighting and structure for signage, and excluding pole or structure or signage used wholly or in part for traffic control, and (ii) a pole or similar structure owned or operated by the city in the ROW that supports only wireless facilities. 
    City means the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    City council means the city council of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    City engineer means the person appointed by the mayor as the manager to perform the responsibilities in this article. 
    Collocate means to install, mount, maintain, modify, operate, or replace wireless facilities on or adjacent to a wireless support structure or utility pole. Collocation has a corresponding meaning. 
    Day means calendar day. 
    Fee means a one-time charge. 
    Permit shall mean the City of Monroe small cell facility permit issued by the city engineer upon satisfaction of the requirements of this chapter, which permit shall be in addition to and not instead of other non-discriminatory permits required for use of the public rights-of-way. 
    Person means an individual, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, trust, or other entity or organization, including the city. 
    Provider includes wireless infrastructure provider, wireless provider, and wireless services provider. 
    Rate means a recurring charge. 
    Rights-of-way or ROW means the area on, below, or above a roadway, highway, street, sidewalk, alley, or similar property, but not including a state or federal interstate or highway, inside the incorporated limits of the city. 
    Small wireless facility means a wireless facility that meets both of the following qualifications: 
(1)  Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna that has exposed elements, the antenna and all of its exposed elements could fit within an enclosure of no more than six (6) cubic feet; and 
(2)  All other imaginary wireless equipment associated with the facility is cumulatively no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume. 
The following types of associated ancillary equipment are not included in the calculation of equipment volume: electric meter, concealment elements, telecommunications demarcation box, ground-based enclosures, grounding equipment, power transfer switch, cut-off switch and vertical cable runs for the connection of power and other services. 
    Utility pole means a pole or similar structure that is used solely for the purpose of carrying electric distribution lines or cables or wires for telecommunications, cable or electric service, or for lighting, signage, or a similar function regardless of ownership, including city owned poles. Such term shall not include anything used for traffic control nor structures supporting only wireless facilities. 
    Wireless facility means equipment at a fixed location that enables wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network, including (i) equipment associated with wireless communications; and (ii) radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration. The term includes small wireless facilities. The term does not include the structure or improvements on, under, or within which the equipment is collocated. 
    Wireless infrastructure provider means any person duly licensed and in good standing who is authorized by any and all federal, state and local divisions of administration authorized to issue such licenses to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities or wireless support structures, but that is not a wireless services provider. 
    Wireless provider means a wireless infrastructure provider or a wireless services provider. 
    Wireless services means services, whether at a fixed location or any mobile, provide using wireless facilities. 
    Wireless services provider means any person or entity duly licensed and in good standing who provides wireless services and is authorized by any and all federal, state and local laws which authorize the issuance of such licenses to provide telecommunications service in the state, that builds or installs wireless communication transmission equipment, wireless facilities and/or wireless support structures. 
    Wireless support structure means a freestanding structure, such as a monopole; tower, either guyed or self-supporting; billboard; or, other existing or proposed structure designed to support or capable of supporting wireless facilities. Such term shall not include a utility pole. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  2, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-43. - Permitted use; application and fees. 
(a)  Permitted use. Collocation of a small cell facility or a new or modified utility pole or wireless support structure for the collocation of a small cell facility shall be a permitted use subject to the restrictions in section 32.5-45. 
(b)  Permit required. No person shall collocate, install or replace a small wireless facility or utility pole or wireless support structure in the rights-of-way, without first filing a City of Monroe small wireless facility application and obtaining a permit therefore. 
(c)  Other permits remain applicable. The permit required and fees made applicable by this article are in addition to and not instead of other non-discriminatory permits and fees required for the installation of utilities in the public right-of-way and/or for temporary traffic control if necessary for the installation of the permitted wireless facility at a particular location. 
(d)  Permit application. All small wireless facility applications for permit filed pursuant to this article shall be on a form, paper or electronic, provided by the city and in accordance with the permit application guidelines issued by the city engineer. The applicant may designate portions of its application materials that it reasonably believes contain proprietary or confidential information as "proprietary" or "confidential" by clearly marking each page of such materials accordingly. 
(e)  Application requirements. The small wireless facility permit application shall be made by the wireless provider or its duly authorized representative in accordance with the permit application guidelines issued by the city engineer and shall contain the following: 
(1)  The applicant' s name, address, telephone number, and e-mail address. 
(2)  The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and email addresses of all consultants, if any, acting on behalf of the applicant with respect to the filing of the application. 
(3)  A general description of the proposed work and the purposes and intent of the small wireless facility. The scope and detail of such description shall be in accordance with the permit application guidelines issued by the city engineer and appropriate to the nature and character of the work to be performed, with special emphasis on those matters likely to be affected or impacted by the work proposed. 
(4)  An initial application submittal in accordance with the permit application guidelines shall include a dimensioned site plan and the identification of all other utilities existing in the right-of-way together with a certification of non-interference by a licensed professional engineer. Applications to collocate to existing poles or facilities shall also include a load analysis with certification of adequate structural capacity by a licensed professional engineer. 
(5)  A small wireless facility shall comply with all applicable codes and shall not hinder the public safety or create a hazardous or unsafe condition. 
(f)  Routine maintenance and replacement. Provided the wireless provider has a current permit for the applicable location, a City of Monroe small wireless facility application shall not be required for: (i) routine maintenance which does not significantly change the existing facility in size or configuration; and (ii) the replacement of a small wireless facility with another small wireless facility that is substantially similar or smaller in size, weight, and height. A copy of the permit must be available at the site when work commences and throughout the duration of the work. 
(g)  Information updates. Any amendment to information contained in a permit application shall be submitted in writing to the city for review and approval within thirty (30) days after the change necessitating the amendment. 
(h)  Application fees. 
(1)  Fee for administrative costs. Unless otherwise provided by law, all applications for permits pursuant to this article shall be accompanied by a fee for actual, direct, and reasonable costs incurred by the city related to processing the application, but shall not exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) each for each small wireless facility addressed in the application and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) each for each wireless support structure or attachment to a city owned pole. 
(2)  Reimbursable review costs. The amount of the actual, direct, and reasonable costs for application fees shall not include costs incurred in a relation to third-party legal or engineering review of an application; or direct payments or reimbursement of third-party public right-of-way rates or fees charged on a contingency basis or under a result-based arrangement. Reimbursement of such costs shall be in addition to and no instead of the application fees. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  3, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-44. - Action on permit applications. 
(a)  Review of small cell facility applications. 
(1)  The city shall review the application for a small wireless facility permit for conformity with applicable laws and regulations including the requirements of this article and the permit application guidelines, and shall issue a small cell facility permit on nondiscriminatory terms and conditions subject to the following requirements: 
a.  The city shall within ten (10) business days of receiving an initial application submittal, take one (1) of the following actions: 
1.  Provide the applicant with a written acknowledgment of complete application; 
2.  Provide the applicant with written notice the city requires five (5) additional business days from the date of notice to review the application for completeness; 
3.  Schedule an application review meeting with the applicant to discuss the content of the application, which meeting can be in person or by teleconference; or 
4.  If an application is incomplete the city shall specifically identify the missing information and/or deficiencies in writing. 
b.  The total review time of the initial application submittal for completeness, including all extensions, shall not exceed thirty (30) calendar days from the date stamp on the initial submittal unless agreed in writing by the city and the applicant. 
c.  The city shall make its final decision to approve or deny the application within sixty (60) calendar days from receipt of a complete application. For purposes of this section the date of receipt of a complete application shall be the date of the acknowledgement of complete application. 
d.  The city shall advise the applicant in writing of its final decision, and in the final decision document the basis for a denial including specific code or public safety provisions on which the denial was based, and send the documentation to the applicant on or before the day the city denies the application. The applicant may cure the deficiencies identified by the city and resubmit the application within thirty (30) days of the denial without paying an additional application fee. The city shall approve or deny the revised application within thirty (30) days of receipt of the amended application. The subsequent review by the city shall be limited to the deficiencies cited in the original denial. 
e.  The review and response times in this section may be extended by agreement between the city and the applicant. 
(2)  Unless otherwise agreed by the city and the applicant, if the city fails to act on an application within fifty (50) calendar days from date of the acknowledgement of complete application, the applicant shall provide written first notice to the city of the date it calculates as the expiration of the time period for acting together with evidence of the date of submission of the complete application. If upon receipt of such written first notice the city fails to act the applicant may provide a written final notice that the application is deemed approved in accordance with applicable federal law. 
(3)  An applicant seeking to construct, modify or replace a network of small wireless facilities may, at the applicant' s discretion, file a consolidated application and receive a single permit for multiple small wireless facilities. Provided however, the city' s denial of any site or sites within a single application shall not affect other sites submitted in the same application. 
(4)  When the applicant submits a consolidated application, the city shall grant a permit for any and all sites in a single application that it does not deny subject to the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  4, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-45. - Small wireless facilities in the right-of-way; maximum height; other requirements. 
(a)  Maximum size of permitted use. Small wireless facilities, and new or modified utility poles and wireless support structures for the collocation of small wireless facilities may be placed in the rights-of-way as a permitted use subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  Except where the height restrictions of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other superseding public agency may apply, each new or modified utility pole or wireless support structure installed in the rights-of-way shall not exceed the greater of: 
a.  Ten (10) feet above the tallest existing utility pole in the rights-of-way in place located within five hundred (500) feet of the new pole; or, 
b.  Fifty (50) feet above ground level. 
(2)  Except where the height restrictions of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or other superseding public agency may apply, new small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way shall not exceed the greater of: 
a.  More than ten (10) feet above an existing utility pole or wireless support structure in the rights-of-way; or 
b.  Above the height for a new utility pole or wireless support structure under section 32.5-44(a)(1). 
(3)  New support poles spacing. New support poles shall be spaced apart from utility poles or other support poles at the same spacing between utility poles in the immediate proximity, but no less than four hundred (400) feet from another pole supporting small wireless or other utility to minimize the hazard of poles adjacent to roadways; minimize visual clutter and distractions to vehicular traffic; and to minimize effect on property values and aesthetics on the area. 
(b)  Zoning. Any wireless provider that seeks to construct or modify a utility pole, wireless support structure or wireless facility that exceeds the height or size limits contained in this section shall be subject to applicable zoning requirements. 
(c)  Undergrounding provisions. Applicant shall comply with nondiscriminatory requirements that prohibit electric utilities, undergrounding telecommunications or cable providers from installing structures in the rights-of-way without prior zoning approval in areas zoned for single family residential use, provided such requirements shall not prohibit the replacement of existing structures without significant change in size or configuration. 
(d)  Location of small cell facilities. Applicant shall provide the latitude and longitude coordinates of each small cell facility in accordance with the requirements of the permit application guidelines issued by the city engineer. 
(e)  Installation in residential areas and parks-Concealment required. Providers are prohibited from installing without satisfactory concealment a small wireless facility in or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is adjacent to a municipal park, recreational facility, community center, existing single or multi-family family residential areas or undeveloped land that is designated for residential use by zoning or deed restrictions. Applicant shall satisfy the requirements of the permit application guidelines issued by the city engineer for concealment. 
(f)  Installation in historic districts-Concealment required. Providers are prohibited from installing without satisfactory concealment a small wireless facility in or adjacent to a street or thoroughfare that is adjacent to or contained within a designated historic district. Applicant shall satisfy the requirements of the permit application guidelines issued by the city engineer for concealment. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  5, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-46. - Effect of permit. 
(a)  Authority granted; no property right or other interest created. A permit from the city authorizes an applicant to undertake only certain activities in accordance with this article, and does not create a property right or grant authority to the applicant to impinge upon the rights of others who may already have an interest in the rights-of-way. 
(b)  Duration. No permit for construction issued under this article shall be valid for a period longer than six (6) months unless construction has actually begun within that period and is thereafter diligently pursued to completion. One six (6) month extension shall be granted if requested before expiration of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  6, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-47. - Removal, relocation or modification of small wireless facility in the right-of-way. 
(a)  Notice. Within ninety (90) days following written notice from the city, wireless provider shall, at its own expense, protect, support, temporarily or permanently disconnect, remove, relocate, change or alter the position of any small wireless facilities within the rights-of-way whenever the city has determined that such removal, relocation, change or alteration, is reasonably necessary for the construction, repair, maintenance, or installation of any city improvement in or upon, or the operations of the city in or upon, the rights-of-way or any other public purpose. 
(b)  Emergency removal or relocation of facilities. The city retains the right and privilege to cut or move any small wireless facility located within the rights-of-way of the city, as the city may determine to be necessary, appropriate of useful in response to any public health or safety emergency. If conditions and circumstances allow, the city shall notify the wireless provider and provide the wireless provider an opportunity to move its own facilities prior to cutting or removing a facility and shall notify the wireless provider after cutting or removing a small wireless facility. 
(c)  Abandonment of facilities. Upon abandonment of a small wireless facility within the rights-of-way the wireless provider shall notify the city ninety (90) days. Following receipt of such notice the city may direct the wireless provider to remove all or any portion of the small wireless facility if the city or any of its departments, determines that such removal will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Restoration. Provider shall repair any damage to the right-of-way, or any facilities located within the right-of-way, and the property of any third party resulting from provider's installation, maintenance, removal, relocation or modification activities within ten (10) calendar days following the date of such activity at provider's sole cost and expense, including restoration of the right-of-way and such property to substantially the same condition as it was immediately before the date provider was granted a permit for the applicable location, or did the work at such location even if provider did not first obtain a permit, including restoration or replacement of any damaged trees, shrubs or vegetation. Such repair, restoration and replacement shall be subject to the sole, reasonable approval of the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  7, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-48. - Right-of-way rates. 
(a)  Annual rate. A wireless provider authorized to place small wireless facilities in the rights-of-way shall pay to the city compensation for use of the rights-of-way in the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) annually per small wireless facility. Annual payments shall be due on or before January 1 of each calendar year. Annual rates shall not be pro-rated. 
(b)  Cease payment. A wireless provider is authorized to remove its facilities from the rights-of-way upon providing the city with at least thirty (30) days written notice and cease paying the city compensation for use of the rights-of-way after removal of its facilities. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  8, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-49. - Attachment to city owned utility poles in the right-of-way. 
(a)  Annual rate. The rate to place a small wireless facility on a city owned pole in the right-of-way shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) per year for all city owned poles in the rights-of-way. Such compensation together with the application fee specified in this article shall be the sole compensation the wireless provider shall be required to pay the city for the permit, but are in addition to and not instead of other fees imposed by other applicable ordinances which may apply. 
(b)  Cease payment. A wireless provider is authorized to remove its facilities from the rights-of-way upon providing the city with at least thirty (30) days written notice. A wireless provider may cease paying the city the annual rate as compensation for use of the rights-of-way after removal of its facilities. The annual rate shall not be pro-rated and no refund shall be due. 
(c)  Make ready. For city owned utility poles in the rights-of-way, the city shall provide a good faith estimate for any make-ready work necessary to enable the pole to support the requested small wireless facility, including pole replacement if necessary, within sixty (60) days after receipt of a completed request. Make-ready work including any pole replacement shall be completed within sixty (60) days of written acceptance and payment of the good faith estimate by the wireless provider. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  9, 3-19-18) 
Sec. 32.5-50. - Other provisions. 
(a)  Interference with operations-No liability. 
(1)  The city shall not be liable to applicant or any provider for any damages caused by other providers or for failure of provider's small wireless facility, support poles and related ground equipment for any reason whatsoever, including damage resulting from vehicular collisions, weather related events, or malicious acts. 
(2)  The city shall not be liable to applicant or any provider by reason of inconvenience or injury to small wireless facility, support poles or related ground equipment or activities conducted by any provider therefrom, arising from the necessity of repairing any portion of the right-of-way, or from the making of any necessary alteration or improvements, in, or to, any portion of the right-of-way, or in, or to, city's fixtures, appurtenances or equipment. The city will use reasonable efforts not to cause material interference to provider's operations of its small wireless facility, support poles or related ground equipment. 
(b)  Reservation of rights. 
(1)  City reserves the right to install and permit others to install, utility facilities in the right-of-way. In permitting such work to be done by others, the city shall not be liable for any damage caused by those persons or entities. 
(2)  City reserves the right to locate, operate, maintain and remove any city pole or structure located within the right-of-way in the manner that best enables the city's operations. 
(c)  Signal interference with city's communications infrastructure prohibited. In the event applicant's or any provider's small wireless facility interferes with any public traffic signal system, any public safety radio system, or any other public communications infrastructure operating on a spectrum where the public entity is legally authorized to operate, the provider shall promptly cease operation of the wireless network or network nodes causing said interference upon receiving notice from the city, and refrain from operating. Provider shall respond to the city's request to address the source of the interference as soon as practicable, but in no event later than twenty-four (24) hours of receiving notice. This article shall be effective one (1) month following adoption by the Monroe City Council. 
(d)  Identifying signage. Applicant shall post its name, location and identifying information, and emergency telephone number in an area on the cabinet of the small wireless facility that is visible to the public. Signage required under this section shall not exceed four-inch  six-inch, unless otherwise required by law (e.g., RF ground notification signs) or the city engineer. Except as required by laws or by the utility pole owner, providers shall not post any other signage or advertising on the support pole, utility pole or service pole. 
(e)  Improperly located network node facilities, node support poles and related ground equipment. If any wireless facilities, support poles or structures including ground equipment is installed in a location that is not in accordance with the plans approved by the city engineer, the applicant or provider shall promptly remove the wireless facilities, support poles, structures or ground equipment upon receiving notice to remove from the city. After thirty (30) days from notice to remove, if the wireless facilities, support poles, structures or ground equipment are not removed, applicant and all providers shall be subject to penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) per day until the facilities are removed or relocated to the permitted location and the right-of-way restored. The penalty shall be enforceable as a code violation in environmental, civil or criminal courts as applicable. 
(f)  The provisions of this article are deemed to be separate and severable. The invalidity of any clause, sentence, paragraph, subdivision, section, or portion of this article, or the invalidity of the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this article, or the validity of its application to other persons or circumstances. 
(Ord. No. 11,835,  10, 3-19-18) 
Chapter 33 - TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Location of mobile signs,  3-27; ambulances, Ch. 5; bicycles, Ch. 8; reckless operation of vehicle,  12-222; hit-and-run driving,  12-223; litter thrown from vehicle,  21-7; trucks causing litter,  21-8; obstructing railroad crossing,  29-1; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; parades,  33-91 et seq.; trees and shrubs obstructing traffic,  34-1(a); vehicles for hire, Ch. 35; major traffic routes,  37-166(g)(7). 
State Law reference- Louisiana Highway Regulatory Act, R.S. 33:1 et seq.; powers of local authorities, R.S. 33:41. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 33-1. - Definitions. 
    The definitions applicable to the Louisiana Highway Regulatory Act shall apply in the interpretation of the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 33-2. - State highway regulations adopted. 
    There is hereby adopted by reference, the same as if copied herein verbatim, all provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 32 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes as added to, amended and revised commonly known as the Louisiana Highway Regulatory Act, and all of the regulations of the department of highways and the director of public safety adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Code 1958,  24-3; Ord. No. 7132, 2-26-80; Ord. No. 7893, 3-25-86) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt Highway Regulatory Act, R.S. 32:41(C). 
Sec. 33-3. - City traffic engineer. 
(a)  The office of the city traffic engineer is hereby established. The traffic engineer shall exercise the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided herein. 
(b)  It shall be the general duty of the traffic engineer to determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic-control devices, to conduct engineering analysis of traffic accidents and to devise remedial measures, to conduct engineering investigations of traffic conditions, to plan the operation of traffic on the streets and highways of this city, and to cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions, and to carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city. 
(Code 1958,  24-84; Ord. No. 7204, 11-11-80) 
Sec. 33-4. - Traffic-control signs and signals. 
    The existence and location of all traffic-control signs, signals, markings and devices, including but not limited to parking meters, which are in place on the adoption date of this Code are hereby ratified and shall be considered to have been authorized by the council. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Obedience to signs required, R.S. 32:56. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7553, enacted July 12, 1983, amended the Code by adding material relating to speed limits as  33-45.1. For purposes of classification, and in order to avoid duplicate provisions concerning speed limits, the editor has deleted the second paragraph of  33-4, which had previously set out the general speed limit. 
Sec. 33-5. - Authority to install traffic-control devices. 
    The traffic engineer shall place and maintain official traffic-control devices when and as required to make effective the provisions of this chapter, and may place and maintain such additional official traffic-control devices as he may deem necessary to regulate or guide traffic in the city. 
(Code 1958,  24-84.1; Ord. No. 7204, 11-11-80) 
Sec. 33-6. - Authority of police officers. 
    The police chief and all members of the police department are hereby authorized to direct and control traffic by means of hand or voice commands and other appropriate means and to arrest those who violate the provisions of this chapter. 
Sec. 33-7. - Defacing, moving, etc., signs. 
(a)  No person shall in any way tamper with, move, damage or destroy any barricade, signs or signals placed upon any highway by the state or city or by any contractor or subcontractor doing highway construction or repair work under or by authority of the state or city, nor shall any person disobey the instructions, signals, warnings, or marking of any warning signs, signals, or barricades so placed upon any highway under construction or being repaired nor shall any person drive around or through any barricade or fences placed upon any closed highway by the state or city or any contractor or subcontractor doing highway construction or repair work under or by authority of the state or city, unless at the time otherwise directed by a police officer. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the employees of the state or city or of any contractor or subcontractor or other person whose proper and lawful duties require them to go upon any portion of a highway which is under construction or in the process of being repaired. 
(c)  Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to prevent or interfere with peaceful picketing by a labor organization. 
(Code 1958,  24-32, 24-46) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 32:237. 
Sec. 33-8. - Streets prohibited to trucks. 
(a)  The police chief may prohibit the operation of trucks larger than trucks commonly referred to as one-half-ton pickup trucks on any street within the city whenever any such street because of its substandard condition or because of deterioration, rain, snow, or other climatic conditions, or construction thereof, or because of traffic condition thereon, will be seriously damaged or destroyed, or whenever the public will be endangered by the use of vehicles thereon, unless such use is prohibited. Such prohibition by the chief of the police department shall be evidenced by signs erected by the police department on such prohibited streets as such points thereon as may be necessary to afford reasonable notice of such prohibition to the operators of such vehicles. Such prohibition may also be evidenced by a list or lists of such streets filed by the police chief in the office of the clerk of the city. 
(b)  No person shall operate a truck larger than a one-half-ton pickup truck on any street prohibited to the same. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply: 
(1)  To trucks making local pickups and deliveries when the use of such streets is necessary for such purposes; 
(2)  To fire apparatus; 
(3)  To trucks of public service companies serving the residents of this city with telephone, natural gas, electrical or cable television service; 
(4)  To trucks belonging to the city; 
(5)  To any other truck for which the police department may have issued and there is then in effect a temporary certificate exempting it from the operation of the provisions of this section, which certificate may not be issued for a period longer than three (3) days; 
(6)  To any truck being used in the construction or repair of such street. 
(Code 1958,  24-37; Ord. No. 7181, 10-14-80) 
State Law reference- Truck routes authorized, R.S. 32:41(A)(6). 
Sec. 33-9. - Driver's license tag; inspection sticker; insurance. 
(a)  No person shall operate a motor vehicle before complying with existing statutes of the state with respect to minimum driving age, chauffeur's or driver's license, and displaying on the vehicle the current year's vehicular inspection and license tag, all fully in accordance with statutes of the state governing operation of motor vehicles on the highways; and no owner or person in control or charge of a motor vehicle shall permit the same to be operated by any person not having a valid driver's license issued by the state; and any violation of such statutes of the state within the corporate limits is a violation of this chapter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensed driver of a motor vehicle to refuse to present his driver's license upon the request of a law enforcement officer. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly operate a motor vehicle and for any owner to allow a motor vehicle to be operated when the vehicle is not covered by the security required under Title 32 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle unless one of the documents evidencing that the motor vehicle is in compliance with Title 32 of the Louisiana Revised Statutes relative to compulsory motor vehicle liability security is contained within the vehicle. 
(Code 1958,  24-5.2; Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82; Ord. No. 7894, 3-25-86) 
State Law reference- Vehicle license required, R.S. 32:51; driver's license required, R.S. 32:52; motor vehicle insurance, R.S. 32: 851 et seq. 
Sec. 33-10. - Operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 
(a)  (1)  The crime of operating a vehicle while intoxicated is the operating of any motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance when: 
a.  The operator is under the influence of alcoholic beverages; or 
b.  The operator's blood alcohol concentration is 0.08 per cent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood; or 
c.  The operator is under the influence of any controlled dangerous substance listed in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V as set forth in R.S. 40:964; or 
d.  (i)  The operator is under the influence of a combination of alcohol and one or more drugs which are not controlled dangerous substances and which are legally obtainable with or without a prescription. 
(ii)  It shall be an affirmative defense to any charge under this subparagraph pursuant to this section that the label on the container of the prescription drug or the manufacturer's package of the drug does not contain a warning against combining the medication with alcohol. 
e.  The operator is under the influence of one or more drugs which are not controlled dangerous substances and which are legally obtainable with or without a prescription and the influence is caused by the operator knowingly consuming quantities of the drug or drugs which substantially exceed the dosage prescribed by the physician or the dosage recommended by the manufacturer of the drug. 
(2)  A valid driver's license shall not be an element of the offense, and the lack thereof shall not be a defense to a prosecution for operating a vehicle while intoxicated. 
(b)  (1)  On a first conviction, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, the offender shall be fined not less than three hundred dollars ($300.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and shall be imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than six (6) months. Imposition or execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
a.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve two (2) days in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program; or 
b.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform four (4) eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities, at least one-half (1/2) of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program, participate in a court-approved substance abuse program, and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program. An offender, who participates in a litter abatement or collection program pursuant to this subparagraph, shall have no cause of action for damages against the entity conducting the program or supervising his participation therein, including a municipality, parish, sheriff, or other entity, nor against any official, employee, or agent of such entity, for any injury or loss suffered by him during or arising out of his participation in the program, if such injury or loss is a direct result of the lack of supervision or act or omission of the supervisor, unless the injury or loss was caused by the intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of the entity or its official, employee, or agent. 
(2)  a.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.15 per cent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, at least forty-eight (48) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to subparagraph (b)(1) of this subsection shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (b)(1)a. or b. of this subsection. 
b.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.20 per cent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, the offender shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and at least forty-eight (48) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (b)(1) of this subsection shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (b)(1)a. or b. of this subsection. 
(c)  (1)  On a conviction of a second offense, notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary except as provided in paragraph (3) [sic] of this subsection, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00), nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), and shall be imprisoned for not less than thirty (30) days nor more than six (6) months. At least forty-eight (48) hours of the sentence imposed shall be served without benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Nothing herein shall prohibit a court from sentencing a defendant to home incarceration, if otherwise allowed under the provisions of Article 894.2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
a.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve fifteen (15) days in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program; or 
b.  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform thirty (30) eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities, at least one-half (1/2) of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program, and participate in a court-approved substance abuse program, and participate in a court-approved driver improvement program. An offender, who participates in a litter abatement or collection program pursuant to this Subparagraph, shall have no cause of action for damages against the entity conducting the program or supervising his participation therein, including a municipality, parish, sheriff, or other entity, nor against any official, employee, or agent of such entity, for any injury or loss suffered by him during or arising out of his participation therein, if such injury or loss is a direct result of the lack of supervision or act or omission of the supervisor, unless the injury or loss was caused by the intentional or grossly negligent act or omission of the entity or its official, employee, or agent. 
(2)  a.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.15 per cent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, at least ninety-six (96) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (1)a. or b. of this subsection. 
b.  If the offender had a blood alcohol concentration of 0.20 per cent or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood, the offender shall be fined one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and at least ninety-six (96) hours of the sentence imposed pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be served without the benefit of parole, probation, or suspension of sentence. Imposition or execution of the remainder of the sentence shall not be suspended unless the offender complies with subparagraph (1)a. or b. of this subsection. 
(d)  (1)  For purposes of determining whether a defendant has a prior conviction for violation of this section, a conviction under either R.S. 14:32.1, vehicular homicide; R.S. 14:39.1, vehicular negligent injuring; or R.S. 14:39.2, first degree vehicular negligent injuring; or a conviction under the laws of any state or an ordinance of a municipality, town, or similar political subdivision of another state, which prohibits the operation of any motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance while intoxicated, while impaired, or while under the influence of alcohol, drugs, or any controlled dangerous substance shall constitute a prior conviction. This determination shall be made by the court as a matter of law. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a prior conviction shall not include a conviction for an offense under this section or R.S. 14:32.1 or R.S. 14:39.1 or under a comparable statute or ordinance of another jurisdiction, as described in paragraph (1) of this subsection, if committed more than ten (10) years prior to the commission of the crime for which the defendant is being tried and such conviction shall not be considered in the assessment of penalties hereunder. However, periods of time during which the offender was incarcerated in a penal institution in this or any other state shall be excluded in computing the ten-year period. Subsections (b) and (c) shall include a screening procedure to determine the portions of the program which may be applicable and appropriate for individual offenders. 
(e)  This subsection shall be cited as the "Child Endangerment Law", When the city proves in addition to the elements of the crime as set forth in subsection (a) of this section that a minor child twelve (12) years of age or younger was a passenger in the motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of motorized conveyance at the time of the commission of the offense, of the sentence imposed by the court, the execution of the minimum mandatory sentence provided by subsection (b) or (c) of this section, as appropriate, shall not be suspended. 
(f)  Court-approved substance abuse program provided for in subsections (b) and (c) shall include a screening procedure to determine the portions of the program, which may be applicable and appropriate for individual offenders. 
(g)  In addition to the costs otherwise provided a person convicted of a violation of section 33-10 of the Code of Ordinance of the City of Monroe who was subjected to a blood, breath, or urine analysis for alcohol, marijuana, morphine, or cocaine presence shall be assessed an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) as special cost, such costs shall be paid to the state, parish, or local governing authority whose law-enforcement agency performed the analysis. In the event the person is unable to pay the fine when assessed, the court may allow payment within certain time limits, based on the person's ability to pay such costs, in the same manner as provided by Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure Article 887. 
(h)  In addition to the costs provided in subsection (g), and in addition to the costs otherwise provided a person convicted of a violation of section 33-10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Monroe shall be assessed an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) as special costs to be used to defray expenses of administering conditions of probation or of incarceration, in the manner as provided by Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure Article 887. If the offender is incarcerated, such costs shall be paid to the sheriff or other custodian of the facility in which the offender is incarcerated. If the offender is placed on probation as provided in section 33-10, the court may order the apportionment and payment of all or a part of such costs to the agencies or person responsible for administering the prescribed substances abuse program, driver improvement program, or community service activities. 
(i)  Community service activities as used in this section may include duty in any morgue, coroner's office, or emergency treatment room of a state-operated hospital or other state-operated emergency treatment facility, with the consent of the administrator of the morgue, coroner's officer, hospital or facility. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82; Ord. No. 7647, 2-28-84; Ord. No. 7580, 11-12-85; Ord. No. 9060, 4-11-89; Ord. No. 9299, 5-26-92; Ord. No. 10,402, 5-25-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:98. 
Sec. 33-10.1. - Underage driving under the influence. 
(a)  The crime of underage operating a vehicle while intoxicated is the operating of any motor vehicle, aircraft, watercraft, vessel, or other means of conveyance when the operator's blood alcohol concentration is 0.02 per cent or more by weight if the operator is under the age of twenty-one (21) based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood. 
(b)  Any underage person whose blood alcohol concentration is found to be in violation of section 33-10 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Monroe shall be charged under its provisions rather than under this section. 
(c)  On a first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00), and participate in a court-approved substance abuse and driver improvement program. 
(d)  On a second or subsequent conviction, regardless of whether the second offense occurred before or after the first conviction, the offender shall be fined not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), and imprisoned for not less than ten (10) days nor more than three (3) months. Imposition or execution of sentence shall not be suspended unless: 
(1)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he serve forty-eight (48) hours in jail and participate in a court-approved substance abuse and driver improvement program; or 
(2)  The offender is placed on probation with a minimum condition that he perform ten (10) eight-hour days of court-approved community service activities, at least one-half (1/2) of which shall consist of participation in a litter abatement or collection program and participate in a court-approved substance and driver improvement program. 
(e)  Court programs regarding substance abuse provided for in subsections (c) and (d) shall include a screening procedure to determine the portions of the program, which may be applicable and appropriate for individual offenders. 
(f)  In addition to the costs otherwise provided a person convicted of a violation of section 33-10.1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Monroe who was subjected to a blood, breath, or urine analysis for alcohol, marijuana, morphine, or cocaine presence shall be assessed an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) as special cost, such costs shall be paid to the state, parish or local governing authority whose law-enforcement agency performed the analysis. In the event the person is unable to pay the fine when assessed, the court may allow payment within certain time limits, based on the person's ability to pay such costs, in the same manner as provided by Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure, Article 887. 
(g)  In addition to the costs provided in subsection (f), and in addition to the costs otherwise provided a person convicted of a violation of section 33-10.1 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Monroe shall be assessed an additional fifty dollars ($50.00) as special costs to be used to defray expenses of administering conditions of probation or of incarceration, in the manner as provided by Louisiana Code of Criminal Procedure Article 887. If the offender is incarcerated, such costs shall be paid to the sheriff or other custodian of the facility in which the offender is incarcerated. If the offender is placed on probation as provided in section 33-10.1, the court may order the apportionment and payment of all or a part of such costs to the agencies or person responsible for administering the prescribed substances abuse program, driver improvement program, or community service activities. 
(h)  Community service activities as used in this section may include duty in any morgue, coroner's office, or emergency treatment room of a state-operated hospital or other state-operated emergency treatment facility, with the consent of the administrator of the morgue, coroner's office, hospital or facility. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82; Ord. No. 10,403, 5-25-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 14:98.1. 
Sec. 33-11. - Removal of debris from accident scene. 
    The driver of any wrecker or other towing service shall remove from the scene of an accident any debris which might present a hazardous condition to moving vehicles or pedestrians. 
(Code 1958,  24-16.1) 
Sec. 33-12. - Toy vehicles, roller skates, etc. 
    No person shall ride on roller skates, a tricycle, a toy wagon, a sled or any other toy or contrivance which is being towed by a vehicle or animal. No person shall operate a vehicle which is towing any person who is on roller skates, a sled, a tricycle, a toy wagon or any other toy or contrivance. 
(Code 1958,  24-41, 24-42) 
Sec. 33-13. - Restrictions on vehicle size, weight, load, etc. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle that is so constructed as to length, width or height, or that is so loaded, as to be in violation of the statutes of the state unless such person first secures from the police department a written permit prescribing the route over which such vehicle shall be moved and secures a police escort if required by the police department; provided, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any such vehicle to travel over any route except that prescribed by aforesaid permit. 
(Ord. No. 3047, Art. III, rule 54, 11-24-53; Code 1958,  24-66) 
State Law reference- Vehicle size, weight, etc., R.S. 32:379 et seq. 
Sec. 33-14. - Impoundment of vehicles. 
    It shall be the duty of police officers to take into their custody any vehicle operated in violation of any provision of this chapter when, in the discretion of such officer, to do so appears necessary. Such vehicle shall be stored at some reputable storage garage or other reputable place at the expense of the owner of such vehicle. 
(Code 1958,  24-51; Ord. No. 7479, 1-11-83) 
Sec. 33-15. - Inoperable vehicles. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to park, store or deposit, or permit to be parked, stored or deposited thereon, an inoperable vehicle unless it is enclosed in a garage or other building; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to vehicles which are inoperable for a period of thirty (30) consecutive days or less. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, "inoperable" means a condition of being junked, wrecked, wholly or partially dismantled, or unable to perform the functions or purpose for which the vehicle was originally constructed. 
(c)  Whenever a complaint is made to the mayor or the mayor becomes aware of a violation of this section, the mayor shall cause to be served upon the owner of the real property upon which such inoperable vehicle is located, a written notice which shall inform such person of the violation and direct that he comply with the provisions of this section within ten (10) days from receipt of notice or the city shall enter upon such property and cause the vehicle to be removed and all costs for the removal of said vehicle shall be assessed against the property upon which the vehicle is located. 
(d)  Notice to the owner of the real property upon which an inoperable vehicle is located shall be by certified mail to the person identified in the last published tax role of the parish tax collector or by attaching the written notice informing the occupant and/or owner of the real property of the violation to the: 
(1)  Front door of such real property two (2) times within a period of ten (10) working days; or 
(2)  On the front of each inoperable vehicle two (2) times within a period of ten (10) working days. If notice is by attachment of the notice to the doors of the premise or the front of each inoperable vehicle, the delivery by such method shall be attested to by a marshal and shall be attached to the record of the matter. If the inoperable vehicle has not been removed by the occupant and/or owner of the real property upon which the inoperable vehicle is located within ten (10) days of the receipt of notice through certified mail or within ten (10) days of the last date of the second attachment to the door of the real property or the inoperable vehicle, the city shall have the authority to enter upon such property and cause the inoperable vehicle to be removed. The notice shall include language notifying the property owner that costs incurred shall be assessed against the property upon which the vehicle is located. 
(Code 1958,  24-51.3; Ord. No. 10,734, 8-28-07) 
Sec. 33-16. - Sale of abandoned vehicles by city. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle belonging to a known or unknown person has been seized or is otherwise held by the police department for illegal parking, stationing, or abandoning of such motor vehicle on the public streets, ways, roads and highways within the city, and the same has not been claimed for a period of six (6) months or more, the motor vehicle shall be considered as having been abandoned to the city and the police department may dispose of such motor vehicle and collect the costs and charges of removing and storing said vehicle in the following manner: 
(1)  After the six-month period has elapsed, the police department shall send a registered or certified letter, return receipt requested, to the last known owner of said vehicle at his last known address, informing him that the city is holding said vehicle and will sell said vehicle to the highest bidder, unless said owner, on or before the date of sale, claims the vehicle and pays to the city all costs and charges imposed by the city for the removal and detention of the vehicle. A copy of said letter shall also be sent to any person or firm known to be the holder of a mortgage on said vehicle. 
(2)  Before the sale of any such vehicles, the police department shall have them appraised by a competent appraiser and shall publish a notice of the proposed sale of said vehicle or vehicles in the official journal of the city not less than three (3) times within a ten-day period prior to the date of said sale. The published notice shall contain a complete list of the vehicles to be sold, the date, time and place of said sale, and notification that said vehicles will be sold individually to the highest bidder therefor. 
(3)  All funds received from the sale of a motor vehicle under the provisions hereof shall be set aside and placed in a separate account established therefor. If, within one year following the date of the sale, the owner of or lienholder on any of said vehicles shall present sufficient proof to the city of his ownership or lien, the said owner or lienholder shall be entitled to the amount received for such vehicle less his pro rata share of the costs and expenses of the sale, as well as all charges and costs due and owing for removal and storage of said vehicle, provided that in no case shall a lienholder be entitled to receive more than the amount due and owing under his lien. Any funds not claimed within one year following the date of sale shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1958,  24-51.1) 
State Law reference- Abandoned vehicles, R.S. 33:4876; 32:473.1 et seq. 
Sec. 33-17. - Disposal of abandoned bicycles and tricycles. 
    Whenever any bicycle or tricycle belonging to a known or unknown owner has been seized for a violation of this Code, or is otherwise held by the police department, and the same has not been claimed for a period of six (6) months or more by the owner thereof, such bicycle or tricycle shall be considered as having been abandoned to the city, and the police department may dispose of the same by donating it to a charitable organization for distribution to an underprivileged child or may sell it, without public advertisement or bids. In the event the same is sold, the proceeds of such sale shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Code 1958,  24-51.2) 
Sec. 33-18. - Summons, arrest, bond. 
    For any violation of this chapter the offending person may be given a summons to appear in the city court to answer same, or in the sound discretion of the police officer, the offender may be placed under arrest and caused to make bond in the manner prescribed by law; provided, any violator below the age of seventeen (17) years shall be summoned to appear before the juvenile division of such court, or in flagrant violations, may be delivered into the custody of the juvenile probation officer. 
(Code 1958,  24-52) 
Sec. 33-19. - Stop signs and yield signs. 
(a)  Preferential right-of-way at an intersection may be indicated by stop signs or yield signs. 
(b)  Except when directed to proceed by a police officer or traffic-control signal, every driver and operator of a vehicle approaching a stop intersection indicated by a stop sign shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the near side at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersection. After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles which have entered the intersection from another highway or which are approaching so closely on said highway as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(c)  The driver or operator of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, or shall stop, if necessary, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or, in the event there is no crosswalk, at a clearly marked stop line; but if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway. Having slowed or stopped in this manner, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian legally crossing the roadway on which he is driving and to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another highway so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Cross reference- Other provisions relating to parking,  33-46 et seq. 
State Law reference- Stop signs and yield signs, R.S. 32:123. 
Sec. 33-20. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,443, adopted Oct. 26, 2004, repealed  33-20, which pertained to penalties and was derived from Code 1958,  24-53. 
Sec. 33-21. - Display of plate. 
    Every registration license plate shall at all times be securely fastened to the vehicle to which it is assigned, so as to prevent the plate from swinging, and at a height not less than twelve (12) inches from the ground, measuring from the bottom of such plate, in a place and position to be clearly visible, and shall be maintained free from foreign materials and in a condition to be clearly legible. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Secs. 33-22-33-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE OPERATION 

Sec. 33-31. - Operation in or adjacent to schools, parks, cemeteries or levees. 
(a)  No person shall drive a vehicle upon the grounds of any school, park, cemetery or upon any levee adjacent to or abutting any waterway within the city limits except upon and along marked or designated streets or roadways, and not to exceed a rate of speed of fifteen (15) miles an hour, unless otherwise provided in this Code. 
(b)  No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of fifteen (15) miles an hour past any school ground on any school day between the hours of 7:30 and 8:30 a.m. and between 2:30 and 3:30 p.m., unless a posted speed limit has been erected, in which event the posted speed limit shall prevail; however, at schools where signs with flashing lights and posted speed limits are erected, no person shall operate a vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit when these signs are flashing, regardless of the day or time. 
(Code 1958,  24-30; Ord. No. 7439, 9-14-82) 
Sec. 33-32. - Dangerous situations. 
    When confronted with probable danger or when signaled to stop by another person in event of danger or peril, a vehicle operator must stop immediately and not proceed until danger is past. 
(Code 1958,  24-16) 
Sec. 33-33. - Turning around or reversing direction. 
    No operator shall turn a vehicle around or reverse the direction of travel in any street except as follows: 
(1)  In intersections of streets with boulevards and at improved openings on boulevards, a "U" turn may be made from one side of the boulevard to the other, provided such turn shall not be attempted when a vehicle approaches from any direction sufficiently near to render collision or accident probable; 
(2)  An operator parking a vehicle parallel to the curb where parking is lawfully permitted may execute a backup movement in order to park provided such movement can be accomplished with safety and without unreasonable delay to other vehicles. 
(Code 1958,  24-22) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate turns, R.S. 32:41(A)(8). 
Sec. 33-34. - Blocking intersections. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle into a street intersection until it is possible to entirely clear such intersection without having to stop in the intersection. 
(Code 1958,  24-29) 
Sec. 33-35. - Funeral processions. 
    The following shall apply to all funeral processions in and through the city: 
(1)  No funeral procession shall travel upon or occupy any street unless notification of such proposed procession has been given to the police department by the funeral director or an authorized official of another law enforcement agency at least four (4) hours prior to the funeral services when such services are to be held in the city, or at least four (4) hours prior to the time such procession will enter the city where the funeral services are not to be held in the city. 
(2)  Any person operating a vehicle in a funeral procession shall maintain an interval of not more than twenty-five (25) feet between his vehicle and the preceding vehicle in such procession (except when yielding right-of-way to an emergency vehicle, or when required to stop at a street intersection under the provisions of this article), and shall also have the headlights on his vehicle illuminated. 
(3)  No vehicle in a funeral procession shall be operated at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per hour except when such procession is being escorted by a police officer, and, when such procession is escorted by a police officer, said procession shall not travel at a speed in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour. 
(4)  No operator of any vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall: 
(a)  Pass any vehicle in a funeral procession proceeding in the same direction; 
(b)  Drive across the path of any vehicle in a funeral procession except where and when such procession is separated by a police officer for the purpose of permitting such crossing; 
(c)  Cut into a funeral procession. 
(5)  When properly escorted by a police officer and when directed so to do by such police officer, a funeral procession (including every vehicle therein maintaining proper illumination and interval) shall proceed through stop signs and red or yellow traffic signal lights, provided that every operator of a vehicle in such procession shall proceed with caution into or across any intersection where such vehicle would not have right-of-way if not in a funeral procession. 
(6)  Every funeral procession shall move only on and along the route designated by the police officer escorting such procession, or the route prescribed by the police department when such procession is not escorted by a police officer. 
(Code 1958,  24-45.13) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parades and processions, R.S. 32:41(A)(3). 
Sec. 33-36. - Changing lanes on multilane streets. 
    No driver or operator shall move from one lane to another on a street having more than one lane for traffic moving in the same direction when a vehicle approaches in the lane to be turned into sufficiently near to render collision or accident probable. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Driving on roadways laned for traffic, R.S. 32:79. 
Sec. 33-37. - Automatic signal light-Proceeding on red. 
    Where and when the movement of vehicles is being controlled by automatic signal lights irrespective of right-of-way otherwise herein conferred, no driver or operator shall operate a vehicle into a street intersection where and when the RED or STOP signal faced by such driver or operator is illuminated, except as follows: 
(a)  When signaled to do so by a police officer who has stationed himself in the intersection and has assumed the direction of traffic, a driver or operator shall proceed into such intersection in accordance with the signals of the police officer. 
(b)  Unless a sign indicates to the contrary, after stopping, a driver of a vehicle may turn right against a steady red light, provided he has yielded the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians and executes the turn safely. 
(c)  Except when a sign prohibits a turn, a driver of a vehicle may turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street, provided he has yielded the right-of-way to other vehicles and pedestrians and executes the turn safely. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82; Ord. No. 9052, 3-28-89) 
State Law reference- Traffic-control signals, R.S. 32:232. 
Sec. 33-38. - Same-Proceeding when light inoperative. 
    A vehicle approaching an automatic signal light not in operation from any cause shall, if moving on a street of lesser or inferior right-of-way, be brought to a complete stop not more than fifteen (15) feet from the intersection to be entered or crossed and not proceed until it has been ascertained that no vehicle approaches sufficiently near to render collision or accident probable; and a vehicle moving on a street of greater or superior right-of-way shall, upon approaching such a signal, be brought under full control and be prepared to stop in an emergency in order to avert collision or accident. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-39. - Same-Flashing signals. 
    At street intersections where electrically illuminated intermittent or flashing signals are displayed, the following rules shall govern the movement of vehicles: 
(a)  When the red lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes, the driver of the vehicle facing such lens shall come to a complete stop not more than fifteen (15) feet from the intersection and shall not proceed into such intersection until he has ascertained that no vehicle approaches sufficiently near to render collision or accident probable. 
(b)  When the yellow lens is illuminated with rapid intermittent flashes the driver of the vehicle facing such lens may proceed through such intersection only at a slow speed and under full control. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Flashing signals, R.S. 32:234. 
Sec. 33-40. - Reckless or negligent driving. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle recklessly, negligently or in any manner whereby the safety of life, limb or property is endangered, whether or not such recklessness or negligence be specifically prohibited by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Reckless driving, R.S. 14:99. 
Sec. 33-41. - Leaving the scene. 
    When confronted with probable danger or when signaled to stop by another person in event of danger or peril, an operator must stop immediately and not proceed until danger is past. In event of collision, injury or accident, an operator must stop his vehicle at the scene of the accident, give his name, address and vehicle license number to the operator of the other vehicle or to the person injured, and render reasonable aid, and shall immediately report the accident to the police department. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Hit and run driving, R.S. 14:100. 
Sec. 33-42. - Emergency vehicles, duty upon approach; following; parking near scene of fire. 
    When an emergency vehicle is making an emergency run and while sounding a siren, whistle, bell or other warning device, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any vehicle within normal hearing of such warning to fail immediately to draw his vehicle to a position parallel with, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of street, clear of any intersection, and he shall there stop and remain stopped until all emergency vehicles sounding a warning have passed; provided, no vehicle, other than another emergency vehicle, shall follow an emergency vehicle while engaged in an emergency run, closer than one thousand (1,000) feet in the rear; and at the scene of fire, catastrophe, accident or emergency to which fire apparatus has made an emergency run, no vehicle other than an emergency vehicle shall stop, park, station or stand itself within one thousand (1,000) feet of the nearest fire apparatus attending such scene. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Procedure upon approach of authorized emergency vehicle, R.S. 32:125. 
Sec. 33-43. - Passing vehicle proceeding in same direction. 
(a)  On streets of two (2) traffic lanes, with opposing traffic in such lanes, and on one-way streets not marked for more than one lane of moving traffic: 
(1)  No operator of a vehicle shall pass or attempt to pass a vehicle proceeding in the same direction except on the left side of such preceding vehicle. 
(2)  No operator of a vehicle shall pass or attempt to pass a vehicle proceeding in the same direction at any street intersection or within fifty (50) feet thereof or when a vehicle approaches from any direction sufficiently near to render collision or accident probable. 
(3)  No operator of a vehicle shall pass or attempt to pass a vehicle proceeding in the same direction when such preceding vehicle is itself traveling at the maximum speed allowed by this chapter. 
(4)  Before passing a vehicle proceeding in the same direction, the operator of the overtaking vehicle shall turn to the left of the preceding vehicle at a distance sufficiently in the rear of the preceding vehicle to ensure safety and shall not again drive to the right side of the street until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. 
(5)  The operator of the overtaken vehicle shall give way to the overtaking vehicle on audible signal or discovery that he is about to be passed, and shall not in any manner increase his speed, but, as safety requires, reduce speed to allow such overtaking vehicle to pass. 
(6)  No operator of a vehicle shall pass or attempt to pass a preceding vehicle unless there is sufficient unobstructed road width to allow such overtaking vehicle to safely pass such preceding vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Driving on the right side, overtaking and passing, etc., R.S. 32:71 et seq. 
Sec. 33-44. - Following too closely. 
    No operator of a vehicle shall follow another vehicle in the same lane at a distance nearer or a speed greater than such following vehicle, in event of emergency, may be brought to a complete stop behind such preceding vehicle without collision or accident. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
State Law reference- Following vehicles, R.S. 32:81. 
Sec. 33-45. - Mechanically unsafe condition, such vehicles not to be operated. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle in a mechanically unsafe condition. A vehicle with a part, or parts, so defective, broken, torn or worn that such vehicle has become a hazard to life, limb or property is mechanically unsafe within the meaning of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-45.1. - Speed limits. 
    No person shall operate a vehicle in excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour upon any street, avenue or roadway within the city limits, unless a posted speed limit has been established, in which event the posted speed limit shall prevail. A posted speed limit shall be deemed to have been established upon the erection and posting of a speed limit sign by the traffic engineer or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. No. 7553, 7-12-83) 
State Law reference- Speed limits, R.S. 32:61 et seq. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING OR PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 10,442, adopted Oct. 26, 2004, amended Art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former Art. III, consisted of  33-46-33-49, 33-66-33-80, pertained to similar subject matter, and was derived from Code 1958,  24-57-24-59, 24-60.2, 24-71-24-74, 24-75(a), 24-76, 24-77, 24-80, 24-81; Ord. No. 7131, adopted 2-26-80; Ord. No. 7266, adopted 4-14-81; Ord. No. 7413, adopted 7-13-82; Ord. No. 7449, adopted 10-26-82; Ord. No 7839, adopted 10-8-85; Ord. No. 9159, adopted 9-11-90. 
Cross reference- Parking in Monroe Air-Industrial Park,  22-25; off-street parking and loading,  37-166 et seq. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit standing or parking, R.S. 32:41(A)(1); parking, standing and stopping, R.S. 32:141 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 33-46. - Application of article; regulations not exclusive, reservation of powers to city. 
(a)  The provisions of this article prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times herein specified or as indicated on official signs except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
(b)  The provisions of this article imposing a time limit on parking shall not relieve any person of the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions prohibiting or limiting the stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles in specified places or as specified. 
(c)  Nothing in this division shall be construed as prohibiting the city from providing for bus stops, for taxicab stands and other matters of similar nature, including zones for the loading and unloading of trucks, vans, or other commercial vehicles, nor shall the provisions hereof be construed as prohibiting the city from prohibiting parking during certain hours of the day. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-47. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Curb means an edging (as of concrete) built along a street to form part of a gutter. 
    Edge of street means the outermost border of the paved area of a street. 
    Fire lane means an unobstructed lane to be used as access for fire-fighting and emergency equipment. 
    Fire protection devices shall mean sprinkler and standpipe fire department connections, fire hose cabinets or sheds, fire extinguishers, or any other devices so marked and designated for fire protection or fire department use. 
    Motor vehicle shall mean any automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer or mobile home. 
    Park or parking shall mean the halting of an occupied or unoccupied vehicle, other than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers. 
    Stand or standing shall mean remaining stationary or inactive. 
    Stop or stopping shall mean the halting, even momentarily, of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control sign or signal. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-48. - Parked vehicles obstructing traffic. 
(a)  Under no circumstances shall a vehicle be parked so as to occupy thirty (30) per cent or more of the width of the surface of any street in the city and/or vehicle more than forty-five (45) feet in length occupy the surface of any street in the city for a period in excess of thirty (30) minutes, unless the parking of the vehicle is necessary for the loading or unloading of any such vehicle. All vehicles under this section shall be moved immediately after being loaded and/or unloaded. 
(b)  Such vehicles shall not block traffic signs or a driver's clear view at intersections. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-49. - Restricted parking; special temporary exemptions. 
(a)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle at any time or for a limited time upon any of the streets or parts of streets or any public parking lot so designated. 
(b)  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, no person shall park a vehicle during the times or for a longer period than indicated upon any of the streets or parts of streets or any public parking lot so signed. 
(c)  Special temporary parking and special temporary restrictions may be put into effect by the police department when justified by special temporary or emergency conditions. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-50. - No parking within twenty-five feet of intersection. 
    No vehicle of any type shall be parked at any time on any street in the city within twenty-five (25) feet of an intersecting street, as measured from the intersecting property lines. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-51. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited during certain hours on certain streets. 
    When signs are erected in each block giving notice thereof, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle between the hours specified by ordinance on any day except Sundays and public holidays within the district or upon any of the streets described by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-52. - Parking signs required. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the city traffic engineer to erect appropriate signs giving notice of any parking time limit(s) imposed, special parking designations or parking prohibitions on designated streets. No such regulations shall be effective unless said signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. 
(b)  The signs required to be erected pursuant to this section shall clearly designate the person or persons or groups of persons allowed to park in such areas and/or clearly designate the length of time for which parking is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-52.1. - Parking space or parking area. 
(a)  Parking spaces shall be clearly demarcated by signage or lines painted on or otherwise applied to a street, pavement or a parking lot surface, or by any other means which reasonably identify an area as a parking space or parking area. 
(b)  Parking in areas not distinguished in any manner shall constitute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,611, 7-8-06) 
Sec. 33-53. - No parking zones. 
    The city traffic engineer shall designate locations within the city where the parking of motor vehicles is prohibited. Painting the curb yellow or red or posting by signs is hereby deemed appropriate marking to prohibit parking along that section of the street on which said curb has been painted or which has been designated by posted signs. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-54. - Two-hour parking on street or in public parking lot. 
(a)  No person shall park any vehicle on any public street or in a public parking lot posted as two-hour parking and leave the same continuously parked for a period greater than two (2) hours. 
(b)  A driver may not return to the same parking space or parking lot until four (4) hours have passed from the time the driver first arrived. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-54.1. - Ouachita Parish Courthouse parking zone. 
(a)  Free parking shall be allowed on both sides of South Grand Street where parking spaces are demarcated. 
(b)  Free parking shall be permitted in the Ouachita River parking lot on South Grand Street. 
(c)  Two-hour parking shall be enforced on Wood Street, St. John Street (both sides before the Calypso Street intersection) and Oak Street (both sides). 
(d)  It shall be unlawful to park on St. John Street beyond the intersection of St. John and Calypso Streets. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful to park on Calypso Street (beyond the intersection of Calypso and St. John Streets to South Grand Street). 
(i)  Judges of the Fourth Judicial District Court of Ouachita Parish should instruct jurors and witnesses to submit citations received by them in conjunction with their public service and their notices to appear at the city attorney's office to have the citations voided. Citations and notices must be presented to the city attorney's office within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the court proceeding in which the person served as either a juror or a witness. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,612, 8-8-06) 
Sec. 33-54.2. - United States District Courthouse parking zone. 
    Jurors and witnesses should be instructed to submit citations and the notices to appear received by them in conjunction with their public service to the Monroe Police Department to have the citations voided. Citations and notices must be presented to the city attorney's office within five (5) business days after the conclusion of the court proceeding in which the person served as either a juror or a witness. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,612, 8-8-06) 
Sec. 33-55. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
    When signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of the street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-56. - Stopping, standing or parking not to obstruct traffic; parking position generally; one-way roadway and two-way roadway; diagonally. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway; and if such roadway has designated thereon traffic lanes, no person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle within the marked traffic lane area so as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the right one-half of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily within three (3) feet of the curb line or the edge of the street during the actual loading or unloading of passengers, or when necessary in obedience to traffic regulations or traffic signs or signals or police officer. 
(b)  On those streets where parking is not otherwise prohibited, all vehicles must be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the street and the vehicle's wheels nearest the curb or edge of the street must be within twelve (12) inches of said curb or edge of the street. On those streets where vehicles are allowed to travel in both directions, a vehicle must be parked next to the curb or edge of the street on the same side of the street and to the right of the lane of traffic in which said vehicle is traveling; provided, however, cars or trucks delivering merchandise or servicing businesses, such as express service, laundry service, ice delivery, etc., before 9:30 a.m., shall be permitted to stop temporarily parallel to parked cars, if unable to park in a legal manner, in order to render such delivery or service, for a period not longer than is required to make such delivery or render such service. After 9:30 a.m., no such temporary double parking will be permitted on any roadway without the permission of a police officer on duty. 
(c)  On a one-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized traffic movement; on a two-way roadway such vehicle shall be facing in the direction of authorized traffic movement on that portion of the roadway on which the vehicle rests. 
(d)  All vehicles shall be parked parallel to the curb or edge of the street, except where diagonal parking shall be permitted in those certain areas where spaces are marked for said parking. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-57. - Parking in public alley. 
    No vehicle shall be parked in any public alley so as to obstruct traffic thereon. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-58. - Obstruction of driveways prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall be parked on a street so as to obstruct the entrance to or exit from any driveway or other area clearly used for purposes of vehicular ingress and egress to premises, or within ten (10) feet, measured along the curb or edge of the street adjacent to the driveway, in either direction from the centerline of the driveway. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-59. - Vehicle protruding into prohibited parking area. 
    The parking of any vehicle so that any portion thereof is in or protruding over a part of any area in which parking is prohibited shall constitute a misdemeanor, and any violator shall be penalized as provided by section 33-82. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-60. - Street construction area, parking prohibited; removal of illegally parked vehicle. 
(a)  Upon those portions of streets where construction or improvement operations are being conducted, and such operations necessitate the closing of such street to the parking of vehicles, the persons, firms or corporations performing such operations shall erect barricades showing the closing of such street and also showing that parking of any vehicle is prohibited thereon. The persons, firms or corporations performing such operations shall notify the Monroe Police Department and the city traffic engineer prior to the closing of streets. 
(b)  In the event any vehicle is parked upon said closed streets, the person performing such operations may order a local wrecker to remove said parked vehicles. In the event it is necessary to have a vehicle removed, the owner shall bear the expense of such removal including towing and storage charge. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-61. - Standing or parking close to curbs. 
    No person shall stand or park a vehicle in a roadway other than parallel with the edge of the roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with the curbside wheels of the vehicle within twelve (12) inches of the edge of the roadway, unless authorized to do otherwise by appropriate signs. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
State Law reference- Parking near curb, R.S. 32:144. 
Sec. 33-62. - Standing or parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to stand or park a vehicle upon any street or highway for the principal purpose of: 
(1)  Displaying it for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessary by emergency. 
(3)  Storage of such vehicle. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, a vehicle shall be deemed to have been left on the street or highway for the principal purpose of storage when that vehicle has been standing in one place on the streets of the city for a longer continuous period than seventy-two (72) hours. The provisions of this paragraph shall apply to a vehicle which is left standing in front of its owner's residence only when the vehicle has no valid inspection sticker, license plates, or expired license plates. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-63. - Standing or parking for advertising purposes prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall stand or park a vehicle on any street or roadway for the purpose of commercial advertising. 
(b)  Advertising notices relating to the business for which a vehicle is used may be put upon a motor vehicle when such vehicle is in use for normal delivery or business purposes and not merely or mainly for the purpose of commercial advertising. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-64. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specific places. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic-control device and except during the occurrence of normal traffic flow, in any of the following places: 
(1)  On a sidewalk; 
(2)  In front of a public or private driveway; 
(3)  Within an intersection; 
(4)  On a crosswalk; 
(5)  Within two (2) feet of a crosswalk at an intersection; 
(6)  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or edge of the street or within twenty (20) feet of the points on the curb or edge of the street immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone unless the traffic authority indicates length by signs or markings; 
(7)  Within fifty (50) feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; 
(8)  Alongside or opposite any street; excavation or obstruction when such stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic; 
(9)  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the curb or the edge or of a street; 
(10)  Upon any bridge or elevated structure, upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
(11)  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping; 
(12)  On a median, unless the vehicle is disabled or at the direction of a police officer, and then only temporarily for a period not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours; 
(13)  In a space designated with a sign for handicapped persons unless the vehicle displays the distinguishing license plates or placards recognized in the State of Louisiana; 
(14)  In such a location as to obstruct a curb ramp or curb cut for handicapped persons; and 
(15)  Any place where parking will obscure or obstruct visibility of any traffic control device. 
(b)  Exceptions. The prohibitions in this section shall not apply to emergency and public service vehicles whose operators are performing services for which they are responsible, nor do these prohibitions apply to vehicles belonging to persons, firms or corporations under contract with the city to perform a public service. These exceptions, however, shall apply only when an emergency situation requires that such vehicles park in the prohibited areas. 
(c)  No person shall move a vehicle not owned by such person into any such prohibited area or away from a curb or edge of a street such a distance as is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places, R.S. 32:143. 
Sec. 33-65. - Parking of motor vehicles in fire lanes, around fire hydrants and fire protection devices on publicly or privately owned property; removal of vehicles; designation, etc., of lanes. 
(a)  The parking, stopping or standing of any motor vehicles in fire lanes or within fifteen (15) feet of the fire hydrants or fire-protection devices on public or private property or within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance, when properly posted, shall be prohibited at all times to preserve the health, welfare and safety of the citizens of Monroe. Any vehicles or property found to be parked, stopped, standing or otherwise obstructing fire lanes or within fifteen (15) feet of fire hydrants or fire-protection devices or within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance, when properly posted, shall be immediately towed away or removed, without notice being provided. The owner of such vehicle or personal property shall be responsible for all penalties or fines, towing charges and resulting storage charges. 
(b)  Commissioned fire department personnel, with the authority of the fire chief, along with other law enforcement agencies, are authorized to issue a citation or to take whatever law enforcement action is deemed necessary or both. Furthermore, when an individual found to be in violation of these provisions refuses a request by an agent of the fire department or a law enforcement officer to move the vehicle found in violation, the officer shall be authorized to have such vehicle towed. 
(c)  The citation shall contain information concerning the nature, date, time, and location of the alleged violation, the state vehicle license plate number, and the make of vehicle. In those cases where a license plate is not visible or legible, the vehicle identification number shall be used in lieu of the state vehicle plate number. The citation shall also contain information advising the person charged of the manner and the time in which he may contest the violation charged in the citation. The citation shall also provide that a failure to timely answer or appear before a court of competent jurisdiction shall be considered a prima facie admission of the violation set forth in the citation, in which the court may assess the appropriate fine or fines and all penalties incidental thereto. 
(d)  The citation issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be personally served upon the operator of the vehicle by affixing the parking citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place thereon. The original parking citation shall bear the name or initials and identification number of the issuing officer who shall affirm the truth of the facts set forth therein. An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner, but who uses or operates the vehicle with permission of the owner, expressed or implied, shall be considered the agent of the owner to receive the citation required to be served upon the operator or registered owner of a vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. When a citation is issued for an alleged violation of this section, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person in whose name the vehicle is registered was the operator of the vehicle when the alleged violation was committed. 
(e)  In the event that the registered owner or operator of a vehicle drives the vehicle away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation while the issuing officer is preparing the citation, or refuses service of the parking citation and drives away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation, this fact shall be duly noted on the original and all copies of the parking citation. This original and all copies of a parking citation shall constitute a business record of the law enforcement agency issuing the citation and shall constitute prima facie evidence that the citation was issued and that an attempt at service was made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(1)  The first violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00). A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of six hundred dollars ($600.00). Each occurrence of a violation of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(2)  If the violator is other than an individual, a fine of six hundred dollars ($600.00) shall be imposed for the first violation. A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each occurrence of a violation of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(3)  In addition to such fine, the violator shall also be required to pay the towing fee and any storage costs which are incurred. 
(4)  No fine issued pursuant to this section shall be reduced or suspended. 
(f)  The establishment and designation of fire lanes and other areas for emergency vehicles shall be the responsibility of the Fire Chief of the City of Monroe, along with the cooperation of the owners and/or managers of private property. It shall be the responsibility of the owners and/or managers of the private property to pay for and erect suitable signs as approved by the City of Monroe in the designated fire lanes and areas. 
(g)  (1)  The owner or proprietor of any business establishment as covered in this section is hereby authorized to utilize the area immediately adjacent to his loading dock or service entrance for the purpose of loading and unloading delivery trucks, service vehicles or other vehicles used in conduction of his business. Said loading dock or service entrance shall not interfere with or prohibit the immediate access of emergency vehicles. 
(2)  The owner or proprietor of any business establishment is authorized to utilize the area adjacent to an entrance to load or unload customer vehicles where heavy or bulky merchandise must be handled. However, in all cases the driver of a customer vehicle must attend the vehicle while the merchandise is being loaded or unloaded and such loading and unloading area must be designated and marked as such. 
(3)  The above service vehicles, trucks, customer vehicles, etc., shall be moved immediately after being loaded and/or unloaded. 
(h)  The owner of any personal property or motor vehicle found interfering with or prohibiting the immediate access of emergency vehicles shall be subject to fines as set forth in section 33-84. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-66. - Parking on public property. 
    When official signs or traffic-control devices are erected or installed, giving notice of restrictions on parking, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle, except as permitted by such signs or traffic-control devices, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or traffic-control device on any public property owned or leased by the city, or any department or administrative unit there or on driveways located thereon. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-67. - Median strip; neutral ground. 
(a)  The median strip or the neutral ground is the area between the dual traffic lanes for the purpose of separating traffic proceeding in opposite directions. 
(b)  Crossing, driving, stopping, standing or parking on the median strip or the neutral ground, other than for official use of maintenance, operational or emergency vehicles, is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-68. - Taxicabs and taxicab zones. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park any taxicab on any street for a longer period than is actually necessary to answer a call for service by such vehicle or to receive or discharge a passenger in fulfilling a call, such waiting time in no instance to exceed twenty (20) minutes; this subsection shall not apply to taxicabs standing in regularly designated taxicab stands in accordance with subsection (b). 
(b)  Stands or spaces within which taxicabs may stop, park and stand shall be provided by the city traffic engineer, where necessary for the public convenience and shall be marked with appropriate signs or by lines painted on the curb or street, and it shall be unlawful for any person, other than the driver of a taxicab designated for such space, to stop, park or stand a vehicle within such designated taxicab stands. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-69. - Distances from buildings frequented by public. 
    No vehicle shall be parked at any time within a distance of twelve and one-half (121/2) feet measured along the curb or edge of the street in each direction from the center of the main door or entrance of buildings or business locations where the curb or edge of the street is so marked. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-70. - Prohibited parking; leased or rented motor vehicles. 
(a)  Whenever a leased or rented motor vehicle, identified as provided in subsection (b) of this section, is parked in violation of any state law, local ordinance or regulation, and a citation is issued at a time when the driver is not present to receive the citation, prior to any proceedings on the citation, the city shall request an affidavit from the registered owner attesting to the name, address and driver's license number of the person to whom the vehicle was leased or rented at the time the citation was issued. 
(b)  The owner of each leased or rented motor vehicle may place an identification tag attached to the inside of the bottom right side of the windshield of such vehicle. The identification tag shall state that the vehicle is rented or leased and shall list the name and address of the registered owner. All such information shall be clearly visible from the outside of the vehicle. The department of public safety shall approve the forms for the identification tags. 
(c)  Upon the request to furnish the affidavit pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the owner shall within seven (7) days after the receipt of the request, mail or deliver to the requesting authority an affidavit attesting to the name, address and driver's license number of the person to whom the vehicle was rented or leased. The affidavit shall create the presumption that the person to whom the vehicle was leased or rented was the driver who parked the vehicle in violation of the law, ordinance or regulation, and the requesting authority shall notify the driver of his responsibility for the violation. 
(d)  Whenever a leased or rented motor vehicle is not identified as provided in subsection (b) of this section or when the requested owner of a properly identified leased or rented vehicle fails to furnish the affidavit, the presumption created under subsection (c) of this section shall not apply and the citation shall be treated as any other regular parking citation. 
(e)  A lessor who fails to comply with the foregoing provisions shall be treated as any other owner and shall be solidarily liable with the operator. 
(f)  If any owner of a motor vehicle receives a notice of violation for a period during which the illegally parked vehicle was reported to any police or law enforcement department as having been stolen, it shall be a valid defense to any charge of a parking violation that the motor vehicle has been reported to the police as stolen prior to the time the violation occurred and had not been recovered by such time. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
State Law reference- Prohibited parking; leased or rented motor vehicles, R.S. 32:146. 
Sec. 33-71. - Standing for loading only. 
(a)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger loading zone during the hours specified for a period not to exceed three (3) minutes. 
(b)  No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials within the block and any place marked as a loading zone during the hours when the provisions applicable to loading zones are in effect. In no case shall a stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed the posted time limit, which time shall be no more than thirty (30) minutes as determined and posted by the city traffic engineer or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-72. - Certain vehicles to be parked only for loading and unloading. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to be able to park any of the following vehicles on streets within the corporate limits of the city at any time except when engaged in loading and unloading or otherwise lawfully and actively engaged in conducting the business for which they are intended and only for the duration of such activities: Inter-urban and intra-urban motorbuses and vans operating as passenger carriers and property hauling vehicles licensed by the state as common carriers. 
(b)  Because of public necessity to transport students to elementary and secondary schools, all school buses are exempted from subsection (a) of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-73. - Parking regulations and violations. 
(a)  Each hour a vehicle remains illegally parked in an on-street parking space is a separate offense, and the violator may be given a ticket for each offense. 
(b)  Any vehicle that has been towed for a parking violation is to be held until the towing fee and penalties related to all outstanding parking tickets and parking penalties owed to the city are paid in full, or a bond is posted in the amount of the towing fee and all outstanding parking tickets and parking penalties. Payment of the towing fee and all outstanding parking tickets and parking penalties shall not constitute a waiver of a person's right to contest the towing or the outstanding parking tickets and parking penalties. 
(c)  (1)  Wheel locks, or "boots," may be used on illegally parked vehicles for which there are three (3) or more outstanding, unpaid and overdue parking tickets within a period of ninety (90) days. The notice of the immobilization, towing, impoundment and appeal hearing shall be affixed to the vehicle. The immobilization fee shall not exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00), excluding charges for towing and storage. If payment is not made to remove the boot at the City of Monroe Taxation and Revenue Division, 316 Breard Street, Monroe, Louisiana 71201, by the end of the business day (5:00 p.m.), the vehicle will be towed by 6:00 p.m. The city shall not be responsible for any damage to an immobilized illegally parked vehicle resulting from unauthorized attempts to free or move that vehicle. 
(2)  Notice of an impoundment shall be mailed by certified mail to the owner of the vehicle in violation within forty-eight (48) hours of impoundment. 
(3)  The notice shall inform the owner of the procedure necessary for the release of the vehicle, where to report, the fact that he has the options of paying the fines and/or penalty for each violation, the fines and/or penalty under protest and then appeal, and of his right to a hearing without the immediate release of the vehicle. The owner shall be responsible for all court costs if his appeal is denied. 
(4)  If an owner desires to contest the impoundment, then he has ten (10) days, from receipt of the notice of impoundment, to file a written demand for hearing, which has to be heard within forty-eight (48) hours of the filing of the written request. If a written demand is filed on a Thursday or a Friday, a hearing shall be granted on the following business day. If the forty-eight (48) hours expires on a holiday, then a hearing shall be had on the following business day. The notice shall be given to the owner by a sign or other marker placed on the vehicle at the time it is booted. Notice of the right to request a hearing also may be given on the back of the receipt if the owner pays for the immediate release of the vehicle. Further notice shall be given by a sign posted at the desk where fines are paid or where wheel locking or "booting" inquiries are made. 
(d)  Any ordinance adopted pursuant to this article may be enforced by law enforcement officers and any person or persons authorized by ordinance or by the chief of police, or his designees, the fire chief, or his designees, whether or not the vehicle is parked on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-74. - Reserved handicapped parking. 
(a)  The city traffic engineer is hereby authorized to designate handicapped spaces and to erect signs indicating parking zones reserved for handicapped persons. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating a parking zone reserved for the handicapped as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle in or otherwise deny access to, such designated place (whether on public or private property) unless that person is handicapped. 
(c)  The law enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue a citation or take whatever law enforcement action is deemed necessary or both. Furthermore, when an individual found to be in violation of these provisions refuses a request by a law enforcement officer to move the vehicle found in violation, the officer shall be authorized to have such vehicle towed. 
(d)  The citation shall contain information concerning the nature, date, time, and location of the alleged violation, the state vehicle license plate number, and the make of vehicle. In those cases where a license plate is not visible or legible, the vehicle identification number shall be used in lieu of the state vehicle plate number. The citation shall also contain information advising the person charged of the manner and the time in which he may contest the violation charged in the citation. The citation shall also provide that a failure to timely answer or appear before a court of competent jurisdiction shall be considered a prima facie admission of the violation set forth in the citation, in which the court may assess the appropriate fine or fines and all penalties incidental thereto. 
(e)  The citation issued pursuant to the provisions of this subsection shall be personally served upon the operator of the vehicle by affixing the parking citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place thereon. The original parking citation shall bear the name or initials and identification number of the issuing officer who shall affirm the truth of the facts set forth therein. An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner, but who uses or operates the vehicle with permission of the owner, expressed or implied, shall be considered the agent of the owner to receive the citation required to be served upon the operator or registered owner of a vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this subsection. When a citation is issued for an alleged violation of the laws governing parking in a handicapped parking space, loading and unloading areas, access aisles, access ramps, and curb cuts, there shall be a rebuttable presumption that a person in whose name the vehicle is registered was the operator of the vehicle when the alleged violation was committed. 
(f)  In the event that the registered owner or operator of a vehicle drives the vehicle away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation while the issuing officer is preparing the citation, or refuses service of the parking citation and drives away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation, this fact shall be duly noted on the original and all copies of the parking citation. This original and all copies of a parking citation shall constitute a business record of the law enforcement agency issuing the citation and shall constitute prima facie evidence that the citation was issued and that an attempt at service was made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(g)  The first violation of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a fine of two hundred seventy-five dollars ($275.00). A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Each occurrence of a violation of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  If the violator is other than an individual, a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed for the first violation. A subsequent violation shall be punished by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each occurrence of a violation of the provisions hereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(i)  In addition to such fine, the violator shall also be required to pay the towing fee and any storage costs which are incurred. 
(j)  The City of Monroe shall recognize parking cards or other removable windshield placards and special license plates which have been issued by authorities of other states and countries for the purpose of identifying vehicles permitted to utilize parking spaces reserved for the handicapped. 
(k)  Handicapped parking fines may be reduced or dismissed by the city attorney, or his designee, for just cause. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,612, 8-8-06) 
State Law reference- Parking spaces for disabled persons, R.S. 40:1742; Fee imposed in addition to fines, fees, costs for violations of mobility-impaired parking restrictions established by local ordinance, R.S. 46:2583(A)(2). 
Sec. 33-75. - Parking citation form. 
(a)  The parking citation shall be the notice of violation for purposes of this article. 
(b)  The parking citation shall contain information concerning the nature, date, time and location of the alleged violation, the state vehicle license plate number, and make of car. In those cases where a license plate is not visible and/or legible, either the vehicle identification number or the brake inspection tag number shall be in lieu of the state vehicle license plate number. In the case of delivery vehicles, the certificate of public necessity and convenience number (CPNC) shall be used in lieu of the state vehicle license plate number. 
(c)  The parking citation shall also contain information advising the person charged of the manner and the time in which he may contest the violation charged in the notice. The parking citation shall also provide that a failure to timely answer or appear before a court shall be considered a prima facie admission of the violation set forth on the parking citation, in which event the court may assess the appropriate fine or fines and all penalties incidental thereto. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
State Law reference- Traffic citations; form; issuance, R.S. 32:398.1. 
Sec. 33-76. - Service of parking citation. 
(a)  A parking citation shall be served personally upon the operator of a vehicle who is present at the time of service. If the operator is not so served, or is not present, the parking citation shall be served upon the registered owner of the vehicle by affixing the parking citation to the vehicle in a conspicuous place thereon. The original parking citation shall be signed by the issuing officer who shall affirm the truth of the facts set forth therein. An operator of a vehicle who is not the owner thereof, but who uses or operates the vehicle with permission of the owner, express or implied, shall be considered the agent of the owner to receive a parking citation required to be served upon the operator or registered owner of a vehicle in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  If the registered owner or operator of a vehicle drives the vehicle away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation while the issuing officer is preparing the parking citation, or refuses service of the parking citation and drives away from or in any manner leaves the site of the violation, this fact shall be duly noted on the original and all copies of the parking citation. This original and all copies of a parking citation shall constitute a business record of the city and shall constitute prima facie evidence that the parking citation was issued and that an attempt at service thereof was made in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-77. - Disposition of parking citations. 
(a)  The original parking citation shall be signed by the issuing officer, and shall be processed in accordance with this article and such other procedures as may be established and promulgated by the City of Monroe. 
(b)  A parking citation may be dismissed by the city attorney, or his designee, only upon his written statement for good cause shown, which statement shall be made a part of the disposition record thereof. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-78. - Citation as legal demand and prima facie evidence. 
    The original parking citation or any true copy thereof shall constitute an ordinary business record of the city and prima facie evidence of the facts contained therein. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-79. - Answering parking citation; failure to answer. 
(a)  A person to whom a parking citation has been issued under this article may answer to the same in the manner and within the delays indicated on the citation. An answer may take the form of: 
(1)  Admission of the violation with payment of the scheduled penalty; or 
(2)  Request for administrative review; or 
(3)  Appeal of administrative review findings. 
(b)  If the owner, his agent or the operator fails to appear on or prior to the court date, there shall be assessed additional delinquent penalties, as provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-79.1. - Failure to pay; civil action. 
(a)  Whenever a person charged with a parking violation fails to pay his penalty, the city attorney, or his designee, may file a civil action against the accused violator in the Monroe City Court. 
(b)  Service of process and all other civil procedures and delays shall be followed as in other civil matters before the Monroe City Court. 
(Ord. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-80. - Notice of hearing. 
    The parking citation shall provide information as to the time and place of a hearing. Whenever a person charged with a parking violation denies liability with explanation, the city attorney, or his designee, shall advise such person, personally or by United States mail, postage prepaid, of the date of which he must appear to answer the charge at a hearing. The form and content of such notice shall be prescribed by the city attorney, or his designee, and shall contain a warning to advise the person that failure to appear on the date designated, or on any subsequent date, to which the hearing is adjourned, shall be deemed an admission of liability. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04) 
Sec. 33-81. - Response to citation generally. 
    The owner or operator of a vehicle to which a notice has been affixed for a violation of this article shall discharge the summons within ten (10) days after the time such notice was attached to such vehicle by delivering or mailing the appropriate sum to the City of Monroe's Taxation and Revenue Division, 316 Breard Street, Monroe, Louisiana 71201 or Post Office Box 123, Monroe, Louisiana 71210. Such payment may be made only by cash, money order or credit card and made payable to the City of Monroe. Payment of the penalty established herein shall operate as a final disposition of the case. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,511, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-81.1. - Citation challenges. 
(a)  Administrative review. 
(1)  If the alleged violator wishes to challenge the issued citation, he should request an administrative review, which is conducted by the city attorney, or his designee, who is well-versed in the City of Monroe Traffic Code. Said request must be made within three (3) days of receipt of the citation. The purpose of this step is to screen out those citations where the alleged violator is clearly not liable for the citation. 
(2)  If administrative review is requested, the alleged violator will be required to post the penalty amount of his citation and a nonrefundable five dollar ($5.00) processing fee prior to being scheduled for review. He must submit a written declaration to the city attorney or his designee. Request for administrative review; forms will be available at the City of Monroe's Taxation and Revenue Division, 316 Breard Street, Monroe, Louisiana 71201. The form must be completed and returned, along with a copy of the citation and any other applicable proof to the Office of the City Attorney, Civil Division, at Post Office Box 123, Monroe, Louisiana 71210. Any documentation submitted with the administrative review request form will not be returned nor will copies be provided for the requestor. 
(3)  A self-addressed stamped envelope must also be included for notification of the finding of the review. An accused violator will be notified in writing of the finding of the review. 
(4)  If the alleged violator is found not liable, then his penalty funds will be refunded. If the citation is upheld, the alleged violator may appeal the findings of the review to the Monroe City Court. If he chooses not to appeal, then the penalty amount previously posted will be forfeited. 
(5)  A parking citation may be dismissed if it is determined, after review, it was either factually incorrect or issued in error. The following reasons, which are not exhaustive, do not warrant dismissal of a parking citation: 
a.  I was only gone for a minute. 
b.  I did not know that I could not park there. 
c.  I think the fine is too high. 
d.  I did not see the sign or curb marking. 
e.  I cannot afford to pay the fine. 
f.  I have never had a ticket before. 
g.  I have a perfect driving record. 
h.  I will never do it again. 
i.  My car was the only one cited. 
j.  I did not know it was against the law. 
(b)  Appeal. 
(1)  The final step in the challenge process is an appeal to the Civil Division of the Monroe City Court. The appeal must be filed at least fifteen (15) days after the findings of the administrative review are completed. 
(2)  The appellant will be responsible for paying any necessary filing fees for the appeal hearing. If he prevails, his posted penalty amount will be refunded. If the citation is upheld, the parking penalty will be forfeited. 
(3)  Parking penalties are to be remitted to the City of Monroe's Taxation and Revenue Division, 316 Breard Street, Monroe, Louisiana 71201. 
(Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-82. - Failure to respond to citation. 
(a)  Any person guilty of violating the provisions of this article, unless otherwise stated, shall be subject to a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) if paid within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the citation. However, any person guilty of violating the provisions of this section more than once in any day shall be subject to a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) for each violation, if paid within ten (10) days. 
(b)  If said fine(s) is/are not paid within ten (10) days, then each violation will result in a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). This amount shall be paid within twenty (20) days from the date of receipt of the citation. 
(c)  Upon the lapse of twenty (20) days, and if payment has not been received by the city, a certified letter will be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle in violation, notifying said registered owner of a fine increase of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each violation 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,511, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 10,612, 8-8-06) 
Sec. 33-83. - Failure to respond to citation; loading zone. 
(a)  Any person guilty of violating the loading zone provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) if paid within ten (10) days from the date of receipt of the citation. However, any person guilty of violating the provisions of this section more than once in any day shall be subject to a fine of twenty dollars ($20.00) for each violation, if paid within ten (10) days. 
(b)  If said fine(s) is/are not paid within ten (10) days, then each violation will result in a fine of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). This amount shall be paid within twenty (20) days from the date of receipt of the citation. 
(c)  Upon the lapse of twenty (20) days, and if payment has not been received by the city, a certified letter will be mailed to the registered owner of the vehicle in violation, notifying said registered owner of a fine increase to one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) for each violation. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,511, 7-12-05; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 10,612, 8-8-06) 
Sec. 33-84. - Presumption as to ownership of illegally parked vehicle. 
    In any prosecution charging a violation of any of the provisions of this article regulating the standing or parking of a vehicle, proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of the provisions of this division, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was, at the time of such parking, the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time during which, such violation occurred. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-85. - Record of violations. 
    It shall be the duty of the Parking Tickets Department of the Monroe Police Department to keep account of all violations of the parking regulations contained in this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-86. - Towing generally. 
(a)  Any illegally parked vehicle may be towed. Any vehicle that has been towed for a parking violation is to be held until the towing fee and penalties related to all outstanding parking tickets and penalties owed to the city are paid in full, or a bond is posted in the amount of the towing fee and all outstanding parking tickets and penalties. Payment of the towing fee and all outstanding parking tickets and penalties shall not constitute a waiver of a person's right to contest the towing or the outstanding parking tickets and penalties. 
(b)  Towing and impoundment charges must be paid in cash. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-86.1. - Release of vehicle in process of being removed. 
(a)  When a vehicle has been hooked to a tow truck in preparation for removal to a pound but the owner or other person lawfully entitled to possession of such vehicle appears and requests the release of such vehicle before the tow truck is in motion, such vehicle shall be unhooked and released, provided, however, that the person to whom such vehicle is released must pay the vehicle release penalty as set forth in section 33-86.2 at the time the release request is made. Payment shall be in the form required by the towing company. 
(b)  The person by whom the release request is made shall present a current valid driver's license and either registration for the vehicle, title to the vehicle, insurance identification and keys for the vehicle, a rental agreement and keys for the vehicle in case of a rental vehicle, or company identification and keys for the vehicle in the case of a commercial vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-86.2. - Vehicle release penalty. 
(a)  The penalty for the release of an illegally parked vehicle shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) for illegally parked vehicles which meet the criteria contained in sections 33-82 and 33-83, and one hundred dollars ($100.00) for illegally parked vehicles which meet the criteria listed in sections 33-65, 33-74 and 33-86.4. 
(b)  This fee is in addition to any other monetary fine(s) and penalty(-ies) permitted by law for the underlying parking violation(s); provided, however, that in no event shall a vehicle release penalty be imposed if the underlying parking violation or, in the case of multiple underlying parking violations, all underlying parking violations, are dismissed by the city attorney or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-86.3. - Towing and storage of illegally parked vehicles; tow away zones established; non-applicability to abandoned vehicles. 
(a)  In addition to any punishment for the violation of the Code, any motor vehicle parked in violation of this article shall be subject to removal, impoundment and detention when such parked vehicle creates or constitutes a traffic hazard, obstructs or may obstruct the movement of traffic or of emergency vehicles, including fire department equipment, and parks, stops or stands in fire lanes or within fifteen (15) feet of the fire hydrants or fire-protection devices on public or private property or within twenty (20) feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station, and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five (75) feet of said entrance; blocks a driveway; or has been on two (2) or more prior occasions parked in violation of a section of this Code or of law for which the towing is ordered; or where two (2) or more parking tickets which have become delinquent are outstanding as to any vehicle and said vehicle is illegally parked on a street, alley or highway at the time of removal; or when such vehicle is illegally parked in areas posted and designated in subsection (b) of this section as "NO PARKING TOW AWAY ZONE." A motor vehicle which is impounded under this section shall be subject to immediate towing or removal without notice. 
(b)  Whenever a motor vehicle has been removed, impounded or detained in accordance with this section, the Monroe Police Department shall as soon as practical, but within one business day, send a certified letter, return receipt requested, to the last known owner of said vehicle, notifying such owners of the following: 
(1)  That the vehicle has been impounded; 
(2)  The amount or rate of assessed charges for towing, storage or other costs incident to the impoundment, the applicable fine amount and that the release of the vehicle may be obtained by paying the stated charges and showing proof of ownership of said vehicle; 
(3)  That in the alternative he may obtain the release of the vehicle by posting an appearance bond; 
(4)  A statement of the procedure to be followed in obtaining and posting such bond; 
(5)  That he has the opportunity for a hearing if he so requests, concerning the propriety of the impoundment; 
(6)  A statement of the procedure to be followed in requesting such a hearing. 
(c)  The charges for the towing, impoundment and detention of said vehicle shall be paid by the owner of said vehicle, or the person who shall have violated any provisions of this article; and provided that if a motor vehicle is presumed or found to be abandoned pursuant to the provisions of section 24.5-72, then the provisions of this section shall not apply. 
(d)  The owner of any motor vehicle impounded under this section may obtain its release either upon payment of the assessed charges for towing and storage, or upon execution of an appearance bond, in the amount of one and one-quarter (11/4) times the amount of towing and storage charges, with good and solvent surety approved by the City Court of the City of Monroe. 
(e)  A hearing, when requested, shall be conducted before a judge of Monroe City Court on the propriety of any tow made in accordance with this section. Such hearings shall be held within forty-eight (48) hours of any request for a hearing. The hearing shall be limited to the question of whether the city had probable cause to tow the vehicle. If a request is made on a Thursday or a Friday, a hearing shall be granted on the following business day. If the forty-eight (48) hours expires on a holiday, then a hearing shall be had on the following business day. 
(f)  The owner of any motor vehicle which has been impounded in accordance with this section shall be entitled to a hearing before a judge of Monroe City Court if he so requests, provided that such a request for a hearing is made in writing within five (5) days of receipt of notice. 
(g)  The Monroe City Court judges shall have the power to order the release of the motor vehicle, prior to the hearing, upon execution of an appearance bond as set forth in this section. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-87. - Airport. 
(a)  This article shall be applicable to stopping, standing or parking at the Monroe Regional Airport, except in parking areas specifically providing for extended and limited parking, passenger loading and unloading zones, and any other designated airport-regulated zones. 
(b)  No person shall park any vehicle on a public parking lot posted as thirty-minute or one-hour parking and leave the same continuously parked for a period greater than thirty (30) minutes or one hour, respectively. 
(c)  Parking hang tags described in this article shall not be utilized at the Monroe Regional Airport. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-88. - Off-street parking in public lots. 
(a)  No person shall park any motor vehicle on or within city-owned public off-street parking lots and leave the same continuously parked for a period greater than twenty-four (24) hours, or as otherwise posted by the authority of the city traffic engineer. This provision shall exclude city-owned vehicles. 
(b)  No person shall park or leave any trailer or non-motorized vehicle on or within a city-owned public parking lot for more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours, or as otherwise posted by the authority of the city traffic engineer. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-89. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Posted on-street parking and public parking lot limits shall not be applicable to elected officials, judges, state officials, fire and police personnel, jurors and witnesses in trials, and service or utility workers who are in readily identifiable vehicles who are engaged in legitimate business. 
(b)  The City of Monroe shall recognize parking cards, hang tags or other removable windshield placards and special license plates for the purposes of identifying vehicles permitted to utilize on-street parking spaces and public parking lot spaces otherwise designated for time-limited parking. 
(c)  Elected officials, judges, state officials, fire and police personnel, jurors and witnesses in trials, and service or utility workers who are in readily identifiable vehicles identified in this section shall not be exempt from any other parking restrictions, prohibitions or penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT PARKING 

Sec. 33-90. - Permit parking regulations generally. 
(a)  The City of Monroe may issue appropriate monthly or yearly permits and shall cause parking signs to be erected in the area indicating the times and conditions under which parking shall be allowed. A permit shall be issued upon application and payment of the applicable fee, only to the owner or operator of a motor vehicle which is appropriately registered with the State of Louisiana. 
(b)  Parking permits may be purchased at the City of Monroe Taxation and Revenue Division Division, 316 Breard Street, Monroe, Louisiana 71201. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-90.1. - Display of permit. 
(a)  All City of Monroe permits are hang-tag type permits which shall be displayed by hanging from the rearview mirror, with the front side facing the windshield. 
(b)  Failure to properly display the hang tag will be subject to citation and penalties set forth in section 33-90.7. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-90.2. - Permit parking exemption. 
(a)  A vehicle in which a valid parking permit is displayed as provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the area for which the permit has been issued without being limited by time restrictions established pursuant to this article. However, said vehicle shall not be exempt from parking restrictions, prohibitions or penalties set forth in this chapter. 
(b)  A City of Monroe parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve to the holder thereof an on-street parking space or public parking lot space. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-90.3 - Duration of and application for permit. 
(a)  Parking permits shall be valid as follows: 
(1)  Monthly permit: Valid for thirty (30) days from the date of purchase. 
(2)  Yearly permit: Valid for one year from the date of purchase. 
No grace period will be granted by the City of Monroe. 
(b)  Each application or reapplication for a parking permit shall contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, his residence address or address of business owner and such other information that may be deemed relevant by the City of Monroe. If an applicant sells or otherwise transfers a vehicle bearing a permit, he shall remove the permit before transfer, and the applicant shall return to the City of Monroe Police Department to have his application information updated. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,520, 8-9-05; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-90.4. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Parking permits can be purchased at the Taxation and Revenue Division of the City of Monroe. 
(b)  The City of Monroe may make such changes to said fees, from time to time, as it sees fit. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,520, 8-9-05; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 10,612, 8-8-06) 
Sec. 33-90.5. - Revocation of permit. 
(a)  The City of Monroe is authorized to revoke the parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this article and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall surrender such permit to the City of Monroe Police Department. An applicant whose permit is revoked shall not be entitled to a refund of his or her permit cost. 
(b)  Failure, when so requested, to surrender a parking permit so revoked shall constitute a violation of law and of this article. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-90.6 - Regulations and procedures. 
(a)  Time restriction on parking. Except as otherwise designated, on-street parking will be restricted to a two-hour time limit on streets that are so designated. Vehicles bearing valid parking permits in the designated areas shall be exempt from the two-hour time limit. The City of Monroe Parking [Department] will erect, or cause, to be erected, signs. These signs shall indicate the two-hour time limit. The two-hour time limit shall be enforced at such times as the City of Monroe shall see fit. 
(b)  Existing parking regulations. All existing parking regulations shall remain in effect. These include but are not limited to: prohibited parking areas, fire lanes, handicapped parking spaces and loading zones. Holders of parking permits will not be exempt from these regulations. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to falsely represent himself as eligible for a parking permit or to furnish information in an application therefore. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person holding a valid parking permit issued pursuant hereto to permit the use or display of such permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which the permit is issued. Such conduct shall constitute an unlawful act and violation of this article both by the person holding the valid parking permit and the person who so uses or displays the permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which it is issued. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for a person to copy, produce or otherwise bring into existence a facsimile or counterfeit parking permit in order to evade time limitations or parking applicable in the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 33-90.7. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates any provision of this permit parking division shall be subject to the following penalties: 
(1)  First violation-$100.00 fine. 
(2)  Second violation-$200.00 fine. 
(3)  Third and each subsequent violation-$300.00 fine. 
(b)  Each violation shall constitute a separate offense. 
(c)  Any permit holder who is in violation of sections 33-65, 33-74, 33-82 and 33-83 shall be subject to the fines and penalties set forth in those provisions, in addition to any violations of this permit parking division, and conversely. 
(Ord. No. 10,442, 10-26-04; Ord. No. 10,574, 3-28-06) 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7449, adopted Oct. 26, 1982, added  33-80-33-91 to the Code. Inasmuch as Ord. No. 7266 had previously added  33-80, and for convenience' sake and purposes of classification, the editor has designated the applicable provisions as art. IV,  33-91-33-102, as authorized by  1-8 of this Code. 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate parades and processions, R.S. 32:41(A)(3). 

Sec. 33-91. - Definitions. 
(a)  Chief of police is the chief of police of the city. 
(b)  Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, show, exhibition, pageant or procession of any kind, or any similar display, in or upon any street, park or other public place in the city. 
(c)  Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-92. - Permit-Required; exceptions. 
(a)  Required. No person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. 
(b)  Exceptions. This section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its function. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-93. - Same-Application. 
    A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file an application with the chief of police on forms provided by such office. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed with the chief of police not less than six (6) days nor more than fifteen (15) days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
(a)  The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade; 
(b)  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization, and of the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
(c)  The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade chairman and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
(d)  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
(e)  The route to be traveled, the starting point and the termination point; 
(f)  The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which, will constitute such parade; the type animals, and description of the vehicles; 
(g)  The hours when such parade will start and terminate; 
(h)  A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed; 
(i)  The location by streets of any assembly areas for such parade; 
(j)  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any such assembly area or areas; 
(k)  The interval of space to be maintained between units of such parade; 
(l)  If the parade is designed to be held by and on behalf of or for any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
(m)  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(3)  Late applications. The chief of police, where good cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than six (6) days before the date such parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-94. - Same-Standards for issuance. 
    The chief of police shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous of its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at the assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of fire-fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to person or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-95. - Same-Notice of rejection. 
    The chief of police shall act upon the application for a parade permit within two (2) days after the filing thereof. If the chief of police disapproves the application, he shall mail to the applicant within two (2) days after the date upon which the application was filed a notice of his action, stating the reasons for his denial of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-96. - Same-Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade permit to the city council. The appeal shall be taken within two (2) days after notice. The council shall act upon the appeal within two (2) days after its receipt. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-97. - Same-Alternative permit. 
    The chief of police, in denying an application for a parade permit, shall be empowered to authorize the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time or over a route different from that named by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two (2) days after notice of the action of the chief of police, file a written notice of acceptance with the chief of police. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-98. - Same-Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the issuance of a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the mayor and members of the city council and to the fire chief of the city. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-99. - Same-Contents. 
    Each parade permit shall state the following information: 
(1)  Starting time; 
(2)  Minimum speed; 
(3)  Maximum speed; 
(4)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(5)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(6)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(7)  Such other information as the chief of police shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-100. - Duties of permittee. 
    A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
    The parade chairman or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-101. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of a vehicle, street car or trackless trolley shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when such vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The chief of police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Sec. 33-102. - Revocation of permit. 
    The chief of police shall have the authority to revoke a parade permit issued hereunder if he hereafter finds that the parade fails to meet the standards for issuance hereon or if he finds that the permittee has failed to comply with all permit directions and conditions set forth in the permit as provided in section hereof. 
(Ord. No. 7449, 10-26-82) 
Chapter 34 - TREES AND SHRUBS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7993, adopted Apr. 28, 1987, amended former Ch. 34, Trees,  34-1-34-3, in its entirety to read as set out herein. The former provisions derived from Code 1958  23-11, 23-13, 23-14. 
Cross reference- Height limitations relative to trees in certain zones at airport,  7-96; filling, etc. of trees without approval, within right-of-way of state highway deemed criminal mischief,  12-87(4); pickup of trees by city,  16-19(9); landscaping within Monroe Air-Industrial Park,  22-26; weeds and noxious growths,  24-16 et. seq.; streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; subdivisions, Ch. 32; zoning, Ch. 37. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Trimming of trees, etc., that overhang public ways. 
(a)  Public nuisance declared. All persons owning or maintaining shade or ornamental trees, shrubs or hedges upon or abutting the sidewalks or banquettes of the city shall keep such trees, shrubs and hedges trimmed and in such condition so as not to interrupt the clear vision of both vehicle and foot traffic and so as not to be an obstruction to vehicle or foot traffic, and so as not to interfere with the proper diffusion of light from any street light or standard light. Owning or maintaining any trees, shrubs or light hedges violating the above is hereby declared to be public nuisance. 
(b)  Planting location restrictions. It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, or cause to be planted, any kind of trees, shrubs or hedges on the streets, curb lines or sidewalks of the city. 
(c)  Trimming of overhanging limbs. All trees, shrubs and hedges located on public right-of-way or located on private property but hanging or encroaching onto public right-of-way shall be trimmed of all limbs and foliage to a height of at least ten (10) feet above the sidewalk and curb level and shall be trimmed or planted in such a manner so as to result in a single trunk or stem. 
(d)  Modification of regulations. The regulations set forth in subsection (b) above may be modified by the city as they pertain to certain specific locations which are of a sufficient distance from public streets, alleys and sidewalks so as to allow such modification without resulting in any interference with the use of the public right-of-way. 
(e)  Compliance required. Any trees, shrubs or hedges which are not maintained in accordance with the regulations contained above shall be forthwith brought into compliance with said regulations by the owners thereof. 
(f)  Notification to comply. The city may notify any owner who is not maintaining his trees, shrubs or hedges in accordance with the provisions of this section to do so within ten (10) days. 
(g)  Failure to comply with notice; violation; penalty. Any person owning trees who is notified by the city to maintain such trees, shrubs and hedges in accordance with provisions of this section and fails to comply with the notice within ten (10) days from receipt thereof shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each offense. Each day that the violation is allowed to continue by the owner shall constitute a separate offense. 
(h)  Additional remedies. When the owner of trees, shrubs and hedges located on public right-of-way fails to maintain such trees, shrubs and hedges in accordance with the provisions of this section, resulting in interference with the use of public right-of-way, in addition to the remedies contained in subsection (g) above, the city may, after serving the notice called for in subsection (f) above, trim the trees, shrubs and hedges in the manner herein provided, at the expense of the owner. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Cross reference- Streets and sidewalks, Ch. 31; traffic, Ch. 33. 
Sec. 34-2. - Use of climbing spikes regulated. 
    It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person engaged in the business of servicing trees, including, but not limited to, arborists and public utility firms, to employ the use of climbing spikes in order to climb trees unless the condition of the tree is such that it is impossible to climb, without the use of such device. If climbing spikes must be utilized, that person seeking to utilize them must first obtain written permission from the owner to utilize said devices. Additionally, after such devices are used, the duty is incumbent upon the person using such devices to spray any tree climbed with climbing spikes with a spray consisting of the proper pesticide and fungicide. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-3. - Arborists, tree trimmers required to remove debris; retention of logs, limbs, etc., by property owner. 
(a)  Unlawful. It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person, firm, or corporation engaged in the business of servicing trees and shrubs including, but not limited to, arborists, tree removers and line clearance personnel employed by or working under contract for utility companies, to perform such services without removing all logs, limbs and other debris from the premises at the same time the services are performed, except as provided in subsection (b). 
(b)  Notice. The requirements and obligations contained in subsection (a) hereof may be and are therefore exclusively assumed by the owner or occupant of the property by notifying the person, firm or corporation performing said services in writing that he desired to retain the logs, limbs or other debris for his own personnel use. Such written notice shall be retained by the person, firm, or corporation performing such service for not less than thirty (30) days, and a copy thereof shall be furnished to the city. Provided that an owner, upon assuming such obligation, shall not be entitled to dispose of such log, limbs or debris through the city garbage or trash departments. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-4. - Attaching wires to trees prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach to any tree on the streets of the city any electric light, telegraph, telephone or other wire, or to use any tree on the streets of the city as support for or to carry any electric light, telegraph, telephone or other wire; or to use any of the trees for any guy wire or any other purpose. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Cross reference- Electricity, Ch. 14. 
Sec. 34-5. - Transportation of logs, limbs, debris, etc., regulated. 
    It shall be unlawful to transport logs, limbs and other debris through or upon the city streets, alleys and/or right-of-ways unless the same is contained in sealed containers, tarpaulins or nets in such a manner as to prevent the same from falling, spilling, blowing, trailing or dragging on the city streets, city alleys, city rights-of-way or adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-6. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, except as specifically provided herein, shall be fined an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or six (6) months in jail or both, for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Secs. 34-7-34-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ARBORISTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Occupational license tax,  20-21 et seq. 

Sec. 34-16. - Definitions. 
    [For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:] 
    Arborist: Any person servicing trees other than one working on his own property. 
    Person: An individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation. 
    Shrub: A woody plant with more than one stem or trunk at the ground level. 
    Tree: A woody perennial plant that has a single trunk or stem. 
    Tree service: Work performed on trees specifically excluding shrubbery and including tree removals, tree trimming and cavity work, spraying for pest and disease control, and fertilizing of trees. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-17. - License-Required; responsibility of licensee; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to solicit or engage within the city in the business of servicing trees, except tree removal work only, unless such person shall have first procured a license to do so from the director of administration. This requirement is in addition to any other local licenses, and also in addition to the license required by the horticulture commission of the Louisiana Department of Agriculture. All persons holding an arborist's license issued pursuant to the terms of this section shall be responsible for the conduct of his employees, as well as himself, in fulfilling all requirements of this section. It shall be the responsibility of all persons holding an arborist's license and their employees to cause such license, or a legible copy thereof, to be available for inspection by representatives of the city at every location where persons holding an arborist's license and/or their employees are engaged in the business of servicing trees. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-18. - Same-Vehicles used in tree service to be marked with licensee's name. 
    All vehicles used in tree service shall be clearly marked with the name of the person holding a valid arborist's license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-19. - Same-Application. 
(a)  No arborist's license shall be issued to a person until such person shall have filed with the director of administration, in writing, an application therefor, accompanied by a photostatic copy of that person's license issued by the Louisiana Horticulture Commission. The application shall give the exact location from which the business is to be conducted. 
(b)  No license shall be issued by the director of administration until the applicant shall have complied with all the requirements of this article and any future requirements affecting arborists that may be enacted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-20. - Same-Not transferable. 
    It shall be unlawful to transfer any arborist license to any other person or for any arborist to knowingly allow any other person to use his license. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-21. - Same-Fee. 
    The license fee for an arborist license shall be equal to the fee that the arborist would pay for a state license. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Sec. 34-22. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any of provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall subject the violator to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first conviction and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent conviction, and/or six (6) months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 7993, 4-28-87) 
Secs. 34-23-34-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TREE BOARD 

Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Park trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names and all areas owned by the city. 
    Street trees are herein defined as trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues and ways within the city. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-32. - Creation of tree board. 
    There is hereby established a tree board for the City of Monroe, Louisiana, which shall consist of seven (7) members, who are citizens and residents of the City of Monroe, Louisiana, and who shall be appointed by the mayor, with representatives from each city council district. 
    The term of office of the members of the tree board shall be three (3) years, except that upon the appointment of the first board, two (2) members shall be appointed for one year, two (2) members shall be appointed for two (2) years and three (3) members shall be appointed for three (3) years. 
    In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed in the same manner for the unexpired portion of the term. Members may be reappointed. 
    Members of the tree board shall serve without compensation. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-33. - Duties of board. 
    It shall be the duty and responsibility of the board to assist in the enforcement and implementation of Chapter 34 of the City of Monroe Code and to study, investigate, advise, develop, update annually and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees, shrubs, bushes or other woody vegetation along streets, in parks, and in other public places in the city. 
    Such plan shall be annually presented to the city council in the form of an ordinance and upon adoption shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    The board shall also assist in the enforcement of all of the provisions of section 34-1 of this chapter. 
    The board, when requested by the mayor or the city council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report, and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
    The board shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations, subject to the requirements of due process and the Louisiana laws governing public bodies, and shall keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of its members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-34. - Tree list. 
    The board shall propose an official street tree list, which upon adoption by the city council in ordinance form shall constitute the official street tree list for the City of Monroe, which shall be numbered herein as section 34-45 when enacted. Said list shall be divided into size categories (small, medium and large) and provide spacing requirements between trees of the various size classes. No species other than those included in this list may be planted as street trees without the written permission of the tree board and all trees planted after the effective date of the street tree ordinance shall conform to the spacing requirements therein. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-35. - Distance from street corners and fireplugs. 
    No street trees shall be planted closer than thirty-five (35) feet from any street corner, measured from the point nearest intersecting curbs or curblines and/or intersecting streets or street lines. No street tree shall be planted closer than ten (10) feet of any fireplug. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-36. - Utilities. 
    No trees, shrubs, bushes or other woody vegetation shall be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire. No trees shall be planted over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, storm water drain, transmission line or other utility line without the written permission of the tree board, after a hearing on the request. 
    No trees shall be planted over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, storm water drain, transmission line or other utility line. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-37. - Public tree care. 
    The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants, shrubs, bushes and other woody vegetation within the lines of all public streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, parks and public grounds as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
    The board may remove or cause to be removed any tree, plant, shrub, bush or other woody vegetation, or part thereof, within the lines of all public streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, parks and public grounds which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, water lines, gas lines or other public improvements or is affected or infected with any injurious fungus, insect, disease or other pest. 
    These provisions shall not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners providing that the selection and location of said trees are in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the zoning ordinance of the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Cross reference- Zoning, Ch. 37. 
Sec. 34-38. - Other restrictions on location. 
    In the event that the zoning ordinances of the City of Monroe contain more stringent restrictions on the spacing and/or location of trees, shrubs, bushes and other woody vegetation than the provisions herein, the more stringent restrictions shall apply and take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-39. - Tree topping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, partnership or corporation to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three (3) inches in diameter within the trees crown to such a degree so as to remove normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility lines or other obstructions where pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision at the determination of the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-40. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-41. - Interference with tree board. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, company, partnership or corporation to prevent, delay or interfere with the tree board, or any of its agents, while engaged in the planting, cultivation, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private property as authorized under this article and any amendments or additions thereto. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-42. - Review by city council. 
    The city council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and/or decisions of the tree board. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-43. - Appeal. 
    Any person may appeal any ruling, act or decision of the tree board to the city council, within ten (10) days of the decision, who shall hear the matter and render a final decision thereon. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Sec. 34-44. - Penalty. 
    Violation of any provisions of this article shall be deemed a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall subject the violator to a fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the first conviction and five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each subsequent conviction, and/or up to six (6) months in jail, or both. 
(Ord. No. 9100, 10-10-89) 
Chapter 35 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Former Ch. 35, pertaining to similar subject matter, was deleted as superseded by the provisions of Ord. No. 7943 adopted Aug. 26, 1986, which amended Ch. 35 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 35 contained substantive sections numbered  35-16-35-19, 35-31-35-39, 35-51-35-59, 35-71-35-74, 35-86-35-90, 35-101-35-110, 35-126, 35-127, 35-141-35-144, which derived from Code 1958  25-2-25-8.2, 25-9-25-20.2, 25-21, 25-22, 25-25-25-27, 25-31, 25-46, 25-47, 25-51-25-59; Ord. No. 7072, adopted July 10, 1979, and Ord. No. 7317, adopted Oct. 13, 1981. 
Cross reference- Occupational licenses,  12-21 et seq.; traffic, Ch. 33. 
State Law reference- The Public Passenger Motor Vehicle Responsibility Law, R.S. 45:200.1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 35-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates that a different meaning is intended: 
    Airport taxi: A public carrier vehicle. A taxicab used for the transportation of passengers for hire from the Monroe Regional Airport terminal building to destinations in the city by a route controlled by the holder of a certificate. 
    Bus: A motor vehicle designed to carry more than twelve (12) persons and used to carry passengers on fixed routes for hire, or fare, on a scheduled basis. 
    Call box stand: A place alongside of a street or elsewhere that the council has authorized a holder of a certificate of public convenience and necessity to install a telephone or call box for the taking of calls and the dispatching of a vehicle for hire. 
    Certificate: A certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the council, authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a vehicle for hire business in the city. 
    City: The City of Monroe. 
    Cruising: The driving of a vehicle for hire on the streets, alleys or public places of the city in search of, or soliciting, prospective passengers for hire. 
    Driver's license: The permission granted by the city to a person to drive a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city. 
    Holder: A person to whom a certificate of public convenience and necessity has been issued. 
    Jitney: A motor vehicle designed to carry not more than twelve (12) and not less than eight (8) persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers on fixed routes for hire. 
    Limousine: A luxurious chauffeur-driven sedan used for the transportation of passengers for hire. 
    Limousine service: A service providing or offering to provide transportation in a limousine by prior reservation, but not including service in connection with funerals. 
    Limousine service license: A license issued by the city for operation of a limousine service. 
    Manifest: A daily record prepared by the driver of a vehicle for hire of all trips made by such driver showing time and place of origin, destination, number of passengers, and the amount of fare of each trip. 
    Open stand: A public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere in the city, which has been designated by the city council as reserved exclusively for the use of a vehicle for hire. 
    Rate card: A card for display in each vehicle for hire which card contains the rates of fare then in force. 
    Taximeter: A meter instrument or device attached to a vehicle for hire which is connected with, and operated from, the front wheel or axle and/or transmission of the vehicle for hire to which it is attached which measures mechanically the distance driven and the waiting time upon which the fare is based. 
    Vehicle for hire: A motor vehicle having a normal seating capacity of less than twelve (12) passengers, used for the transportation of passengers for hire over any streets by a route and/or to a destination controlled by the passenger. 
    Waiting time: The time when a vehicle for hire is not in motion from the time of acceptance of a passenger or passengers to the time of discharge, but does not include any time that the vehicle for hire is not in motion if due to any case other than the request, act or fault of a passenger or passengers. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
State Law reference- Relevant definitions under state law, R.S. 45:200.2. 
Sec. 35-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The police department shall enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-3. - Violations. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided by state law or city ordinance, any owner, driver, chauffeur or other person in charge of any vehicle for hire who shall fail to comply with, or in any way violate, the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punished by a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not less than sixty (60) days nor more than six (6) months, or both. 
(b)  Conviction hereunder may result in the revocation of the certificate or certificates involved, permanently or for a fixed period, by the city council. No such certificate shall be reissued in favor of the person in whose name it stood, except by authority of the city council. 
(c)  Violation by a partnership, corporation or association shall be presumptive evidence of such violation by all partners, officers and directors thereof, and any such partner, officer or director who knowingly, or without exercise of due and reasonable care and inquiry, consented to, permitted or approved, directly or indirectly, such violation, in whole or in part, shall be subject to the penalties hereinabove provided. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-4-35-10. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSES (RESERVED) 

Secs. 35-11-35-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JITNEY (RESERVED) 

Secs. 35-51-35-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - LIMOUSINE SERVICE 
DIVISION 1. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY 

Sec. 35-101. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or permit a vehicle owned or controlled by him to be operated as a limousine for hire upon the streets of the city without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-102. - Application. 
    An application for a certificate shall be filed with the police department upon forms provided by the city; and such application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments; 
(3)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers; 
(4)  Any facts which the applicant believes tend to prove that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate; 
(5)  The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed depots and terminals; 
(6)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant; and 
(7)  Such further information as the council may require. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-103. - Character of applicant. 
    No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character or who has been convicted of a felony; nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be inelgible for a license under the foregoing conditions [sic]. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-104. - Hearing and issuance. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a certificate, the city council shall fix a time and place for public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given the general public by posting a notice of such hearing in a daily newspaper published in the city. Any interested person may file with the city council a memorandum in support of or opposition to the issuance of a certificate. 
(b)  If the council finds that further service in the city is required by public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this article and the rules promulgated by the council, then the council shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under such certificate, and the date of issuance; otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(c)  In making the above findings, the city council shall take into consideration the number of vehicles for hire already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience, and responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-105. - Transfer. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-106. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds. A certificate issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council if the holder thereof has: 
(1)  Violated any of the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Discontinued operations for more than fifteen (15) days. 
(3)  Has violated any ordinance of the city, or law of the United States or of this state, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
(b)  Notice. Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-107. - Insurance requirements. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued until the owner of the public carrier vehicle shall first have filed with the officer in charge of the traffic division of the police department a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. Such insurance policy shall provide for the payment of a sum not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or death of any one person resulting from any one accident, and subject to such limit for one person, for payment of a sum not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to, or death of, two (2) or more persons, resulting from any one accident, and for a payment of a sum not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages to property resulting form any one accident, by reason of the ownership operation, maintenance or use of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-108. - Reports to secretary of state. 
    The officer in charge of the traffic division of the police department shall make and deliver, in January of each year, to the secretary of state, printed or typed certified lists giving in alphabetical order the full names and addresses of all owners of public carrier vehicles holding valid certificates issued by the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-109. - Certificate of compliance. 
    Upon filing by the owner of a public carrier vehicle or vehicles of the insurance policy, the officer in charge of the traffic division of the police department shall issue a certificate of compliance for each such vehicle. This certificate of compliance shall show that the owner of such vehicle has complied with the requirements of section 35-107, and shall recite the full name of the owner of the vehicle and of the insurer, together with the number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of the vehicle insured thereunder, and the number thereof. The original certificate of compliance shall be posted within the vehicle. The issuing officer shall retain and preserve a duplicate of the certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-110. - Annual fee. 
    A person to whom a certificate has been issued shall pay an annual fee to the city equal to one per cent of the gross receipts derived from the limousine for the year for which the certificate was issued. Such fee shall be paid prior to April 1 of the subsequent year. Upon request each certificate holder shall exhibit manifests, tax returns, bank records and such other documents as may be necessary to verify the correctness of the fee paid. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-111-35-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 35-121. - Periodic inspections. 
    Every vehicle operating under this article shall be periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be established by the city council to insure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions, but no less than once each year. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-122. - Sanitation. 
    Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 35-123. - Identifying markings on vehicle. 
    The city shall issue a card or decal for each vehicle covered by a limousine certificate and such card or decal shall be displayed by affixing to the inside of the vehicle. If more than one vehicle is operated by a licensee each vehicle shall be designated by a different number, and the number also shall so appear on each side of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-124. - State vehicle license. 
    Each vehicle hereunder shall be properly licensed under the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-125. - Advertising. 
    Subject to the rules and regulations of the council, it shall be lawful for any person owning or operating a limousine for hire to permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such motor vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Cross reference- Advertising and signs, Ch. 3. 
Secs. 35-126-35-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 35-141. - Established. 
    No owner or driver of a limousine shall charge a greater sum for the use of a limousine than in accordance with the following rates: 
(1)  Per trip ..... $20.00 
(2)  Per hour ..... 30.00 
(3)  Out of town, per mile ..... 1.50 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-142. - Change of rates. 
    Rates shall only be changed upon application to and approval by city council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-143. - Refusal to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any limousine after having hired the same. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-144. - Receipts. 
    The driver of any limousine shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner, name of the driver, certified number, charges and date of transaction. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-145-35-170. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRIVER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 35-171. - State driver's license. 
    All drivers shall be required to have at all times a driver's license as required by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-172. - City driver's license. 
    No person shall operate or drive a limousine for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a limousine shall permit same to be so operated or driven, and no limousine licensed by the city shall be so operated or driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of such limousine shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a limousine driver's license issued under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-173. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a limousine driver's license shall be filed with the police department on forms provided by the city; such applications shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses of four (4) residents of the city who have known the applicant for a period of two (2) years and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in transportation of passengers. 
(3)  The educational background of the applicant. 
(4)  A concise history of the employment of the applicant. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician of the city, certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay the license fee provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-174. - Qualifications. 
    No such license shall be issued to any person who is not competent to operate a motor vehicle or is not familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances. Before issuing a limousine driver's license the chief of police shall examine the applicant with a written test and/or a driving test to determine the competency of the applicant as a driver. The chief of police may delegate the giving of such tests to a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-175. - Examination of applicant. 
    Before any application for a limousine driver's license is finally passed upon by the police chief the applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of the city and to show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's permit issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-176. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a limousine driver's license a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-177. - Issuance. 
(a)  The police department shall, upon consideration of the application for a limousine driver's license and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the police chief to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered. The applicant may appeal an adverse consideration to the city council. 
(b)  Upon approval of an application for a limousine driver's license the police department shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name, address, color, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-178. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a limousine driver's license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year or any part of a year. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-179. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Limousine driver's licenses shall expire at the end of each calendar year, and may be renewed upon payment of the required fee unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-180. - Display. 
    Every driver licensed under this division shall post his driver's license in such a place as to be if full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a limousine. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-181. - Suspension or revocation; notice. 
    The police chief may suspend any driver's license issued under this division for a driver's failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this article, such suspension to last for a period of not more than fifteen (15) days. The department may revoke any driver's license for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. A license may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his behalf. Any suspension or revocation under this section may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-182-35-200. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 35-201. - Compliance with laws. 
    Every driver licensed under this article shall comply with all city, state and federal laws, including all traffic laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-202. - Quality of service. 
    All persons engaged in the limousine business in the city operating under the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use limousines. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open twenty-four (24) hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching limousines. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the city as soon as they can do so and, if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the city at any time when such holder has available limousines, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this article and the certificate granted to such holder may be revoked at the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-203. - Service by reservation only. 
(a)  All limousine service shall be by reservation only. 
(b)  No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, by prior reservation, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-204. - Solicitation of passengers by driver. 
(a)  No limousine driver shall solicit passengers for a limousine. The driver of any limousine shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street, except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his limousine for not more than ten (10) consecutive minutes, and provided further, nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
(b)  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign, or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-205. - Cruising. 
    No limousine driver shall cruise in search of passengers. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-206. - Receipt and discharge of passengers. 
    Drivers of limousines shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the right-or left-hand sidewalk, or side or the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. Drivers shall assist passengers in and out of limousines. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-207. - Restriction on number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a limousine as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his limousine as stated in the license for such vehicle issued by the police department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 7960, 10-28-86) 
Sec. 35-208. - Records and reports-Generally. 
(a)  Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating, and other expenses, capital expenditures, and such other operating information as may be required by the council. Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information and other data required by this article at a place readily accessible for examination by the council. 
(b)  Every holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and statistics of operation to the council for each calendar year, in accordance with a uniform system prescribed by the director of administration. Such reports shall reach the director on or before the fifteenth day of March of the year following the calendar year for which such reports are prepared. 
(c)  All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of limousines which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be reported within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of occurrence to the police department in a form of report to be furnished by such department. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-209. - Same-Driver's manifests. 
    Each driver of a limousine shall maintain a daily manifest on which shall be recorded the time and place of origin, designation of each trip, time and place of termination, the amount of the fare, the name of the driver, and identity of the limousine. The manifest form shall be furnished to the driver by the licensee. The licensee shall preserve each daily manifest for a period of four (4) years and shall submit any information contained in the manifest forms at the request of the police department. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-210. - Immoral purposes. 
    It is unlawful for a limousine service driver to permit any person to occupy or use a limousine for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, indecent conduct or other unlawful use. And it is unlawful for a driver to direct or offer or agree to direct any person to any place or person for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or indecent conduct. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-211-35-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - TAXICAB SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Taxicabs and taxicab zones,  33-47. 

DIVISION 1. - CERTIFICATE OF PUBLIC CONVENIENCE AND NECESSITY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 45:200.3. 

Sec. 35-251. - Required. 
    No person shall operate or permit a vehicle owned or controlled by him to be operated as a taxi for hire upon the streets of the city without having first obtained a certificate of public convenience and necessity from the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-252. - Application. 
    An application for a certificate shall be filed with the police department upon forms provided by the city; and such application shall be verified under oath and shall furnish the following information: 
(1)  The name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The financial status of the applicant, including the amounts of all unpaid judgments against the applicant and the nature of the transaction or acts giving rise to such judgments; 
(3)  The experience of the applicant in the transportation of passengers; 
(4)  Any facts which the applicant believes tend to provide that public convenience and necessity require the granting of a certificate; 
(5)  The number of vehicles to be operated or controlled by the applicant and the location of proposed deposits and terminals; 
(6)  The color scheme or insignia to be used to designate the vehicle or vehicles of the applicant; and 
(7)  Such further information as the council may require. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-253. - Character of applicant. 
    No such license shall be issued to or held by any person who is not a person of good character; nor shall such license be issued to or held by any corporation if any officer thereof would be ineligible for a license under the foregoing conditions. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 10,059, 7-25-00) 
Sec. 35-254. - Hearing and issuance. 
(a)  Upon the filing of an application for a certificate, the city council shall fix a time and place for public hearing thereon. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the applicant and to all persons to whom certificates of public convenience and necessity have been theretofore issued. Due notice shall also be given the general public by posting a notice of such hearing in a daily newspaper published in the city. Any interested person may file with the city council a memorandum in support of or opposition to the issuance of a certificate. 
(b)  If the council finds that further service in the city is required by public convenience and necessity and that the applicant is fit, willing and able to perform such public transportation and to conform to the provisions of this article and the rules promulgated by the council, then the council shall issue a certificate stating the name and address of the applicant, the number of vehicles authorized under such certificate, and the date of issuance; otherwise, the application shall be denied. 
(c)  In making the above findings, the city council shall take into consideration the number of vehicles for hire already in operation, whether existing transportation is adequate to meet the public need, the probable effect of increased service on local traffic conditions, and the character, experience, and responsibility of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-255. - Transfer. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred without the consent of the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-256. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  Grounds. A certificate issued under the provisions of this article may be revoked or suspended by the city council if the holder thereof has: 
(1)  Violated any of the provisions of this article; 
(2)  Discontinued operations for more than fifteen (15) days; 
(3)  Has violated any ordinance of the city, or law of the United States or of this state, the violation of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public transportation. 
(b)  Notice. Prior to suspension or revocation, the holder shall be given notice of the proposed action to be taken and shall have an opportunity to be heard. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-257. - Insurance requirements. 
    No certificate of public convenience and necessity shall be issued until the owner of the public carrier vehicle shall first have filed with the officer in charge of the traffic division of the police department a policy of liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in this state. Such insurance policy shall provide for the payment of a sum not less than twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to or death of any one person resulting from any one accident, and subject to such limit for one person, for payment of a sum not less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages by reason of bodily injury to, or death of, two (2) or more persons, resulting from any one accident, and for a payment of a sum not less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to satisfy all claims for damages to property resulting from any one accident, by reason of the ownership operation, maintenance or use of such vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 45:200.4-45:200.7. 
Sec. 35-258. - Reports to secretary of state. 
    The officer in charge of the traffic division of the police department shall make and deliver, in January of each year, to the secretary of state printed or typed certified lists giving in alphabetical order the full names and addresses of all owners of public carrier vehicles holding valid certificates issued by the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-259. - Certificate of compliance. 
    Upon filing by the owner of a public carrier vehicle or vehicles, of the insurance policy, the officer in charge of the traffic division of the police department shall issue a certificate of compliance for each such vehicle. This certificate of compliance shall show that the owner of such vehicle has complied with the requirements of section 35-257, and shall recite the full name of the owner of the vehicle and of the insurer, together with the number and date of expiration of the policy, a description of the vehicle insured thereunder, and the number thereof. The original certificate of compliance shall be posted within the vehicle. The issuing officer shall retain and preserve a duplicate of the certificate of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, R.S. 45:200.9. 
Sec. 35-260. - Fee. 
    A person to whom a certificate has been issued shall pay an annual fee to the city equal to one per cent of the gross receipts derived from the taxicab for the year for which the certificate was issued. Such fee shall be paid prior to April 1 of the subsequent year. Upon request each certificate holder shall exhibit manifests, tax returns, bank records and such other documents as may be necessary to verify the correctness of the fee paid. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-261-35-270. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VEHICLE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 35-271. - Periodic inspections. 
    Every vehicle operating under this article shall be periodically inspected by the police department at such intervals as shall be established by the city council to insure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions, but no less than once each year. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-272. - Sanitation. 
    Every vehicle operating under this article shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Cross reference- Health and sanitation, Ch. 18. 
Sec. 35-273. - Identifying markings on vehicle. 
(a)  Each taxicab shall bear on each side of the vehicle, in painted letters and figures not less than two (2) inches or more than six (6) inches in height, and in a conspicuous position approved by the traffic division of the police department: 
(1)  The full name of the owner of the certificate under which said vehicle is being operated; and 
(2)  The number of the certificate for such vehicle. 
(b)  In addition, the vehicle shall bear an identifying design approved the city council. No vehicle covered by the terms of this article shall be licensed whose color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia to be used thereon shall, in the opinion of the council, conflict with or imitate any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used on a vehicle or vehicles already misleading or tend to deceive or defraud the public. If the color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia thereof is changed so as to be, in the opinion of the council, in conflict with or imitation of any color scheme, identifying design, monogram or insignia used by any other person, owner or operator, in such a manner as to be misleading or tending to deceive the public, the certificate covering such taxicab shall be suspend or revoked. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-274. - State vehicle license. 
    Each vehicle hereunder shall be properly licensed under the laws of the State. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-275. - Advertising. 
    Subject to the rules and regulations of the council, it shall be lawful for any person owning or operating a taxi for hire to permit advertising matter to be affixed to or installed in or on such motor vehicles for hire. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Cross reference- Advertising and signs, Ch. 3. 
Secs. 35-276-35-300. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 35-301. - Established. 
    No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge a greater sum for the use of a taxicab than in accordance with the following rates: 
(1)  Mileage rates: One dollar and fifty cents ($1.50) for the first one-fifth mile or fraction thereof; thirty-six cents ($0.36) for each additional one-fifth mile or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Waiting time: Thirty cents ($0.30) for each one minute of waiting time or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Luggage: No charge for each two (2) suitcases per paying passenger; fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional suitcase. 
(4)  Additional passengers. Only one fare shall be charged for two (2) passengers or less, where the point of destination of the passengers is the same. For each additional passenger in excess of two (2) passengers, an additional charge of fifty cents ($0.50) may be made. No charge will be made for children twelve (12) years of age and under when accompanied by an adult. 
(5)  Airport taxicab. The owner or driver of the airport taxicab shall charge a rate consistent with zoning map on file in the office of the clerk and made a part hereof. The rates will be as follows, for each passenger, no charge for children under twelve (12) years of age when accompanied by an adult: 
Local motels, not more than ..... $5.00 
Zone No. 1, not more than ..... 6.00 
Zone No. 2, not more than ..... 7.00 
Zone No. 3, not more than ..... 8.00 
Zone No. 4, not more than ..... 9.00 
New zones, not more than ..... 10.00 
No comparable rates, not more than ..... 10.00 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86; Ord. No. 7959, 10-28-86; Ord. No. 10,021, 3-28-00) 
Cross reference- Monroe Regional Airport,  7-46 et seq. 
Sec. 35-302. - Change of rates. 
    Rates shall only be changed upon application to and approval by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-303. - Refusal to pay fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of any taxicab after having hired the same. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-304. - Receipts. 
    The driver of any taxicab shall, upon demand by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, either by a mechanically printed receipt or by a specially prepared receipt on which shall be the name of the owner, name of the driver, certified number, charges and date of transaction. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-305. - Taximeter. 
    All taxicabs operated under the authority of this article shall be equipped with taximeters fastened in front of the passengers, visible to them at all times day and night and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. Such taximeter shall be operated mechanically by a mechanism of standard design and construction, driven either from the transmission or from one of the front wheels by a flexible and permanently attached driving mechanism. They shall be sealed at all points and connections which, if manipulated, would affect their correct reading and recording. Each taximeter shall have thereon a flag to denote when the vehicle is employed and when it is not employed; and it shall be the duty of the driver to throw the flag of such taximeter into a nonrecording position at the termination of each trip. The taximeters shall be subject to inspection from time to time by the police department. Any inspector or other officer of the department is hereby authorized, either on complaint of any person or without any such complaint, to inspect any meter and, upon discovery of any inaccuracy therein, to notify the person operating the taxicab to cease operation. Thereupon such taxicab shall be kept off the highways until the taximeter is repaired and in the required working condition. 
(Ord. No. 7959, 10-28-86) 
Secs. 35-306-35-335. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DRIVER'S LICENSE 

Sec. 35-336. - State driver's license. 
    All drivers shall be required to have at all times a driver's license as required by the laws of the state. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-337. - City driver's license. 
    No person shall operate or drive a taxicab for hire upon the streets of the city, and no person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit same to be so operated or driven, and no taxicab licensed by the city shall be so operated or driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's license issued under the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-338. - Application. 
(a)  An application for a limousine driver's license shall be filed with the police department on forms provided by the city; such applications shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The names and addresses of four (4) residents of the city who have known the applicant for a period of two (2) years and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the applicant. 
(2)  The experience of the applicant in transportation of passengers. 
(3)  The educational background of the applicant. 
(4)  A concise history of the employment of the applicant. 
(b)  Each application shall be accompanied by a certificate from a reputable physician of the city, certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not afflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. At the time the application is filed, the applicant shall pay the license fee provided in this division. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-339. - Qualifications. 
    No such license shall be issued to any person who is not competent to operate a motor vehicle or is not familiar with the traffic laws and ordinances. Before issuing a taxicab driver's license the chief of police shall examine the applicant with a written test and/or a driving test to determine the competency of the applicant as a driver. The chief of police may delegate the giving of such tests to a police officer. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-340. - Examination of applicant. 
    Before any application for a taxicab driver's license is finally passed upon by the police chief the applicant shall be required to pass a satisfactory examination as to his knowledge of the city and to show that he has a current motor vehicle operator's permit issued by the state. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-341. - Investigation of applicant. 
    The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's license a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-342. - Issuance. 
(a)  The police department shall, upon consideration of the application for a taxicab driver's license and the reports and certificate required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may request a personal appearance before the police chief to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered. The applicant may appeal an adverse consideration to the city council. 
(b)  Upon approval of an application for a taxicab driver's license the police department shall issue a license to the applicant which shall bear the name, address, color, age, signature and photograph of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-343. - Fee. 
    The annual fee for a taxicab driver's license shall be ten dollars ($10.00) per year or any part of a year. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-344. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Taxicab driver's licenses shall expire at the end of each calendar year, and may be renewed upon payment of the required fee unless the license for the preceding year has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-345. - Display. 
    Every driver licensed under this division shall post his driver's license in such a place as to be in full view of all passengers while such driver is operating a taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-346. - Suspension or revocation. 
    The police chief may suspend any driver's license issued under this division for a driver's failing or refusing to comply with the provisions of this article, such suspension to last for a period of not more than fifteen (15) days. The department may revoke any driver's license for failure to comply with the provisions of this article. A license may not be revoked unless the driver has received notice and has had an opportunity to present evidence in his behalf. Any suspension or revocation under this section may be appealed to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-347-35-360. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - OPERATIONAL RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 35-361. - Compliance with laws. 
    Every driver licensed under this article shall comply with all city, state and federal laws, including all traffic laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-362. - Quality of service. 
    All persons engaged in the taxicab business in the city operating under the provisions of this article shall render an overall service to the public desiring to use taxicabs. Holders of certificates of public convenience and necessity shall maintain a central place of business and keep the same open twenty-four (24) hours a day for the purpose of receiving calls and dispatching taxicabs. They shall answer all calls received by them for services inside the corporate limits of the city as soon as they can do so and, if such services cannot be rendered within a reasonable time, they shall then notify the prospective passengers how long it will be before the call can be answered and give the reason therefor. Any holder who shall refuse to accept a call anywhere in the corporate limits of the city at any time when such holder has available taxicabs, or who shall fail or refuse to give overall service, shall be deemed a violator of this article and the certificate granted to such holder may be revoked at the discretion of the council. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-363. - Service required. 
    No driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly person, unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this article to do so. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-364. - Solicitation of passengers by driver. 
(a)  No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers for a taxicab except when sitting in the driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curb side thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the side thereof. The driver of any taxicab shall remain in the driver's compartment or immediately adjacent to his vehicle at all times when such vehicle is upon the public street, except that, when necessary, a driver may be absent from his taxicab for not more than ten (10) consecutive minutes, and provided further, nothing herein contained shall be held to prohibit any driver from alighting to the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers into or out of such vehicle. 
(b)  No driver shall solicit patronage in a loud or annoying tone of voice or by sign, or in any manner annoy any person or obstruct the movement of any persons, or follow any person for the purpose of soliciting patronage. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-365. - Cruising. 
    No taxicab driver shall cruise in search of passengers except in such areas and at such times as shall be designated by the council. Such areas and time shall only be designated when the city council finds that taxicabs cruising would not congest traffic or be dangerous to pedestrians and other vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-366. - Receipt and discharge of passengers. 
    Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk as nearly as possible or in the absence of a sidewalk, to the extreme right-hand side of the road and there receive or discharge passengers, except upon one-way streets where passengers may be discharged at either the right-or left-hand sidewalk, or side of the roadway in the absence of a sidewalk. Drivers shall assist passengers in and out of taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-367. - Restriction of number of passengers. 
    No driver shall permit more persons to be carried in a taxicab as passengers than the rated seating capacity of his taxicab as stated in the license for such vehicle issued by the police department. A child in arms shall not be counted as a passenger. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-368. - Records and reports-Generally. 
(a)  Every holder shall keep accurate records of receipts from operations, operating, and other expenses, capital expenditures, and such other operating information as may be required by the council. Every holder shall maintain the records containing such information and other data required by this article at a place readily accessible for examination by the council. 
(b)  Every holder shall submit reports of receipts, expenses and statistics of operation to the council for each calendar year, in accordance with a uniform system prescribed by the director of administration. Such reports shall reach the director on or before the fifteenth day of March of the year following the calendar year for which such reports are prepared. 
(c)  All accidents arising from or in connection with the operation of taxicabs which result in death or injury to any person, or in damage to any vehicle, or to any property in an amount exceeding the sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be reported within twenty-four (24) hours from the time of occurrence to the police department in a form of report to be furnished by such department. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-369. - Same-Driver's manifests. 
    Each driver of a taxicab shall maintain a daily manifest which shall be recorded the time and place of origin, designation of each trip, time and place of termination, the amount of the fare, the name of the driver, and identity of the taxicab. The manifest form shall be furnished to the driver by the licensee. The licensee shall preserve each daily manifest for a period of four (4) years and shall submit any information contained in the manifest forms at the request or the police department. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-370. - Immoral purposes. 
    It is unlawful for a taxicab service driver to permit any person to occupy or use a taxicab for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness, indecent conduct or other unlawful use. And it is unlawful for a driver to direct or offer or agree to direct any person to any place or person for the purpose of prostitution, lewdness or indecent conduct. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Secs. 35-371-35-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WRECKER SERVICE 

Sec. 35-401. - License. 
(a)  Required. No automobile wrecker service shall be maintained or operated within the city unless the owner, operator or lessee of such establishment first obtains a license from the director of administration. 
(b)  Application; fee. No automobile wrecker service license shall be issued to any person who is not of good moral character. Application must be made in writing on a form provided by the director of administration. The chief of police shall submit the applications to the city council for approval. The fee for an annual license shall be fifty dollars ($50.00). Licenses shall expire on December 31 of the year for which they were issued. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-402. - Rules and regulations. 
    The police chief is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations for the licensing, inspections and operation of wreckers within the city. Such rules and regulations shall include, but will not be limited to, minimum safety equipment and safety standards of wreckers, public liability insurance requirements and other necessary and proper requirements. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-403. - Emergency, nonpreference wrecker calls. 
(a)  The police chief shall establish a process for dispatching and allocating emergency, nonpreference wrecker calls by the police department. 
(b)  The police department shall maintain two (2) towing service lists. One towing service list shall include those companies, services or establishments operating a wrecker with a minimum of eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross vehicle weight towing capacity. The second towing service list shall include those companies, services or establishments operating wreckers with less than eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds gross towing capacity. All such towing companies, services or establishments and their wreckers shall comply with all of the provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  All emergency, nonpreference wrecker call by the police department shall be on a rotation basis. An operator of one towing company, service or establishment cannot take the rotation calls for another towing company, service or establishment. 
(d)  All towing companies, services or establishments on either list must be available on a twenty-four-hour, three hundred sixty-five-day basis. 
(e)  Each towing company, service or establishment shall be allowed a twenty-minute response time from time of notification to arrival at the needed location; and the response time will be strictly enforced. 
(f)  The police chief shall establish any additional rules and regulations necessary to carry out the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
Sec. 35-404. - Penalty. 
(a)  Whenever any motor vehicle is towed from any location within the city limits without the consent of the owner, it shall be the responsibility of the towing party to inform the police department, within one hour of the towing, of the license number and description of the vehicle, the place from which it was removed and the place to which it was moved. 
(b)  Failure to comply with the provisions of this section shall be grounds for the revocation of license of the towing party in addition to the sanctions provided for in section 1-11 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 7943, 8-26-86) 
ARTICLE VII. - TRANSPORTATION NETWORK COMPANIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- State law reference: R.S. 45:201. 

Sec. 35-405. - Compliance, adoption of the state law. 
    The City of Monroe hereby adopts the provisions of Louisiana Revised Statute Title 45, Chapter 4, "The Public Passenger Motor Vehicle Responsibility Law" (R.S. 45:200.1, et seq.), and "The Louisiana Transportation Network Company Motor Vehicle Responsibility Law" (R.S. 45:201.1, et seq.) and regulations of the State of Louisiana pursuant thereto, as amended and to be amended, and except such as are in conflict or inconsistent with this title or other ordinances and except such as by their nature are not applicable. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event of a conflict in a provision of this article and a provision of Louisiana law or regulation, the provision imposing the greater obligation shall govern. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-406. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Digital network means any online-enabled technology application service, website or system offered or utilized by a transportation network company that enables the prearrangement of rides with transportation network company drivers. 
    Prearranged ride means the provision of transportation by a TNC driver to a rider, beginning when a TNC driver accepts a ride requested by a rider through a digital network controlled by a transportation network company, continuing while the TNC driver transports a requesting rider, and ending when the last requesting rider departs from the personal vehicle. A prearranged ride does not include transportation provided using a vehicle operating as a taxicab, limousine, or any other vehicle for hire as provided under Chapter 35. 
    Transportation network company ("TNC") means a corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other entity that is licensed pursuant to this chapter and operating in the City of Monroe that uses a digital network to connect transportation network company rides to transportation network company drivers who provide prearranged rides. A transportation network company may not be deemed to control, direct or manage the personal vehicles or transportation network company drivers that connect to its digital network, except where agreed to by written contract. 
    Transportation network company driver or TNC driver means an individual who receives connections to potential riders and related services from a transportation network company in exchange for payment of a fee to the transportation network company and uses a transportation network company vehicle to offer or provide a prearranged ride to riders upon connection through a digital network controlled by a transportation network company. 
    Transportation network company rider or TNC rider means an individual or persons who use a transportation network company's digital network to connect with a transportation network company driver who provides prearranged rides to the individual or persons in the TNC driver's transportation network company vehicle between points chosen by the rider. 
    Transportation network company vehicle or TNC vehicle means a vehicle that is used by a transportation network company driver and is: 
(a)  Owned, leased or otherwise authorized for use by the transportation network company driver; and 
(b)  Not a taxicab, limousine, luxury vehicle for hire, or any other vehicle for hire as provided under Chapter 35. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-407. - TNC permit required; fees. 
(a)  A person shall not operate a TNC in the city without first having obtained a permit from the chief of police. 
(b)  The chief of police shall issue a permit to each TNC that meets the requirements for a TNC set forth in this Chapter, and pays a permit fee of two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00). Said permit shall be valid for one year from the date of issuance. It may be renewed annually upon payment of the annual two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-408. - Agent. 
    The TNC shall maintain with the Secretary of State a registered agent for service of process in the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-409. - Fare collected for services. 
    On behalf of a TNC driver, a TNC may charge a fare for the services provided to riders provided that, if a fare is collected from a rider, the TNC shall disclose to the rider the fare calculation method on its website or within the software application service. The TNC shall also provide riders with the applicable rates being charged and the option to receive an estimated fare before the rider enters the TNC driver's vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-410. - Identification of TNC vehicles and drivers. 
    The TNC's software application or website shall display a picture of the TNC driver, and the license plate number of the motor vehicle utilized for providing the prearranged ride before the rider enters the TNC driver's vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-411. - Electronic receipt. 
    Within a reasonable period of time following the completion of a trip, a TNC shall transmit an electronic receipt to the rider on behalf of the TNC driver that lists: 
(a)  The origin and destination of the trip; 
(b)  The total time and distance of the trip; and 
(c)  An itemization of the total fare paid, if any. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-412. - Financial responsibility of transportation network companies. 
    TNCs and TNC drivers shall comply with the insurance requirements set forth in the Transportation Network Company Motor Vehicle Responsibility Law, R.S. 45:201.1 et seq. The TNC shall provide the city with a certificate of insurance providing evidence that the TNC has purchased all insurance required by law. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-413. - Zero tolerance for drug or alcohol use. 
(a)  The TNC shall implement a zero tolerance policy regarding a TNC driver's activities while accessing the TNC's digital platform. The zero tolerance policy shall address the use of drugs or alcohol while a TNC driver is providing prearranged rides or is logged into the TNC's digital network but is not providing prearranged rides, and the TNC shall provide notice of this policy on its website, as well as procedures to report to the TNC a complaint about a driver with whom a rider was matched and whom the rider reasonably suspects was under the influence of drugs or alcohol during the course of the trip. 
(b)  Upon receipt of such rider complaint alleging a violation of the zero tolerance policy, the TNC shall suspend such TNC driver's access to the TNC's digital platform within forty-eight (48) hours from the initial reporting, and shall conduct an investigation into the reported incident. The suspension shall last the duration of the investigation. 
(c)  The TNC shall maintain records relevant to the enforcement of this requirement for a period of at least two (2) years from the date that a rider complaint is received by the TNC. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-414. - TNC driver requirements. 
(a)  Before allowing an individual to accept trip requests through a TNC's digital platform the following conditions shall be met: 
(1)  The individual shall submit an application to the TNC, which includes information regarding his or her address, age, driver's license, motor vehicle registration, automobile liability insurance, and other information required by the TNC. 
(2)  The TNC shall conduct, or have a third party conduct, a local and national criminal background check for each applicant that shall include: 
(A)  A search of the multi-state/multi-jurisdiction criminal records locator or other similar commercial nationwide database with a validation (primary source search); and 
(B)  A search of the National Sex Offender Public Website maintained by the United States Department of Justice; 
(3)  The TNC, or a third party on behalf of the TNC, shall obtain, and review, a driving history research report for each potential TNC driver. 
(b)  The TNC shall not permit an individual to act as a TNC Driver on its digital platform if the individual: 
(1)  Has had more than three (3) moving violations in the prior three-year period, or one major violation in the prior three-year period (including, but not limited to, attempting to evade the police, reckless driving, or driving on a suspended or revoked license); 
(2)  Has been convicted, within the past seven (7) years, of a felony; misdemeanor for driving under the influence of drugs or alcohol, hit and run, or other driving-related offense; or a misdemeanor for a violent offense or sexual battery; 
(3)  Is a match in the United States Department of Justice National Sex Offender public website; 
(4)  Does not possess a valid driver's license; 
(5)  Does not possess proof of registration for the motor vehicles(s) used to provide prearranged rides; 
(6)  Does not possess proof of automobile liability insurance for the motor vehicle(s) used to provide prearranged rides; or 
(7)  Is not a least nineteen (19) years of age. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-415. - Vehicle safety. 
    Before allowing a TNC driver to accept trip requests through the TNC's network, the TNC shall ensure that any motor vehicle(s) that TNC Driver is authorized to use to provide prearranged rides meets the State of Louisiana's vehicle safety requirements for private motor vehicle. 
    A valid Louisiana brake tag shall certify compliance of the vehicle herewith. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-416. - No street hails. 
    A TNC driver shall not solicit or accept street hails. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-417. - No cash trips. 
    The TNC shall adopt a policy prohibiting solicitation or acceptance of cash payments for fares from riders and notify TNC drivers of such policy. Any payment of fares for prearranged rides shall be made only electronically using the TNC's digital network or software application. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-418. - No discrimination; accessibility. 
(a)  The TNC shall adopt a policy of non-discrimination on the basis of destination, race, color, national origin, religious belief or affiliation, sex, sexual orientation, or gender identity with respect to riders and potential riders and notify TNC drivers of such policy. 
(b)  TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws regarding non-discrimination against riders or potential riders on the basis of race, color, national origin, religious belief or affiliation, sex, disability, age, sexual orientation or gender identity. 
(c)  TNC drivers shall comply with all applicable laws relating to accommodation of service animals. 
(d)  A TNC shall not impose additional charges for providing services to person with physical disabilities because of those disabilities. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-419. - Records. 
    A TNC shall maintain the following customer records: 
(a)  Individual trip records for at least one year from the date each trip was provided; and 
(b)  Individual records of TNC drivers for at least one year after the date on which a TNC driver last provides a prearranged ride using the TNCs digital network or last logs in to the TNC's digital network, whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-420. - Confidentiality of records. 
    The City of Monroe shall have the authority to enforce the requirements of this act, including through inspection of relevant records; provided that any records disclosed to the city that are otherwise exempt from the definition of a public record under the Louisiana Public Records Act shall not be disclosed to third parties. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-421. - Controlling authority. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, TNCs and TNC drivers are governed exclusively by the chapter. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Sec. 35-422. - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall operate a vehicle upon any street in violation of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or imprisoned for not less than sixty (60) days nor more than one year, or both. 
(Ord. No. 11,784, 7-25-17) 
Chapter 36 - WATER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Charter reference- Public works department,  4-07. 
Cross reference- Theft of utility services,  12-97; flood reduction measures to be taken with reference to water systems,  13-56(4); fire hydrants generally,  15-2 et seq.; plumbing code, Ch. 27; sewers and drains, Ch. 30 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 36-01-36-09. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BAYOU DeSIARD[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 7599, enacted Sept. 27, 1983, amended the Code by adding  36-1-36-6. In order to accommodate the inclusion of this material as an article in itself, it has been designated Art. II, and the former Art. II concerning city water service has been redesignated as Art. III. 
Cross reference- Bayou DeSiard boating regulations,  25-54 et seq. 

Sec. 36-1. - Bayou DeSiard as reservoir. 
    Bayou DeSiard is recognized, acknowledged and declared the principal water supply of the city and that area of Bayou DeSiard located within the corporate limits is hereby designated as the reservoir or storage basin of the city water system. 
(Ord. No. 7599, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 36-2. - Public policy. 
    It is the public policy of the city to protect and preserve Bayou DeSiard as the principal water supply for the city and to provide for the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its citizens by regulating and controlling the water quality and integrity of Bayou DeSiard. 
(Ord. No. 7599, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 36-3. - Definitions. 
    As used herein, these words or phrases shall have the following meaning: 
(1)  Bayou DeSiard shall mean all parts of Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks, bed and all adjacent wetlands, streams and watercourses, including intermittent streams, watercourses and drains which drain or discharge into or mingle with the waters of Bayou DeSiard and which are located within the corporate limits. 
(2)  Contaminate shall mean any material or substance, whether in suspension or not which tends to degrade existing water quality or which tends to affect the chemical, physical, biological or radiological integrity of Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks and/or bed. It shall include: 
a.  Discharges incidental to dredging and to dredge and fill activities; 
b.  Industrial discharges; 
c.  Discharge of refuse, garbage or trash; 
d.  Weeds or other obnoxious growth; 
e.  Chemical substances; and 
f.  Any other material or substance identified or classed by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and/or the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources as contaminate or pollutant. 
(Ord. No. 7599, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 36-4. - Prohibitions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except as provided herein, to: 
(1)  To directly or indirectly introduce any contaminate into Bayou DeSiard. 
(2)  To breach, break into, or remove the bank or bed of Bayou DeSiard or any portion thereof. 
(3)  To alter any authorized structure which encloses, holds or protects the waters of Bayou DeSiard. 
(4)  To engage in any activity proximate to or in Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks or bed which would in any manner change, alter or modify the course, location or condition of Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks or bed. 
(5)  To engage in any activity proximate to or in Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks or bed which would in any manner change, alter or modify the quantity or quality of the waters of Bayou DeSiard. 
(6)  To discharge any material or substance into or in close proximity to Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks or bed which adversely affects the odor, appearance, clarity or quality of the water, banks or bed of Bayou DeSiard. 
(7)  To erect or install any structure in or on Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks and/or bed, except those specifically authorized by the provisions of this Code, or by the authority of the United States of America or the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 7599, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 36-5. - Application of article; exemptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Water quality improvements or projects undertaken by or under the authority of any federal, state or local governing body or their agencies. 
(2)  Highway, road or dam related project undertaken by or under the authority of any federal, state or local governing body or their agencies. 
(3)  Navigation, flood control, levee, drainage, water, sewerage or other activities for a public purpose undertaken by or under the authority of any federal, state or local governing body or their agencies. 
(4)  Weed control when undertaken by or under the authority of any federal, state or local governing body or their agencies. 
(5)  Bank stabilization activities which do not otherwise violate the provisions herein. 
(6)  Activities authorized by or under the authority of the United States of America or the State of Louisiana which are not subject to control or regulation by the City of Monroe. 
(7)  Structures and accessory structure permitted under chapter 37. 
(8)  Ordinary repairs and/or maintenance to any of the above. 
(9)  Discharge of any contaminate which is incidental to any of the above exemptions or to any normal discharge incidental to any recreational activity which is lawfully allowed and conducted on Bayou DeSiard. 
(Ord. No. 7599, 9-27-83) 
Sec. 36-6. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to prosecution and upon conviction shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a term of not more than six (6) months, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Further, in addition to the penalties set forth in subsection (a) above, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall: 
(1)  In the event of a violation of sections 36-4(1), 36-4(5) or 36-4(6), be required to remedy at his own expense the effects of his violation in a manner and within a time period approved by the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources and the city council. 
(2)  In the event of a violation of sections 36-4(2), 36-4(3), 36-4(4) or 36-4(5), be required to return at his own costs, Bayou DeSiard, its waters, banks and/or bed to the condition it was in prior to his violation in a manner and within a time period approved by the Louisiana Department of Natural Resources and the city council. 
(3)  Submit and obtain an approved remedial plan and time period as set forth in subsection 36-6(b)(1) and 36-6(b)(2) within thirty (30) days of his conviction, unless otherwise extended by the city council. 
(4)  Failure to comply with subsections 36-6(b)(1), 36-6(b)(2) and 36-6(b)(3) shall constitute contempt of court. 
(Ord. No. 7599, 9-27-83) 
Secs. 36-7-36-15. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY WATER SERVICE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Note- See the editor's footnote for Article II. 

Sec. 36-16. - Water meters required. 
(a)  Each building/residence must have a separate water meter and connection from the main. As used herein "house" does not mean outbuildings such as private garages, servants' quarter and toilets serving the house which are served by the primary building/residence meter, but does include rental buildings. 
(b)  Each building/residence must have affixed to it a number in accordance with the provisions of chapter 26, article III. 
(Code 1958,  22-31(b); Ord. No. 10,699, 4-24-07) 
Sec. 36-17. - Turning on water service and placement of meters. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided, water shall not be turned on and no meter shall be placed on any premises for which a permit for plumbing work has been issued until the public works director has been furnished a certificate from the planning and urban development director evidencing the completion of said work in accordance with all ordinances. 
(b)  A plumber may turn on the water after the connection is completed to test out his work, but must leave the stopcock closed when he has finished his work, unless specially authorized, in writing, by the public works director to leave it turned on. 
(Code 1958,  22-29(i), 22-31(a)) 
Sec. 36-18. - Water taps, meters and service pipes. 
    No person except a tapper employed by the city shall, under any circumstances, tap the water mains of the city. The running of the service pipe from the main to the existing or proposed curb line and the installation of the stopcock and box and meter are also to be done by regular employees of the city, except in cases where it may be found expedient to grant plumbers special written permission to do the same. 
(Code 1958,  22-29(f)) 
Sec. 36-19. - Connection permit. 
    No connection shall hereafter be made to any water main canal without a written permit for such connection issued by the public works director. 
(Code 1958,  22-4(f)) 
Sec. 36-20. - Tap fees. 
    The following fees shall be paid to the city for tapping the main, laying service line to existing or proposed curb lines and for materials necessary therefor: 
1.  Utility water tap fees for 3/4-inch taps ..... $575.00 
2.  Utility water tap fees for 1-inch taps ..... 650.00 
The fee for all taps above one inch shall be the actual cost of material and labor. 
When any paved street or sidewalk is to be cut, an extra charge will be made, the amount of which shall be furnished and paid when the application for the connection permit is made. 
(Code 1958,  22-29; Ord. No. 10,600, 6-13-06) 
Sec. 36-20.1. - Other fees. 
    [The following are additional fees related to city water service:] 
(1)  Nonsufficient funds fee for returned checks ..... $ 30.00 
(2)  Residential utility water deposits (based on meter size) ..... 85.00 
(3)  Commercial utility water deposits (based on meter size) ..... 175.00 
(4)  Industrial utility water deposit (based on meter size) ..... 500.00 
(5)  Utility water connection ..... 25.00 
(6)  Utility water reconnection ..... 25.00 
(7)  Meter tampering and damage fee ..... 50.00 
(8)  Customer-related meter service and inspection fee ..... 25.00 
(Ord. No. 10,599, 6-13-06) 
Sec. 36-21. - Tampering with meter, stopcock service pipes, etc. 
(a)  No one shall tamper with, remove or attempt to adjust or make any repairs to any meter or stopcock installed by the city, except as provided for in the following subsection of this section, or in any service pipe from the city main to the curb cock. Such work may be done only by regular authorized employees of the city. 
(b)  No person other than an employee of the public works director or a person carrying a permit from the authorized agent of such director shall open, close, or tamper with any valve whatever on any main or street pipe line, or corporation cocks, or curb cocks, laid or operated by such director or cause same to be done. 
(c)  No owner, agent of owner or occupant of a building/residence in the city shall cause the water meter supplying water into the building/residence from the city water system to be concealed or otherwise prohibited from reading by employees of the city. 
(d)  Whenever any water meter is deemed by the department of administration to be impeded for reading by a city employee, such owner, agent for owner or occupant shall be notified by placing a written "notice" on the front door of any such building/residence informing the owner, agent for owner or occupant of the impediment and requiring its removal within ten (10) days of the notice. 
(e)  Whenever the owner, agent for owner or occupant of any building/residence issued the "notice" described in subsection (d) herein fails to remedy the impediment described in such notice, the department of administration shall order the water service at such building/residence to be cut off and the water service at the building/residence shall not be connected until the impediments is cured to the satisfaction of the department of administration and any reconnection fees charged are paid. 
(Code 1958,  22-5(e), 22-29(h); Ord. No. 10,702, 4-24-07) 
Sec. 36-22. - Use of water for construction purposes. 
(a)  Any contractor may have water furnished for use in building construction upon application and payment of proper fees to the utilities commission. In no case shall the contractor tamper with the curb stopcock installed by the city unless by written permit from the public works director. The contractor must notify the utilities commission when work is completed, and, upon such notification, the public works director shall cause the water to be cut off by a properly authorized agent. 
(b)  The fees for water used for construction purposes shall be at regular meter rates or at a flat price which shall be furnished upon application to the public works director. 
(Code 1958,  22-29(j), (k)) 
Sec. 36-23. - Water rates. 
(a)  Water rate for consumers inside the city limits shall be: 
(1)  Water usage rate: 
      ..... FY 2018   
0-1,000,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... $ 3.17 
Above 1,000,000 gallons per 1,000 ..... 2.85 
      ..... FY 2019   
0-1,000,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons ..... $ 4.12 
Above 1,000,000 gallons per 1,000 ..... 3.71 
(2)  Minimum monthly bill amount: 
FY 2018 ?" meter or less 4,000 gal 1" meter 5,000 gal 11/2" meter 8,000 gal 2" meter 12,000 gal 3" meter 32,000 gal 4" meter 60,000 gal 6" meter 120,000 gal 8" meter 240,000 gal Over 8" meter 480,000 gal FY 2019 ?" meter or less 4,000 gal 1" meter 5,000 gal 11/2" meter 8,000 gal 2" meter 12,000 gal 3" meter 32,000 gal 4" meter 60,000 gal 6" meter 120,000 gal 8" meter 240,000 gal Over 8" meter 480,000 gal  
  
(b)  Water rate for consumers outside the city limits shall be: 
(1)  Water usage rate: 
FY 2018 0-1,000,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 150% of the respective rates inside the city limits Above 1,000,000 gallons per 1,000 FY 2019 0-1,000,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 150% of the respective rates inside the City limits Above 1,000,000 gallons per 1,000  
  
(2)  Minimum monthly bill amount: 
FY 2018 ?" meter or less 4,000 gal 1" meter 5,000 gal 11/2" meter 8,000 gal 2" meter 12,000 gal 3" meter 32,000 gal 4" meter 60,000 gal 6" meter 120,000 gal 8" meter 240,000 gal Over 8" meter 480,000 gal FY 2019 ?" meter or less 4,000 gal 1" meter 5,000 gal 11/2" meter 8,000 gal 2" meter 12,000 gal 3" meter 32,000 gal 4" meter 60,000 gal 6" meter 120,000 gal 8" meter 240,000 gal Over 8" meter 480,000 gal  
  
(c)  Water rate for consumers qualifying for lifeline rates shall be: 
(1)  Water usage rate: 
FY 2018 0-1,000,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 85% of the respective rate of inside the city limits Above 1,000,000 gallons per 1,000 FY 2019 0-1,000,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 85% of the respective rate of inside the city limits Above 1,000,000 gallons per 1,000  
  
(2)  Minimum monthly bill amount: 
FY 2018 ?" meter or less 4,000 gal 1" meter 5,000 gal 11/2" meter 8,000 gal 2" meter 12,000 gal 3" meter 32,000 gal 4" meter 60,000 gal 6" meter 120,000 gal 8" meter 240,000 gal Over 8" meter 480,000 gal FY 2019 ?" meter or less 4,000 gal 1" meter 5,000 gal 11/2" meter 8,000 gal 2" meter 12,000 gal 3" meter 32,000 gal 4" meter 60,000 gal 6" meter 120,000 gal 8" meter 240,000 gal Over 8" meter 480,000 gal  
  
(3)  The lifeline utility rate is available only to water customers qualifying under the following criteria: 
a.  Only one (1) application per individual is allowed for the lifeline utility water rate. 
b.  The utility water account shall be in the name of the individual owner or renter residing in the residence certifying eligibility for the lifeline utility water rate. 
c.  Only one (1) single family residential utility water meter account shall receive the lifeline utility water rate for each applicant and for each property served. 
d.  Allowed water usage per month for metered account receiving lifeline utility water rate will be up to a maximum of five thousand (5,000) gallons. All over five thousand (5,000) gallons will be charged at the current non-lifeline utility water rate. 
e.  The individual shall be or exceed sixty-two (62) years of age at the time of filing or be permanently disabled as per SSI, SSDA, or VA. 
f.  In addition to age and/or disability requirement stated above the individual applicant must meet the income limits set annually by the federal Department of Housing and Urban Development ("HUD") concerning eligibility for UD assisted housing programs, Section 8. 
g.  Individuals must apply in person for the lifeline utility water rate at Customer Service, Tax and Revenue Division, Department of Administration located at 316 Breard, Monroe, LA. The application must be notarized, have attached copies of SSI, SSDA, or VA documents, financial documents for HUD eligibility, and a copy of driver's licenses or birth certificate. 
h.  Determination of eligibility and renewal shall be made by the director of administration, or his/her designee. 
i.  The application is valid for one (1) calendar year January 1 through December 31. All applications are required to be renewed annually and in person prior to January 1 st of the next year. All lifeline rate applications not renewed by January 15 th of the application year will be terminated and revert back to the normal utility water rate. 
j.  Any account holder that is delinquent or has caused the city to write off debts owed by the account holder is not eligible for the lifeline utility water rate. 
k.  Any account that becomes delinquent for more than sixty (60) days will be ruled ineligible for the lifeline utility water rate for the rest of the current year. 
l.  Any abuse or fraud of the lifeline utility water rate will be considered theft of city services and may be prosecuted accordingly. 
    The above rates (the "rates") shall be adjusted upward on an annual basis for each fiscal year in the same proportion as the increase of the Consumer Price Index (as calculated by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics) compared to the prior fiscal year end date (April 30). Commencing April 30, 2018, and annually as of each April 30 th thereafter, such adjustment shall be calculated and determined, and the adjusted rates shall become effective as of the first day of the new fiscal year (May 1). These rate adjustments shall be automatic and shall be calculated and determined by the division of administration and verified by the auditor and shall not exceed four (4) percent in a year. 
(Ord. No. 7379, 4-27-82; Ord. No. 9016, 7-12-88; Ord. No. 10,481, 4-26-05; Ord. No. 10,651, 12-26-06; Ord. No. 11,073, 6-8-10; Ord. No. 11,122, 9-28-10; Ord. No. 11,838, 3-27-18) 
Sec. 36-23.1. - Customer service policy and procedure. 
I.  Application for service. 
    Anyone may apply for water and/or sewer service to a property provided they are the owner, owner's agent, or an occupant of the property to be served. Also, the applicant must be of legal age (eighteen (18) years or older). 
    The utility operations division (hereafter referred to as the utility) must treat all applicants in an equal and non-discriminatory manner, without regard to race, sex, age, national origin, or marital status. 
    Upon request for service, the utility will require an "application for service" and deposit payment. 
    A credit check may be performed as well as a review for payment history for previous services rendered by the City of Monroe. 
    A fee for establishing or transferring water service will be charged to the new account. See the schedule of fees for the amount. 
    If a request for service is denied by the utility, the applicant will be informed both orally and/or in writing of the reasons for the denial and how to dispute the decision. 
(a)  Fees. If it is necessary to revisit the property multiple times for connection, the utility will charge an additional fee to establish water service. See the schedule of fees for the amount. 
(b)  Deposits. 
(1)  Deposit is required. 
Residential: All properties require a water deposit. See the schedule of fees for the deposit amounts. 
If it is deemed the customer is a credit risk, the applicant will be requested to provide a water deposit. See the schedule of fees for the deposit amounts. 
Non-residential (commercial): all properties require a water deposit based on meter size. See the schedule of fees for the deposit amounts. 
Non-residential (industrial): all properties require a water deposit based on meter size. See the schedule of fees for the deposit amounts. 
Trash only: all properties require a trash deposit. See the schedule of fees for the deposit amounts. 
(2)  Payment of deposits. Deposits are expected to be paid at time of service request. No deposit is to be waived unless authorized by the director of administration. If third-party agency pledges to pay a deposit for the applicant, the agent is to provide a signed statement in writing. The account is to then be placed on a 30-day extension to allow time to receive payment. 
(3)  Refund of deposits. Any deposit collected by the utility will be refunded to the customer after such time as the account is disconnected, either for delinquency or at the customer's request. The deposit will be drawn upon to collect the outstanding balance on a disconnected account; any amount remaining after paying the outstanding receivable balance will be refunded to the customer within thirty (30) days of the account being closed. 
(c)  Service transfer. If a customer is moving he/she may request a transfer of service if: (a) current active service is in the City of Monroe's service area; (b) the "new" address is in the City of Monroe's service area and; (c) all previous balances have been paid in full unless approved by division supervisor or appointed personnel. A date can be given to stop service at the "old" address and a date can be given to start service at the "new" address. 
(d)  Old unpaid bills. Any balances outstanding from previously closed accounts by applicant should be paid at the time of new account being established. If the applicant is unable to make payment, the outstanding balances will be transferred to the new account immediately, and a payment agreement on the balance will be required. 
Closed accounts with balances over one hundred dollars ($100.00) are transferred to a collection agency after twenty (20) days from date of finalization. 
(e)  Third party notice. The customer has the right to request a copy of their bill to be mailed to a third party, however the applicant is still responsible for payment of the account. 
II.  Unauthorized use of service. 
    When a new customer moves into a vacated service (e.g., residence, business, etc.) without applying for service, the utility will issue a work order to shut off service immediately. If the customer does not contact the utility in up to three (3) days, the service will be disconnected, and proper authorities contacted if necessary. 
III.  Billing. 
(a)  Frequency. Each account will receive one (1) bill per month, following a schedule set by the utility. 
(b)  Information. This bill will provide the following minimum information to the customer: 
  Beginning and ending dates of the bill period; 
  Due date by which payment must be made; 
  Bill amount after due date once penalties are assessed; 
  Previous meter reading, current meter reading, date read, and consumption for period; 
  Current services being billed and the amount due for each; 
  Delinquent (arrears) balance that has carried forward; 
  Total balance due on the account; 
  Address and telephone number for the utility business office; 
Customers are responsible for their account balance and should be aware of their billing schedule. Failure to receive a bill does not relieve the customer of his/her obligation for its payment, nor from the consequence of non-payment. 
(c)  Services. 
(1)  Water. Each account will be billed monthly for consumption in the thousands of gallons based on the meter reading. A minimum charge will be assessed to accounts using four thousand (4,000) gallons or less. No bills will be prorated. 
If an actual reading is unable to be received, consumption will be billed by the utility based on the prior three (3) months average consumption. 
(2)  Sewer. Sewer charges are included on the same bill as the water bill. The quantity of wastewater billed shall be based on the quantity of water consumed at that account as determined by the water meter reading. Accounts using water only may opt to install a separate meter, as approved by the water distribution, to avoid sewer charges for purposes of filling pools, watering lawn, etc. 
(3)  Trash. Trash charges are included on the same bill as the water bill and are a flat rate per receptacle. The service charge is for weekly trash/garbage pickup and dumping at the city landfill. The city provides the customer with a 96-gallon receptacle for garbage. The garbage receptacle is also repaired and replaced if necessary by the city at no additional charge to the customer. Exceptions are damage due to customer negligence (burned by coals, etc.) or replacement by request when no damage is present. 
(4)  Fire sprinkler/hydrant fees. Fees for fire protection and hydrants will be billed monthly. These charges are a flat rate determined by the size of the service. 
(d)  Penalties. Penalties will be charged on any balance still outstanding twenty-one (21) days after the bill date. 
(e)  Shut-offs. Utility shut-off of delinquent accounts will occur Monday through Thursday. In the event of a recognized City of Monroe holiday, the service will not be shut off the day before or the day of the holiday but shut-offs will resume the next business day. 
(f)  Unoccupied properties/minimum charges. Unoccupied properties where a meter is installed will be billed monthly. Accounts using no water (zero (0) gallons) will be billed at the minimum rate for water and sewer. 
IV.  Adjustments to customer accounts. 
    A customer may request their account be adjusted for several different reasons. In all cases, qualified customers who wish to receive an adjustment to their bill must notify the office in person at the City Hall Annex, Monroe or by telephone. 
Following are allowed adjustments: 
(1)  Water. Consumption may be adjusted on an account if that customer has been asked to run their water for city maintenance. In this case, consumption may be adjusted based on the customer's average usage for both the water and sewer portions of their bill. Reasons may include (but are not limited to) the following: flushing hydrants by request of water distribution, water meter leak repaired by the utility or water distribution, water utility construction, etc. 
(2)  Sewer. A customer may apply for an adjustment to the sewer portion of their bill for situations where water was consumed yet there is sufficient proof that the water did not return to the sewerage system. Reasons may include (but are not limited to) the following: new pool, pool repairs, etc. Adjustments for excessive water leaks where water did not return to the sewerage system require approval on a case-by case basis. 
V.  Collections. 
(a)  Payment on accounts. If payment is sent by mail, the bill is considered paid on the day it is received. Customers have the option to pay online, by bank draft, or in person at the city hall annex. 
Payments by mail or in office are applied to customer accounts within one (1) business day of the tax and revenue division receiving the payment. Payments are accepted in the form of cash, check, money order, Discover, Mastercard or Visa. Payments made online are posted daily by end of work day and can be made by credit or debit card. Bank draft payments are scheduled to draft on the due date. There are situations that may alter any of the normal processes such as system errors, holidays, etc. In the event of such errors, any penalties that occur will be waived. 
Partial payments are applied to customer accounts as follows: 
(1)  Oldest outstanding balance (by date billed). 
(2)  Water charges first then sewer charges. 
If third-party agency pledges to make a payment for customer, the agent is to provide a signed statement in writing. The account is to then be placed on an extension not to exceed the next bill due date to allow time to receive payment. 
(b)  Delinquent receivable process. All open accounts receivable with late or delinquent payment activity will be handled in a timely and effective manner to ensure maximum collection. The collection process will be performed in a professional, fair, and consistent manner. 
(1)  Residential. 
a.  Single family customers. A late charge is assessed on any balance still outstanding after twenty (20) days from the bill date. Residential customers are considered delinquent when full payment is not received within nine (9) days after the due date. If the full balance is not received within the nine (9) days, the disconnection of service process will begin. 
The disconnection process begins by sending a cut off notice one (1) day after the due date. The notice informs the customer of the delinquent account, and that the customer needs to properly respond to the utility or service will be disconnected on a scheduled date. Proper responses include payment, payment arrangement, or notification that the customer disputes the billed amount. If the utility does not receive proper response to the cut off notice, a service fee will be added to the account, and service to the property will be disconnected on the scheduled date (at least the tenth day after due date). The disconnection day will not be a weekend, holiday, or day before a holiday. 
b.  Multi-unit single metered customers. Tenants residing in a multi-unit property (i.e., apartment complex) and supplied by a single water meter are given additional protection by the utility. 
The disconnection process begins the same as a single-family unit. A service fee will be added to the account and service to the property will be disconnected at or around four (4) days after scheduled disconnect date (at least ten (10) days after due date). The utility will make a reasonable attempt to notify the manager and/or owner of the property prior to disconnection in person or by telephone. After three (3) failed attempts to make contact, the utility will disconnect service. The disconnection day will not be a weekend, holiday, or day before a holiday. 
(2)  Industrial and commercial accounts. The utility uses the same process for industrial and commercial customers as for multi-unit single metered customers. 
Water/Sewer Approx. Days Bill mailed 0 Bill considered late 20 Shut-off notice sent 21 Penalties added 21 Shut-off period begins 30 Shut-off period ends 45  
(c)  Fees. If multiple visits occur to the same property for the same purpose, the utility has a right to charge the customer a fee for each additional visit. See schedule of fees for the additional charge amount. 
(d)  Returned payment process. The City of Monroe will automatically redeposit checks refused by the bank. If the second attempt for deposit is returned due to insufficient funds, the utility will add the amount of the return payment to the customer's account. In addition, the utility will assess a returned check fee to the customer's account per schedule of fees. The charge will be assessed for each account paid with the check. A work order may also be issued for disconnection of service. 
Online payments and bank drafts are only processed once through the bank. If the attempt for deposit is returned due to insufficient funds, the utility will add the amount of the return payment to the customer's account. In addition, the utility will assess a returned check fee to the customer's account per schedule of fees. A work order may also be issued for disconnection of service. 
There are no probationary periods for a return payment. Replacement funds must be made inside the office with cash or by credit card. If the replacement funds are paid online, the payment must be made with a debit or credit card to restore service immediately. Customers making bad payments two (2) times within one (1) year will be placed on a three-month probationary period. If bad payments are made three (3) times within one (1) year, the customer will be placed on a six (6) month probationary period. During probation period, the customer will be prohibited from paying by personal check whether by mail or in person. 
  
Returned Check Disconnection Residential during shut-off period: Immediate disconnection & service fee added Residential not during shut-off period: Need to be cleared by next bill Multi-unit residential: Manager/owner notified & allowed 3 days to rectify the issue Commercial: Same as multi-unit residential  
  
(e)  Payment arrangements. 
(1)  The utility may offer reasonable payment extensions to customers who need extra time to make payment past the scheduled due date guidelines for such arrangements should be established by the department of administration. 
(2)  Water customers may request an extension to pay their water bill for up to ten (10) days. The eligibility for a payment extension will be determined by considering all the following criteria notwithstanding a single criterion: 
a.  Customer payment history; 
b.  Length of time a City of Monroe water utility customer; 
c.  Past due amount; 
d.  Age of past due amount; 
e.  Timeliness of prior payments. 
f.  The utility staff along with management should review the status to determine if a temporary payment extension may be granted. 
g.  If eligible, the department will offer an extended date to pay the water bill. 
h.  Even if a payment extension is granted, the customer may receive a final notice reminder. 
VI.  Bankruptcy process. 
    When the utility receives notice from the court that a customer has filed a petition for bankruptcy, the utility does the following: 
(1)  Identifies the account(s) in that customer's name. 
(2)  Closes the bankrupt account(s), flagging as an account closed for bankruptcy. 
(3)  Creates new account(s) in customer's name and contacts the customer to sign for service on new account(s). The utility may require a security deposit on the new account. 
(4)  Files proof of claim with the court for balance on closed account(s). The utility does not perform additional collection effort on the final balance on the closed account(s) to avoid violating bankruptcy law (i.e., violating the automatic stay). 
VII.  Closing an account. 
    Upon leaving a service location, it is the customer's responsibility to contact the utility to close their account. At that time, the utility will schedule either a meter reading or removal of the meter. 
    A customer is responsible for any charges billed to an account until the utility is notified by the customer to close the account. A customer is also responsible for any charges billed when the utility closes their account due to a unpaid balance or no payment made to restore service ten (10) or more days after disconnecting for nonpayment. 
(a)  Meter reading. Property being sold to another party will be scheduled for a meter reading on the date requested. Once the reading is obtained, a final bill will be processed within fourteen (14) business days and the account will be closed. Payment is due twenty (20) days after billed date. 
If the new customer has not contacted the utility within three (3) business days, a disconnection notice will be posted following the guidelines established in this Customer Service & Procedure Manual, Article II titled "Unauthorized Use of Service". 
(b)  Removing meter. If the customer's intent is to demolish the property and discontinue service, the utility will schedule the removal of the water meter. Once the meter is removed, the final reading will be processed, and a final bill sent to the customer within fourteen (14) business days. Payment is due twenty (20) days after billed date. 
VIII.  Resolving a dispute. 
    A customer or applicant reserves the right to dispute decisions made by the utility. The utility must investigate the dispute, report the results of the investigation to the customer, and attempt in good faith to resolve the dispute. If the utility cannot resolve the dispute, it must inform the person of his/her right to appeal the dispute to the director of administration or the legal department. 
(Ord. No. 11,567, 4-28-15; Ord. No. 11,906, Arts. I-VIII, 1-22-19) 
Sec. 36-24. - Water sales outside city limits. 
    Ongoing sales and future contracts for the sale of water to areas outside of the city limits of Monroe, except those under a written contract of sale legally entered into prior to August 1, 1998, and those sales to purchasers or intended purchasers who have a pending petition for annexation upon which final action has not been taken, shall be governed by and subject to the following terms, conditions and considerations unless any such term, condition or consideration is deemed not to be in the best interest of the city or necessary for the conditions of the pending sale of water: 
(1)  All sales of water outside the city limits shall be made to a single entity under a written bulk water sale contract only; 
(2)  Such contracts shall be approved by ordinance of the city council; 
(3)  Such sales contracts shall not be for single residential users; 
(4)  The sales contract shall provide that water sold thereunder shall only be for the properties specifically listed therein; 
(5)  Such sales contracts shall not be for a term exceeding five (5) years, including option terms; 
(6)  The sales contract shall also provide the maximum amount of water guaranteed under the contract under both a daily and monthly basis and provide that the city may limit the purchaser to said maximum amount or may charge a premium rate for any amount over said maximum, at the city's option; 
(7)  The sales contract shall provide a method for rate increases and shall also contain the provision that at any time that the water rate for residents of Monroe is increased the rate under the contract will automatically increase proportionally; 
(8)  Such contract shall provide for termination of service for nonpayment in accordance with the contract terms; 
(9)  The sales contract shall also provide for limitations and restrictions in the event of water shortages due to drought or other conditions; 
(10)  There shall be a single master meter located at the juncture with the city's water system for each bulk sale contract, unless specifically excepted because of sound engineering principals, each master meter shall be equipped with a back-flow preventer; 
(11)  Purchaser shall maintain a water storage tank between the city line and its distribution system with a capacity to store a two-day supply of water, based on estimated peak usage; 
(12)  A noninterest bearing refundable deposit covering forty-five (45) days of the contract costs based on estimated usage shall be required at the execution of the contract, at anytime during the term of the contract the city may request that the deposit be increased to cover an actual forty-five (45) days usage at the contract costs; 
(13)  Purchaser must agree to fully maintain the delivery system; 
(14)  Purchaser will pay for the master meter, back-flow preventer and any accessory structures needed to house and maintain the meter. Purchaser shall maintain the said meter and accessory structures but said master meter and back-flow preventer shall belong to the city and be subject to recalibration at anytime upon the city's request; 
(15)  Sale and delivery must be determined not to have any adverse effect on the quality and availability of water services to Monroe users, both to current users and to reasonably anticipated growth, and shall not constitute any adverse economic effect on the system as a whole (in which case, the appropriate city agency shall document in a written report the nature of such negative impact); 
(16)  All property owners in the area to be covered by the bulk water sales contract must agree in writing not to allow the area to be annexed by any other entity; 
(17)  All property owners in the area to be covered by the bulk water sales contract must agree in writing to make application to the City of Monroe for annexation within one year after being informed by the city that the area has become seventy-five (75) per cent contiguous with the city (should such an application not be filed within the one-year period, the City Council of Monroe shall order the contract terminated and all water services terminated upon thirty (30) days notice); 
(18)  The sales contract shall provide that the City of Monroe is authorized to terminate the supply of water to the purchaser in the event that continuation would endanger the city system; 
(19)  The City of Monroe shall not be required to enter into any bulk water sales contract as result of the enactment of this ordinance, but shall have the discretion to do so. 
(Ord. No. 9831, 8-11-98; Ord. No. 11,074, 6-8-10) 
Sec. 36-25. - Prior contracts, exemptions. 
    The provisions of section 36-23 above, shall not alter or modify specific provisions and procedures for establishing water rates that exist in written contracts by the city for water services legally entered in prior to April 27, 1982, written contracts for bulk water sales legally entered into prior to August 1, 1998, or pursuant to section 36-24 above. The terms and provisions in said contracts shall govern the establishment, adjustment and/or change in the water rates for the facilities covered. 
(Ord. No. 9831, 8-11-98) 
Sec. 36-26. - Right of entry for director; unlawful obstruction of water meter. 
(a)  The director of public works or his duly authorized representative shall have access at all reasonable times to all parts of buildings or premises supplied by water from the City of Monroe's water mains, for the purpose of ascertaining the quantity of water used and of inspecting condition of pipes and fixtures. Notice of the proposed inspection shall be given to the owner and/or resident of such premises by affixing a notice to the front door or by hand delivery. The reason for the inspection shall be included in the notice along with a contact number for communication. In the event the owner/resident is notified of a suspected water leak on the premises and the owner/resident refuses to meet with or have such condition identified by the director repaired within the time frame directed, the director of public works has the right to disconnect service at the city's main. The director shall have the right to disconnect the premises from the city's water main for a violation of any of the circumstances mention in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, obstruct or unnecessarily delay the entering, by the director or his duly authorized representatives, to any building or premises at the times and for the purposes referred to in subsection (a). 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to store, maintain or keep any goods, merchandise, material, animals, refuse or any other deterrent within a distance of six (6) feet from any water meter, gate valve or other appliance in use on any water connection of the city. 
(Ord. No. 10,577, 3-28-06; Ord. No. 11,343, 11-27-12) 
Sec. 36-27. - Penalties for violation of article. 
    Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be subject to prosecution and upon conviction, shall be fined not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisoned for a term of not more than six (6) months, or both. Each day the violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 10,577, 3-28-06) 
Sec. 36-28. - Use of water rate fees. 
    All proceeds of the water user fees shall be deposited in the water fund and shall be expended only as to any of the following: 
(1)  To defray the operational costs of the water treatment facilities and water delivery system; 
(2)  To defray the maintenance and repair costs of the water treatment facilities and water delivery system; 
(3)  To defray the debt service incurred by the water treatment facilities and the water delivery system; 
(4)  Transfers to the city general fund shall be limited to reimbursement for funds actually transferred to or advanced for the water treatment facilities and the water delivery system from the general fund; 
(5)  Administrative charge-backs to the general funds shall be limited to actual costs for the services rendered as determined by the department of administration and approved by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 11,075, 6-8-10) 
ARTICLE IV. - CROSS-CONNECTIONS AND BACKFLOW PREVENTERS 

Sec. 36-29. - Cross-connection control device or method required. 
    Each existing or new structure is required to implement and maintain an adequate cross-connection control device or method for backflow prevention as mandated under state law and state regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-30. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply only to this article. For those terms not defined in this article, the definitions contained in the Louisiana Administrative Code, Title 51, Public Health Sanitary Code, Part XII, Titled Water Supplies, Sections 343 (Cross Connections), 344 (Protection of Water Supply/Containment Practices) and 345 (Connection With Unsafe Water Sources Forbidden) and Part XIV, Titled Plumbing; Also referred to as the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition (LSPC 2013), Section 609 (Protection of Potable Water Supply), and as amended, shall apply. 
    Administrative authority means the City of Monroe Water Department, or any agent, employee, officer, department, or board of the city designated to enforce this article. 
    Approved means accepted or acceptable under an applicable specification or standard stated or cited in the Code, or accepted as suitable for the proposed use under procedures and authority of the administrative authority. 
    Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment means an air gap meeting ASME Standard A 112.1.2 - 1991 (R 1998) Air Gaps in Plumbing Systems or a backflow prevention assembly which is listed by the University of Southern California-Foundation for Cross-Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USCFCCCHR) as having met the requirements of ANSI/AWWA Standard C510-97 or ASSE Standard 1015-1993, "Double Check Valve Backflow-Prevention Assemblies", or ANSI/AWWA Standard C511-97 or ASSE Standard 1013-1993, "Reduced-Pressure Principle Backflow Assemblies" for containment. The listing shall include the limitations of use based on the degree of hazard. The backflow prevention assembly must also be listed by the ASSE in Table 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition or other testing agency approved by the administrative authority. This term shall additionally include those backflow prevention assemblies meeting ANSI/ASSE Standard 1047-1995, "Backflow Preventer, Reduced Pressure Detector Assembly", or ANSI/ASSE Standard 1048-1995, "Backflow Preventer, Double Check Detector Assembly". (These detector assembly devices are often times used on fire protection/fire sprinkler systems to detect and monitor unauthorized water usage.) 
    Approved backflow prevention assembly for containment in fire protection system means a backflow prevention assembly listed in Table 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition, to be used in a fire protection system which also meets the requirements of Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) and Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and the requirement of the standard codes adopted by the City of Monroe. Devices sized smaller than two and one-half (21/2) inches which have not been listed by Underwriters Laboratory (UL) and tested by Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM) may be allowed if approved by the State Fire Marshal, and such device is listed in Table 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. Any such device under this definition shall minimally meet the definition of an "approved backflow prevention assembly for containment". In addition, the particular type of device to be used for a particular application/degree of hazard shall be selected and installed in accord with the requirements of Table 609.F.5 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. 
    Approved testing agency means an organization primarily established for purposes of testing to approved standards and approved by the administrative authority (e.g., American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), American Society of Sanitary Engineers (ASSE), American Water Works Association (AWWA), American National Standards Institute (ANSI), Factory Mutual Research Corporation (FM), Underwriters Laboratory (UL), University of Southern California-Foundation for Cross Connection Control and Hydraulic Research (USC-FCCCHR), etc.). 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the water purveyor's approved public water supply such as, but not limited to, a private well, pond or river. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substance into the distribution pipes of a potable supply of water from any sources other than its intended source. 
    Backflow connection means any arrangement whereby backflow can occur. 
    Back-pressure backflow means backflow due to an increased pressure above the supply pressure. This may be due to pumps, boilers, gravity or other sources of pressure. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or method to prevent backflow into the potable water system. 
    Backflow prevention assembly general tester means those individuals holding a testing certificate from a nationally recognized backflow certification organization approved by the state health officer. Such individuals are not required to be a licensed plumber and are authorized to perform tests of backflow prevention devices and methods. When such devices or methods are located on private property, a backflow prevention assembly general tester is not authorized to install, repair, or maintain such devices or methods. A general tester may perform installation, maintenance or repairs, if the backflow prevention device is on public property, after having obtained approval from the water purveyor. 
    Backflow prevention assembly technician means a water supply protection specialist licensed by the State Plumbing Board of Louisiana pursuant to LA. R.S. 37:1361 et seq., and its implementing regulations (LAC 46:LV.101 et seq.). All water supply protection specialists are Louisiana licensed plumbers who hold such a special endorsement on their plumbing license. Such individuals are authorized to test, install, repair, and maintain backflow prevention devices and methods. 
    Back-siphonage means the flowing back of used, contaminated, or polluted water from a plumbing fixture or vessel into a water supply pipe due to a negative pressure in such pipe. (See "backflow") 
    Code or this code , when used alone, shall mean these regulations, subsequent amendments thereto or any emergency rule or regulation which the administrative authority having jurisdiction may lawfully adopt. 
    Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires the installation of an air gap or a backflow prevention assembly immediately following the water meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water which creates an actual hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids or waste. Also defined as high hazard. 
    Cross-connection means any connection or arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a potable water supply system and any plumbing fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or device, through which it may be possible for non-potable, used, unclean, polluted or contaminated water, or other substances, to enter into any part of such potable water system under any condition. 
    Customer means the owner, operator, or occupant of a building or property which has a water service from a public water system, or the owner or operator of a private water system which has a water service from a public water system. "Customer" shall not include any residential connection used for dwelling purposes, unless: 
(1)  The residence is also used as a business premises and the home-based business or occupation involves operation of a home-based business or occupation which the water purveyor or City of Monroe Inspector deems a potentially significant and high hazard to the City of Monroe water supply; 
(2)  The domestic water service provided is also used for a landscape irrigation system; or 
(3)  A separate water service has been installed for landscape irrigation and other non-domestic purposes. 
    Degree of hazard means the rating of a cross-connection or water service which indicates if it has the potential to cause contamination or pollution. 
    Domestic sewage means the liquid and water-borne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes, free from industrial wastes, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the public sewer or by means of a private sewage disposal system. 
    Double check valve backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently acting internally loaded check valves, four (4) properly located test cocks, and two (2) isolation valves. 
    Existing work means a plumbing system, or any part thereof which has been installed prior to the effective date of this code. 
    Fire protection system means any system used for fire protection or suppression with a direct connection to the public water supply, including, but not limited to, sprinklers, stand-pipes, and siamese connections. 
    High hazard - see contamination. 
    High hazard cross-connection means a cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of the potable water by creating an actual hazard to the public health, through poisoning or through the spread of disease by sewage, industrial fluids, or waste. 
    Industrial waste means any and all liquid or water-borne waste from industrial or commercial processes, except domestic sewage. 
    Isolation means a method of backflow prevention in which a backflow prevention assembly is located at the cross-connection rather than at the water service entrance. 
    Labeled means equipment or materials bearing a label or listing agency. 
    Liquid water means the discharge from any fixture, appliance or appurtenance in connection with a plumbing system which does not receive fecal matter. 
    Listed means equipment or materials included in a list published by a listing agency that maintains periodic inspection or current production of listed equipment or materials and whose listing states either that the equipment or material complies with approved standards or has been tested and found suitable for use in a specified manner. 
    Listing agency means an agency accepted by the administrative authority which is in the business of listing or labeling and which maintains a periodic inspection program on current production of listed models, and which makes available a published report of such listing in which specific information is included that the product has been tested to approved standards and found safe for use in a specific manner. (e.g., USC-FCCCHR, ASSE, etc.) 
    Low hazard - see pollution. 
    Low hazard cross-connection means a cross-connection which may cause an impairment of the quality of potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. 
    Main means the principal artery of any system of continuous piping to which branches may be connected. 
    May is a permissive term. 
    Pharmaceutical-grade antifreeze means a food-grade antifreeze such as an inhibited propylene glyco-based fluid. 
    Point of entry means the point of connection to the potable water system. 
    Point of introduction means the point at which any additive is introduced to the water supply system. 
    Pollution means an impairment of the quality of the potable water to a degree which does not create a hazard to the public health but which does adversely and unreasonably affect the aesthetic qualities of such potable waters for domestic use. Also defined as "low hazard." 
    Potable water means water which is satisfactory for drinking, culinary, and domestic purposes and meets the requirements of the state and city departments of health. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly means a backflow prevention device consisting of two (2) independently acting internally loaded check valves, a differential pressure relief valve, four (4) properly located test cocks, and two (2) isolation valves. 
    Sewage means any liquid waste containing animal or vegetable matter in suspension or solution and may include liquids containing chemicals in solution. 
    Shall is a mandatory term. 
    Table 609.F.5 refers to the table marked 609.F.5 in the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition. (Known as the containment device table) 
    Table 609.F.6 refers to the table marked 609.F.6 in the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition. (Known as the fixture isolation table) 
    Water service means, depending on the context, the physical connection between a public water system and a customer's building, property, or private water system, or the act of providing potable water to a customer. 
    Water supply system means the water supply system of a building or premises consisting of the building supply pipe, the water distributing pipes and the necessary connecting pipes, fittings, control valves, and all appurtenances carrying or supplying potable water in or adjacent to the building or premises. 
    Water purveyor means the City of Monroe Public Works Department. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-31. - Administrative authority. 
(a)  The water purveyor shall have the right to enter, with the consent of the customer, or upon the basis of a suitable warrant issued by a court of appropriate jurisdiction, any property to inspect for cross-connections. 
(b)  The State of Louisiana will approve training programs for "backflow prevention assembly technicians" and register "backflow prevention assembly technicians" who successfully complete a training program approved by the State Plumbing Board of Louisiana as per LA. R.S. 37:1367(G) and LAC 46:LV.310, all of which applies to licensed plumbers. In addition, the state health officer, through the LSPC, 2013 Edition, does accept certain persons as "general testers" per Section 609, under "Maintenance/Field Testing thereof. Such individuals are known and defined herein as "backflow prevention assembly general testers". The limitations of jurisdiction/authority of "backflow prevention assembly general testers" are described within said definition. 
(c)  The administrative authority shall collect a fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each inspection done by the water purveyor. The inspection will only be for the water purveyor to make sure that the air gap or backflow prevention device is in place and is the proper cross-connection control device or method used in accord with Table 609.F.5 and Section 609 "Responsibility of Water Supplier". 
(d)  The administrative authority and the water purveyor shall maintain records of cross-connection, hazard surveys, and the installation, testing, and repair of all backflow prevention assemblies installed for containment purposes. 
(e)  Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, the administrative authority and water purveyor are authorized to take additional actions which may not be specifically covered herein that are deemed necessary to protect the City of Monroe's water supply from potential or actual cross-connections in accord with the requirements of the Louisiana State Plumbing Code, 2013 Edition. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-32. - Water services. 
(a)  New water services. 
(1)  Plans shall be submitted to the water purveyor for review on all new water services in order to determine the degree of hazard. 
(2)  The water purveyor shall approve the type of backflow prevention assembly or method required for containment based on the requirement of Table 609.F.5 and degree of hazard. If a cross-connection is not listed in Table 609.F.5, the water purveyor shall use Table B1 of the "Manual for the Selection, Installation, Maintenance, and Field Testing of Backflow Prevention Devices" (CAN/CSA Standard B64.10-1994) as a guide to determine the type of device to require. 
(3)  The water purveyor shall require the installation of the appropriate backflow prevention assembly or method for containment before the initiation of water service. 
(b)  Existing water service. 
(1)  Any changes of, or additions to, existing water services shall be treated as new water services for the purpose of this article. 
(2)  Within six (6) months after adoption of this article, the administrative authority shall publish and make available to each customer a copy of the standards used to determine the degree of hazard. 
(3)  Each customer shall survey the activities and processes which receives water service and shall report to the water purveyor if cross-connections exist and the degree of hazard. Upon a finding of hazard, the customer shall cause the appropriate backflow prevention assembly or method to be installed in a timely fashion. 
(4)  For existing water services, the water purveyor may inspect the premises to determine the degree of hazard. When high hazard cross-connections are found the water purveyor shall: 
a.  Develop a schedule of compliance which the customer shall follow, or 
b.  Terminate the water service until a backflow prevention assembly or method for containment required by the water purveyor has been installed. 
(5)  Failure of the water purveyor to notify a customer that the customer has a high hazard cross-connection and should install backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment in no way relieves the customer of the responsibility to comply with all requirements of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-33. - Customer duties. 
(a)  The customer shall be responsible for ensuring that no cross-connections exist without approved backflow protection within the customer's premises starting at the point of service from the public potable water system. 
(b)  The customer shall, at the customer's own expense, cause installation, operation, testing and maintenance of the backflow prevention assemblies required by the administrative authority. The customer shall advise the water purveyor in advance of when a device is to be tested to allow the water purveyor the opportunity to witness the test. 
(c)  Within fifteen (15) days after testing and/or repairs are completed, the customer shall provide the administrative authority with copies of records of the installation and of all tests and repairs made to the backflow prevention assembly on a form provided by the administrative authority. 
(d)  In the event of a backflow incident, the customer shall immediately notify the water purveyor of the incident and take steps to confine the contamination or pollution. 
    Water service will not be restored until corrective action is taken and approved after inspection by the water purveyor. 
(e)  In accordance with Section 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition, Upon completion, the owner of a containment assembly or method (see Section 609.F.5 of the LSPC) shall provide records of such tests, repairs, overhauls, or replacements to the water supplier. Upon completion, the owner of a fixture isolation device, assembly, or method (see Section 609.F.6 of the LSPC) shall provide records of such tests, repairs, overhauls, or replacements to the plumbing official. In addition, all records shall be kept by the owner of the backflow prevention device or method for at least five (5) years and, upon specific request, shall be made available to the plumbing official, water supplier, and/or the state health officer. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-34. - Requirements. 
(a)  Water purveyor requirements. 
(1)  For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the water purveyor will perform evaluations and inspections of plans and/or premises and inform the customer by letter of any corrective action deemed necessary, the method of achieving the correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made. Ordinarily, ninety (90) days will be allowed, however, this time period may be shortened depending upon the degree of hazard involved and the history of the device(s) in question. 
(2)  The water purveyor will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless it is protected by an approved backflow preventer or an air gap for which a permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to insure satisfactory operation. 
(3)  The water purveyor shall notify the customer by letter of any failure to comply at the time of the first reinspection or immediately following the first reinspection. The water purveyor will allow an additional fifteen (15) days for the correction. In the event the customer fails to comply with the necessary correction by the time of the second reinspection, the water purveyor will notify the customer by letter that the water service to the customer's premises will be terminated within five (5) days from the customer's receipt of such letter. In the event that the customer informs the water purveyor of extenuating circumstances as to why the correction has not been made, a time extension may be granted by the water purveyor but in no case will exceed an additional thirty (30) days. 
(4)  Notwithstanding anything to the contrary, if the water purveyor determines at any time that a serious threat to the public health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately. 
(5)  The water purveyor shall have on file a list of private contractors who are certified backflow device testers and/or repairers. All charges for these tests, repairs, etc., will be paid by the customer of the building or property. 
(6)  The water purveyor will begin initial premise inspections to determine the nature of existing or potential hazards, following the approval of this program by the city council and mayor, during the calendar year (2014). Initial focus will be on high hazard industries and commercial premises. 
(b)  Customer requirements. 
(1)  The customer shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of all cross-connections on his premises. 
(2)  The customer, after having been informed by a letter from the water purveyor, shall at his expense, install, maintain, and test or have tested, any and all backflow prevention devices or methods on his premises. 
(3)  The customer shall correct any malfunction of the backflow prevention device or method which is revealed by periodic testing. 
(4)  The customer shall inform the water purveyor of any proposed or modified cross-connection and also any existing cross-connection of which the customer is aware but has not been found by the water purveyor. 
(5)  The customer shall not install a bypass around any backflow prevention device or method unless there is a backflow prevention device or method of the same type on the bypass. Customers who cannot shut down operation for testing of the device(s) or method(s) must supply additional devices or methods necessary to allow testing to take place. 
(6)  The customer shall install backflow prevention devices or methods in a manner approved by the water purveyor and in conformance with the installation requirements of Section 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. In addition, devices having an atmospheric port or discharge shall be installed such that the port or discharge point is located at least twenty-four (24) inches above the highest flood level which may have occurred in the previous ten-year period. 
(7)  The customer shall install only backflow prevention devices or methods approved by the water purveyor. 
(8)  Any customer having a private well, auxiliary water supply or other private water source, must have a permit if the well, auxiliary water supply or source is cross-connected to the water purveyor's system. Permission to cross-connect may be denied by the water purveyor. The customer may be required to install a backflow prevention device or method at the service entrance if a private water source is maintained, even if it is not cross-connected to the water purveyor's system. 
(9)  In the event the customer installs plumbing to provide potable water for domestic purposes which is on the water purveyor's side of the backflow prevention device or method, such plumbing must have its own backflow preventer installed. 
(10)  The customer shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for permits, annual or semi-annual device or method testing, retesting in the case that the device or method fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for noncompliance with the water purveyor's requirements. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-35. - Required backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment. 
(a)  Water service assemblies. An air gap or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly is required for water services having one or more potential cross-connections which the administrative authority classifies as high hazard as defined by Tables D104 and D105. 
(b)  Fire protection system assemblies. 
(1)  All proposed installations of fire suppression systems shall be reviewed by the department of inspections to determine the appropriate type of backflow prevention devices or methods required. 
(2)  For all proposed fire suppression systems using antifreeze, a reduced pressure principle (#10 on Table 609.F.5) backflow prevention device shall be installed at the point of entry. The customer shall provide the City of Monroe with the design and chemical usage of the fire suppression system. 
(3)  All existing fire suppression systems shall meet the requirements of section 13-9 above. An inspection by a fire suppression specialist shall be done to determine whether antifreeze has been utilized in the suppression system. The inspection shall be done at the expense of the customer. If it cannot be certified that antifreeze has been used, then a backflow prevention device shall be installed as prescribed by Table 609.F.5 and as approved by the department of inspections. Installation shall be at the expense of the customer. The required backflow prevention devices or methods shall be installed at the time the system is repaired or changed, or within twelve (12) months after adoption of this article, whichever occurs first. 
(4)  In the event cross-connections, such as those found in using auxiliary water supply systems or in providing other water additives such as foaming agents, are necessary for the proper operation of the fire suppression system, then an air gap or a reduced pressure principle backflow prevention device shall be installed in an approved manner. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-36. - Registration. 
(a)  Technician registration. Any backflow prevention assembly technician licensed by the State of Louisiana must register with the administrative authority before performing work within the City of Monroe. Any licensed backflow prevention assembly technician shall include his or her state registration number on all correspondence and forms required by or associated with this article. 
(b)  General tester registration. Any backflow prevention assembly general tester shall present a copy of his/her testing certificate from a nationally recognized backflow certification organization and shall register with the administrative authority before performing work within the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-37. - Non-compliance by registered technicians or general testers. 
(a)  The local registration of a technician or general tester may be revoked or suspended for a period of up to two (2) years for non-compliance with this article. 
(b)  Any of the following conditions constitute non-compliance: 
(1)  Improper testing or repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods; 
(2)  Improper reporting of the results of testing or of repairs made to backflow prevention assemblies or methods; 
(3)  Failure to meet registration requirements; 
(4)  Related unethical practices. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-38. - Installation of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  The required backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment shall be installed in the manner recommended by the manufacturer and in accord with the requirements of Section 609 of the LSPC, 2013 Edition, immediately following the meter or as close to that location as deemed practical by the administrative authority. In any case, it shall be located upstream from any branch piping. Installation at this point does not eliminate the responsibility of the customer to protect the water supply system from contamination or pollution between the backflow prevention assembly or methods and the water main. 
(b)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to be protected from flooding. The port or discharge point shall be installed such that it is located at least twenty-four (24) inches above the highest flood level which may have occurred in the previous ten-year period. 
(c)  Reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall not be installed in underground vaults or pits, unless a gravity drainage system (designed by a Louisiana registered engineer) for the particular site has been approved by the state health officer. (The intent of the exception to this section is to possibly allow below-grade installations on particular sites or lots having sufficiently hilly ground at the proposed location of the device such that when the vault or pit is constructed it may be equipped with positive gravity drainage openings as to prevent any part of the device from being submerged. A recommended design standard for such an installation may be found in Sections 606.4.1 and 606.4.2 of the 1994 Standard Plumbing Code.) 
(d)  All backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be protected from freezing. Those devices used for seasonal services may be removed in lieu of being protected from freezing; however, the devices must be reinstalled and tested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician prior to service being reactivated. 
(e)  If hot water is used within the water supply system, thermal expansion shall be provided for when installing a backflow prevention assembly or method for containment in accordance of the LSPC, 2013 Edition. 
(f)  Provisions shall be made to convey the discharge of water from reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assemblies or methods to a suitable drain through an air gap. 
(g)  No backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be installed in a place where they would create a safety hazard, such as, but not limited to, over an electrical panel, or above ceiling level. 
(h)  If interruption of water service during testing and repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods for containment is unacceptable to the customer, another backflow prevention assembly or method of equivalent or higher protection, sized to handle the temporary water flow needed during the time of testing or repair, shall be installed in parallel piping. 
(i)  All backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be installed so that they are accessible for testing. 
(j)  All shut-off valves shall conform with the current edition of the 2013 Edition Louisiana State Plumbing Code requirements for either ball or resilient seat gate valves. Full port ball valves shall be used on assemblies installed in piping two (2) inches or smaller, and full port resilient wedge-type shut-off valves on assemblies installed in piping larger than two (2) inches. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-39. - Testing of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  Testing of backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be performed by a backflow prevention assembly technician or by a backflow prevention assembly general tester registered with the administrative authority. The costs of tests required in the following paragraphs shall be borne by the customer. 
(b)  Backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be tested upon installation; when cleaned, repaired, or overhauled; when relocated; and shall be tested and inspected at least once annually. Backflow prevention devices shall be tested in accordance with CAN/CSA Standard B64.10-1994 or ASSE Standard 5010-1998. 
(c)  Backflow prevention assemblies or methods which are in place, but have been out of operation for more than three (3) months, shall be tested before being put back into operation. Backflow prevention assemblies or methods used in seasonal applications shall be tested before being put into operation each season. 
(d)  Any backflow prevention assembly or method which fails a periodic test shall be repaired or replaced by a backflow prevention assembly technician when such assembly is located on private property. When such a device is located on public property, a backflow prevention assembly general tester may repair or replace the device if authorized by the water purveyor. When water service has been terminated for non-compliance, the backflow prevention assembly or method shall be repaired or replaced prior to the resumption of water service. Backflow prevention assemblies or methods shall be retested by a registered backflow prevention assembly technician or by a backflow prevention assembly general tester immediately after repair or replacement. 
(e)  The department of inspections may require backflow prevention assemblies or methods to be tested at any time in addition to the annual testing requirement. 
(f)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall report the testing of backflow prevention assembly or method to the customer and to the administrative authority within fifteen (15) days of the test. 
(g)  The administrative authority may require, at its own cost, additional tests of individual backflow prevention assemblies or methods as it shall deem necessary to verify test procedures and results. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-40. - Repair of backflow prevention assemblies or methods. 
(a)  All repairs to backflow prevention assemblies or methods on private property shall be performed by a licensed plumber holding a special "water supply protection specialist" endorsement on his plumbing license, herein defined as "backflow prevention assembly technician". 
(b)  After obtaining approval from the water purveyor, a "backflow prevention assembly general tester" may perform repairs to backflow prevention assemblies or methods located on public property. 
(c)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall not change the design, material, or operational characteristics of a backflow prevention assembly or method during repair or maintenance, and shall use only original manufacturer replacement parts, if available; if not available, shall use replacement parts approved by the department of inspections. 
(d)  The registered backflow prevention assembly technician or backflow prevention assembly general tester shall report the repair, overhaul, or replacement of any backflow prevention assembly or method to the customer and to the department of inspections on the form provided by the department of inspections within fifteen (15) days of the repair. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-41. - Customer non-compliance. 
    The water service may be discontinued in the case of non-compliance with this article. Non-compliance includes, but is not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Refusal to allow the administrative authority or water purveyor access to the property to inspect for cross-connection; 
(2)  Removal of a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(3)  Bypassing of a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(4)  Providing inadequate backflow prevention when potential or actual cross-connections exist. 
(5)  Failure to install a backflow prevention assembly or method which has been required by the administrative authority. 
(6)  Failure to test and/or properly repair a backflow prevention assembly or method as required by the administrative authority. 
(7)  Failure to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Sec. 36-42. - Penalty for violation. 
    Apart from any other penalties or sanctions imposed by local or state laws, any person found guilty of violating any provision of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11 of the City of Monroe Code. Each day that a violation is allowed to continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation. 
(Ord. No. 11,508, 9-9-14) 
Chapter 37 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 11,443, adopted Nov. 12, 2013, repealed Ch. 37 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 37 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 37,  37-1-37-9, 37-21-37-29, 37-41-37-46, 37-56, 37-57, 37-71-37-76, 37-86-37-89, 37-96-37-103, 37-111, 37-112, 37-121, 37-122, 37-136-37-142, 37-144, 37-151-37-156, 37-166, 37-167, 37-171-37-196, pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation.  The zoning map referred to in this chapter is not printed in this code; such map is available for inspection at the city hall. 
Charter reference- Planning and urban development,  4-08. 
Cross reference- Restrictions on hogs, horses, etc.,  6-3 et seq.; airport zoning,  7-91 et seq.; buildings, Ch. 9; restrictions on carnivals, circuses, etc., located near residences or schools,  12-227; flood hazard areas,  13-21 et seq.; historical preservation, Ch. 18.5; use restrictions in Monroe Air-Industrial Park,  22-19; gates opening onto sidewalk,  31-2; subdivisions, Ch. 32. 
State Law reference- Zoning, R.S. 33:4721 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - SCOPE AND APPLICATION 

Sec. 37-1. - Zoning regulations, short title. 
    These regulations shall be known and may be cited as the "Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance" of the City of Monroe in the State of Louisiana. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-2. - Purpose and authority. 
(a)  Purpose. These zoning regulations as herein set forth have been prepared for the City of Monroe, Louisiana, to safeguard the health, property and public welfare by controlling the design, location, use or occupancy of all buildings and structures through the regulated and orderly development of land and land uses within this jurisdiction. 
(b)  Authority. This ordinance adopted pursuant to the Charter of the City of Monroe, and the provisions of Section 33:4721 et seq., Section 33:101 et seq., and Section 25:731 et seq. of the Louisiana statutes and the Constitution of the State of Louisiana in order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
(c)  Commission provisions. 
(1)  Under the authority of the Louisiana (LA) R.S. 33:101 et seq. the City of Monroe maintains a municipal planning commission, to be known as the "Monroe Planning Commission" or "planning commission" herein, whose administrative provisions are found in chapter 2, article III of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  As per LA.R.S. 33:4721 et seq., the municipal planning commission shall also serve as the municipal zoning commission, and shall have all of the powers conferred upon zoning commissions by law, and shall be known as the "Monroe Zoning Commission" or "zoning commission" herein. The administrative provisions for the zoning commission are found in chapter 2, article III of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
(3)  There may be a board of adjustment, the membership, terms of office, and rights and duties of which shall be provided in LA.R.S. 33:4727, as amended. 
(d)  Any reference or citation made in this ordinance to any duly enacted statute of the United States of America or of the State of Louisiana; or any duly enacted ordinance of the Parish of Ouachita, the City of Monroe; or any regulation enacted or promulgated by any department, agency, bureau or other institution or subdivision of the United States of America, the State of Louisiana, the Parish of Ouachita or of the City of Monroe shall refer to the provisions of the cited or referenced statute, ordinance or regulation as of the date of the enactment of this ordinance or as cited or referenced statute, ordinance or regulation may thereafter from time to time be amended, reenacted or re-designated. 
(e)  All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith or incompatible with the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed. 
(f)  Upon the effective date of this ordinance, the pre-existing chapter 37, zoning, of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances shall be repealed. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-3. - Jurisdiction. 
(a)  These regulations shall apply to all the area located within the corporate limits of the City of Monroe. All developments shall meet minimum standards and requirements of these regulations, as amended. This ordinance, or any amendment thereto, shall not affect the validity of any building permit lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any amendment thereto, provided that the permit is valid upon the effective date of the adoption of this ordinance or any amendment thereto, that construction authorized by such permit has commenced prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or any amendment thereto, and provided that construction has and does continue without interruption until development is completed. 
(b)  This ordinance, or amendment thereto, shall not affect the validity of variances granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or amendment thereto. Said variances shall remain in effect after the effective date of this ordinance, and shall constitute variances to the applicable provisions of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-4. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this code shall apply to the construction, addition, alteration, moving, repair and use of any building, structure, parcel of land, fence or sign within the city, except work located primarily in a public way, public utility towers and poles and public utilities unless specifically mentioned in this code. 
(b)  Where, in any case, different sections of this code specify different requirements, the more restrictive shall govern. Where there is conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
(c)  In fulfilling these purposes, this ordinance is intended to benefit the public as a whole and not any specific person or class of persons. Although, through the implementation, administration and enforcement of this code, benefits and detriments will be enjoyed or suffered by specific individuals, such as merely a byproduct of the overall benefit to the whole community. Therefore, the City of Monroe, its officers, agents and employees shall have qualified immunity against unintentional breaches of the obligation of administration and enforcement imposed on the jurisdiction hereby. 
(d)  If any portion of this code is held invalid for any reason, the remaining herein shall not be affected. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-5. - Fees. 
    The Monroe City Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and expenses and a collection procedure for applications, certificates of occupancy, appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. A schedule of fees shall be available from the planning director's office and may be altered or amended only by the city council. No certificate, conditional use or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full. The appropriate fees for application procedures specified herein shall include: 
Map Amendment: ..... $  300.00 for the first acre and 
  25.00 for each additional acre  Minimum charge .....   300.00  Maximum charge .....  3,000.00 Planned Unit Developments and Mobile Home Parks: .....   250.00 for the first acre and 
  25.00 each additional acre.  Minimum charge .....   250.00  Maximum charge .....  2,500.00  Acreage based on total acres exclusive of streets Site Plan Review: .....   150.00 per plan Conditional Use Permit:  Major: .....   250.00  Minor: .....   150.00 Variances: .....   200.00 Text Amendments: .....   100.00 Preliminary/Final Subdivision Plat: .....   25.00 per lot  Minimum fee .....   300.00  Maximum fee .....  3,000.00 Revocation: .....   200.00 Dedication: .....   200.00 Zoning Compliance Verification Form: .....   75.00 
  (Temporary uses $50.00)  Certificate of occupancy is included in this fee Annexations: .....   200.00 Fence Permits: .....   25.00 Certificate of Appropriateness: .....   75.00 Copies: .....    .50 Appeals: .....   75.00 Zoning Certification Letter: .....   25.00  
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,611, 9-8-15) 
Sec. 37-6. - Transition rules. 
    In determining the applicability of this ordinance, with respect to the previously applicable zoning regulations, the following rules apply. 
(1)  Existing nonconforming structures and uses. A structure or use that is made nonconforming before the effective date of this ordinance, but is made conforming by the provisions of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment to this ordinance, is lawful as of the effective date of this ordinance or of any subsequent amendment to this ordinance. However, any subsequent addition, enlargement or expansion of that structure or use is required to conform to the procedural and substantive requirements of this ordinance. 
(2)  Existing permitted uses, conditional uses, and planned developments. 
a.  If a structure or land is used in a manner that was classified as a permitted use prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and now that use is classified as a conditional use (major or minor) as of the effective date of this ordinance, that use is deemed a lawful nonconforming use and is controlled by the provisions of article VIII. Any subsequent addition, enlargement, or expansion of that use shall conform to the requirements of this ordinance. 
b.  If a structure or land is used in a manner that was classified as a conditional use (special exception or use requiring planning approval) prior to the effective date of this ordinance, and that use is now classified as a permitted use as of the effective date of this ordinance, that use is deemed a lawful permitted use. Any subsequent addition, enlargement, or expansion of that use shall conform to any ordinance requirements for such permitted use and is no longer subject to the conditional use ordinance under which it was originally approved. 
c.  Planned developments shall follow the requirements of article IV. 
(3)  Existing lots and structures rendered nonconforming. If a lot or structure exists legally before the effective date of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment to this ordinance, and such lot or structure does not meet all standards set forth in this ordinance, that structure is deemed a legal nonconforming structure and is controlled by the provisions of article VIII. 
(4)  Previously issued building permits. If a building permit for a building or structure was lawfully issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment to this ordinance, and if substantial construction has begun within one-hundred eighty (180) days of the issuance of that permit, the structure may be completed in accordance with the plans on the basis of which the building permit was issued and may, upon completion, be occupied under an occupancy permit for the use originally intended. 
(5)  Previously granted conditional uses and variances. All conditional uses (special uses and uses requiring planning approval) and variances granted prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any subsequent amendment to this ordinance remain in full force and effect, unless a conditional use is allowed as a permitted use as of the effective date of this ordinance. The recipient of the conditional use or variance may proceed to develop the property in accordance with the approved plans, including all conditions included as part of approval. If the recipient has failed to act on the conditional use or variance before the approval expires, including any periods of extension granted, the provisions of this ordinance govern. 
(6)  Pending applications. An application that has been received and deemed complete and scheduled for a public hearing or meeting is subject to the rules in effect on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(7)  Illegal uses. Uses that are illegally established prior to the adoption of this code shall remain illegal. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-7. - Annexed territory. 
    The petition for annexation shall set forth the appropriate city zoning, which shall be determined by adjacent zoning, the current and/or proposed use, and a determination by Planning and Zoning Director of the City of Monroe or his/her designee as to the appropriate zoning classification, before adoption of an annexation ordinance by the City Council of the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 37-8-37-19. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DEFINITIONS AND RULES OF INTERPRETATION 

Sec. 37-20. - Rules of interpretation. 
    The following rules of interpretation shall apply to the text of this zoning ordinance: 
(1)  The particular controls the general. 
(2)  In the case of any difference in the meaning or implication between the text of this zoning ordinance and any caption or illustration, the text controls. 
(3)  "Shall" is always mandatory and not discriminatory. 
(4)  Words used in the present tense include the future; and words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly states the contrary. 
(5)  A "building" or "structure" includes any part thereof. 
(6)  "Person" includes an individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association or any other similar entity. 
(7)  Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and" or "or", the following shall apply: 
a.  "And" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
b.  "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singularly or in any combination. 
(8)  Terms not defined in this ordinance have the meaning customarily assigned to them, or a meaning to be assigned by a designee of the City of Monroe. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-21. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, these terms and words are hereby defined: 
    Abandonment: (Also see discontinuance.) The cessation of the use of a property or of a particular use for at least twelve (12) months, or a sign that remains without bona fide advertising or which is located on a property that becomes vacant or unoccupied for more than six (6) months. 
    Accessory dwelling unit: A self-contained residential unit, considered subordinate to the principal use, and built on the same lot as an existing single-family home. 
    Accessory structure: A building or structure attached or detached from, but located on the same lot as, the principal structure and the use of which is clearly incidental and subordinate to the principal structure. 
    Accessory use: A use that is customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use, and which is located on the same lot as the principal use. 
    Addition or enlargement: Any construction that increases the size of a building or structure in terms of site coverage, height, length, width or floor area. 
    Adult use: Any business as defined by Louisiana Revised Statute (LA R.S.) 14:106A, including adult bookstores, adult motion picture theaters, adult mini-motion picture theaters, adult live entertainment businesses, adult nightclubs or massage businesses. These uses are further defined in (LA R.S.) 14:106 and subsection 37-92(a) of this ordinance. However, those massage businesses where all employees associated with massage meet the ethical and educational requirements specified by the American Massage Therapy Association, or equivalent national or state standards, are exempt from this definition. 
    Airport: Facilities for the takeoff and landing of aircraft, including runways, aircraft storage buildings, helicopter pads, air traffic control facilities, informational facilities and devices, terminal buildings, airport-related uses; and airport auxiliary facilities, including fences, lighting and antennae systems, on-premises signs, driveways, and access roads. This term includes aircraft maintenance facilities, aviation instruction facilities, and heliports when part of a larger airport facility. 
    Airport-related use: A use or activity whose purpose or function is primarily or partially dependent on location or access to the operations of an airport and whose functions are necessary for the daily operations and economic viability of a full-service commercial airport. 
    Alcohol beverage sales: The sale of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premises consumption. 
Alcohol beverage sales, off-premises: The retail sale of alcoholic beverages in the original manufacturer sealed and labeled container in a business such as a grocery store, convenience store or liquor store for consumption off site. 
Alcohol beverage sales, on premises: The sale of beer, wine, or other alcoholic beverages as the primary activity (e.g., bars, taverns, etc.) or as an incidental or secondary activity to another primary business activity (e.g., full-service or specialty restaurants, hotels, banquet halls) for consumption on site. 
    Alley: A dedicated right-of-way twenty (20) feet or less in width that affords only a secondary means of access to property abutting thereon. 
    Alteration: Any change, addition or modification in construction, use or occupancy. 
    Animal shelter: A facility that is used to house or contain animals and is owned, operated, or maintained by a government or nonprofit organization for the purpose of providing temporary kenneling and finding permanent adoptive homes for animals. 
    Applicant: Any person, firm or corporation requesting approval of any land use, development or improvement application, or similar entitlement regulated by the City of Monroe Municipal Code. 
    Application: The completed form(s) and all accompanying documents, exhibits and fees required of an applicant by the applicable department, board or commission of the City of Monroe for development review, approval or permitting process. 
    Appurtenance: An architectural feature of a structure that is higher than the adjacent portion of the structure, such as a chimney, cupola, spire or parapet wall. 
    Art gallery: An establishment engaged in the sale, loan, or display of art books, paintings, sculpture, or other works of art. This clarification does not include libraries, museums, or non-commercial art galleries . 
    Arts studio: An educational facility where classes in the various arts (e.g., dance, painting, sculpting, singing) are taught to four (4) or more persons at a time. 
    Attic: The finished or unfinished space of a building that is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. 
    Automobile/vehicle dealership: An establishment that sells or leases new or used, functional automobiles, trucks, vans, trailers, recreational vehicles, boats, motorcycles or other motorized transportation vehicles. An automobile/vehicle dealership may contain an inventory of the vehicles for sale or lease either on site or at a nearby location, and may provide on-site facilities for the repair and service of the vehicles sold or leased by the dealership. 
    Automobile rental/leasing establishment: Rental of automobiles, light trucks and vans, including incidental parking and servicing of vehicles for rent or lease. Typical uses include auto rental agencies, moving vehicle rental, and taxi-cab dispatch areas. 
    Automotive repair, major: An establishment primarily engaging in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment, including paint, body and fender, and major engine and engine part overhaul, which is conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
    Automotive repair, minor: An establishment primarily engaging in the repair or maintenance of motor vehicles, trailers and similar large mechanical equipment, including brake, muffler, upholstery work, tire repair and change, lubrication, tune-ups, and transmission work, which is conducted within a completely enclosed building. 
    Awning: A roof-like cover, often of fabric, metal or glass, designed and intended for protection from the weather or a decorative embellishment, and that projects from a wall or roof of a structure over a window, walk or door. 
    Banquet hall: (See also reception hall) An establishment that is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions including, but not limited to, banquets, weddings and other celebrations, which may also include on-site kitchen/catering facilities. The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption may only occur during scheduled events and is not open to the general public. 
    Bar: An establishment serving alcoholic beverages in which the principal business is the sale of such beverages for consumption on the premises. Snack food or other prepared food may be available for consumption on the premises as an accessory use only. No sales of alcohol for off-premises consumption are permitted. A bar may include a microbrewery on-site as an accessory use only. 
    Base flood elevation: The elevation, expressed in feet above mean sea level, to which flooding has a one per cent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Bed and breakfast: An owner-occupied residential structure that provides up to seven (7) sleeping rooms for overnight paid occupancy for a period not to exceed fourteen (14) days. Common bathroom facilities may be provided rather than private bathrooms for each room, however no cooking facilities are permitted in individual rooms. Limited social functions may be allowed, as regulated in subsection 37-92(b) of this ordinance. 
    Bingo hall: A facility used primarily for the conduct of manual or electronic video bingo games, open to the public and not in a subsidiary nature to another use. 
    Block: A parcel of land within a subdivision or development, which is bounded by streets or bounded by streets and the exterior boundary of the subdivision. For this definition, an alley is not considered a street but part of the block. 
    Blockface: The portion of a block or tract of land facing the same side of a single street and lying between the closest intersecting streets. 
    Board of adjustment: The term "board of adjustment" shall mean the Monroe Board of Adjustment created under LA.R.S. 33:4727 et seq., which shall have the powers provided for by Louisiana law to hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by an administrative official; and to grant variances where there are practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships in carrying out the strict letter of this ordinance and as may be provided for in this chapter 37 zoning of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
    Boardinghouse: A building where, for compensation and by prearrangement for definite periods, meals or lodging are provided for five (5) or more persons. 
    Boardwalk: An elevated public pedestrian connection constructed over a public street or along a waterfront. 
    Boathouse: A single-story structure consisting of posts and a roof, with or without walls, connected to either a dock or ground in a body of water, constructed for boat storage or related marine use only. The term "boat house" includes the anchoring system and any walkways or bridges that connect to the structure. 
    Brewpub: A restaurant that includes the brewing of beer as an accessory use. The brewing operation processes water, malt, hops, and yeast into beer or ale by mashing, cooking, and fermenting. The area used for brewing, including bottling and kegging, shall not exceed twenty-five (25) per cent of the total floor area of the commercial space. The brewery shall not produce more than one thousand five hundred (1,500) barrels of beer or ale per year. 
    Buffer: An area established in order to protect and separate one land use from another, which may include landscaping, fencing or other buffering materials. 
    Buildable area: The area of a lot remaining after the minimum yard and open space requirements of the zoning ordinance have been met. 
    Building Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof and designed, intended or used for the sheltering or protection of persons, animals, or property of any kind. 
Building, main or principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is situated. A dwelling shall be deemed to be the main building on the lot in all residential districts. 
Building, temporary: A building that serves as office or storage for a given period of time. A temporary building may only remain on the site for six (6) months and is not permitted to serve as a residence at any time. 
    Building frontage: The linear dimension of the facade of a building that abuts the required front yard as stipulated in this ordinance. A corner building is permitted to use the secondary facade to determine building frontage. 
    Building inspector: A person employed by the City of Monroe who is charged with the administration and enforcement of building codes. 
    Building integrated solar energy system: A solar energy system that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building, rather than a separate mechanical device, replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building. Building integrated systems include but are not limited to photovoltaic or hot water systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, walls, skylights, and awnings. 
    Building mounted solar energy system: A solar energy system affixed to a principal or accessory building. 
    Canopy: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material supported by the building or by support extending to the ground directly under the canopy placed so as to extend outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other openings. 
    Cargo containers: A cargo container is an industrial, standardized reusable metal vessel that was originally, specifically, or formerly designed for or used in the packing, shipping, movement or transportation of freight, articles, goods or commodities by commercial trucks, trains and/or ships. A cargo container modified in a manner that would preclude future use by a commercial transportation entity shall be considered a cargo container for the purpose of this article. 
    Cargo terminal: A transportation facility in which quantities of goods or container cargo are stored without undergoing any manufacturing processes, transferred to other carriers, or stored outdoors in order to transfer them to other locations. 
    Carnival: (see also fair) A temporary outdoor event, with rides, animal events, art shows, concerts, craft fairs, itinerant shows and/or religious revival meetings, which is located outside of permanent structures and has a duration of no more than ten (10) days in a month. 
    Carport: An accessory structure consisting of a canopy or shed attached or adjacent to the main structure and open on two (2) or more sides for the purpose of providing shelter for one or more vehicles. 
    Carwash: A commercial establishment engaged in the washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles or other light dirty equipment, whether automatic in an enclosed structure or by hand. 
    Cemetery: Land used or dedicated for the burial of the dead, including crematoriums, columbariums, mausoleums and necessary sales and maintenance facilities. Mortuaries and chapels may be included when operated within the boundary of said cemetery. 
    Certificate of occupancy: A document issued by the director of planning and zoning allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure, use, and/or site have been constructed, installed, or will be used in compliance with all applicable codes and ordinances. 
    Check cashing facility: (See also pay-day loan agency) An establishment that is not a bank or financial institution subject to federal or state regulation, and that charges either a flat fee or a fee based on a per centage of the face value of a check to be cashed or processed by such establishment, and provides such services to the public. 
    Children's residential facility: (See also residential care facility) A building, other than an apartment, hotel, small or large group home, providing temporary lodging and board and a special program of specialized care and counseling on a full-time basis for twelve (12) or more children who are displaced from their normal living environment. A children's residential facility must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as a children's residential or similar care facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
    Church: (Also see house of worship) A building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious expression, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. 
    City: The City of Monroe, Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
    City council: The chief legislative body of the City of Monroe, Louisiana. 
    Clubhouse: The principal building associated with a golf course, tennis club, or similar recreational facility that typically contains the pro shop, administrative offices, exercise facilities and locker rooms, golf cart storage and maintenance, and may also contain food and beverage services, including public meeting and banquet rooms and related facilities. 
    Columbarium: An accessory structure or building and substantially exposed above ground, intended to be used for the interment of the cremated remains of deceased persons or animals. Columbaria shall be considered accessory uses to cemeteries or houses of worship. 
    Common structure: An accessory structure, such as a carport, laundry, gazebo or recreational facility used by more than one resident in a multi-family development or manufactured housing development. 
    Community center: A facility to be used as a place of meeting, recreation, adult training or social activity, and not operated for profit, which is open to the community and designed to accommodate the surrounding neighborhood or the larger community. 
    Community garden: Neighborhood-based developments that provide space for community members to grow plants for beautification, education, recreation, community distribution or personal use. These sites shall be owned and managed by public or civic entities, non-profit organizations, or other community-based organizations that are responsible for maintenance and operations. 
    Concept plan: A generalized plan drawn to scale for development of property requested to be zoned as a planned unit development and that identifies the following: the use of the property; the intensity of the uses expressed in number and type of dwelling units, gross square feet in commercial, industrial or other uses; general location and size of proposed buildings; streets and roadways within and adjacent to the property; access points, parking areas, and the number of spaces; open space to be preserved and open space to be created; general vegetation; legal description; total acreage; graphic scale; and north point. 
    Conditional use: A use that, because of special requirements or characteristics, may be allowed in a particular zoning district only after review by the planning commission and granting of a conditional use permit imposing such conditions as necessary to make the use harmonious or compatible with neighboring uses, as outlined in article IX of this ordinance. 
    Construction: Any act or process that requires a building permit and that adds an addition onto an existing building or erects a new principal or accessory structure on a lot which is subject to the design standards, the provisions of chapter 13 (drainage and flood control), or chapter 33 (storm water quality) of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances for the district in which the property is located. 
Construction, commencement: The physical improvement of land in accordance with a permit issued by the building inspector of the City of Monroe, such as the pouring of slabs or footings or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the first permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on its piling or foundation when a structure is without a basement or poured footings. 
Construction, substantial completion: The date at which the work or building project, or a designated portion of the work or building project is sufficiently complete, in accordance with the construction contract documents, so that the owner may use or occupy the work or building project, or designated portion thereof, for the intended use for which it is originally designed and intended for. This would include the completion of all life safety systems, a weather-tight envelope, and adequate protection of building occupants and or equipment from hazards posed by additional or possible construction activities or other potential harmful conditions that may exist or become evident during the final work effort to complete the project per the construction contract documents. This date is then certified by the architect to the owner or client. From this date a number of other provisions are started such as warranty, guaranties and liabilities. 
    Contractor storage yard: Any land or buildings used primarily for the storage of equipment, vehicles, machinery, or other building materials or construction contractor in the conduct of any building trade or craft. 
    Condominium: A single-dwelling unit in a multiunit dwelling or structure, that is separately owned and may be combined with an undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the property. 
    Convalescent center: A facility that provides nursing services and temporary custodial care on a 24-hour basis for persons suffering from illness, other than mental illness, which is not of sufficient severity to require hospitalization, or persons requiring further institutional care after being discharged from a hospital other than a mental hospital. 
    Correctional facility: A public or privately-operated facility for the detention, confinement, treatment or rehabilitation of persons arrested or convicted for the violation of civil or criminal law. Such facilities include adult detention centers, juvenile delinquency centers, jails or prisons. 
    Craft brewery: A commercial facility that produces fermented malt beverages on site in quantities from 0 to 465,000 gallons (15,000 barrels) per year. If more than 15,000 barrels per year are produced, it will be considered light manufacturing. The facility may include an accessory tasting room where customers can taste samples of the products manufactured on-site and purchase related sales items. A maximum of 10% of production can be sold in the tasting room and any sale of alcohol in the tasting room or otherwise in the facility which is manufactured outside the facility is prohibited. The tasting room may only be open three (3) days a week with minimum hours of operation. 
    A craft brewery does not include restaurants with accessory brewing facilities or microbreweries. 
    Crematorium: An accessory use within a cemetery or mortuary containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation. 
    Day: When used in this ordinance, day shall mean one business day. 
    Day care center, adult: A facility where, for a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour day, functionally-impaired adults that are not related to the owner or operator of the facility are supervised or participate in a training program. This excludes alcohol and drug abuse clientele, former inmates of prisons or correctional institutions or former patients of mental institutions who have been found not guilty by reason of insanity. An adult day care center does not include adult day care homes. 
(1)  Day care center, small: Up to fifteen (15) adults; 
(2)  Day care center, large: Sixteen (16) to fifty (50) adults; 
(3)  Day care center, commercial: Fifty-one (51) or more adults. 
    Day care center, child: A facility where, for a portion of a twenty-four (24) hour day, supervision and guidance of children that are not related to the owner or operator of the facility is provided on a regular basis. A child day care center does not include a child day care home. 
(1)  Day care center, small: Up to fifteen (15) children; 
(2)  Day care center, large: Sixteen (16) to fifty (50) children; 
(3)  Day care center, commercial: Fifty-one (51) or more children. 
    Day care home, adult; A private home in which a permanent occupant provides care for the elderly and/or functionally impaired adults in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. This excludes alcohol and drug abuse clientele, former inmates of prisons or correctional institutions or former patients of mental institutions who have been found not guilty by reason of insanity. 
(1)  Day care home, small: Up to five (5) adults, 
(2)  Day care home, large: Six (6) to twelve (12) adults. 
    Day care home, child; A private home in which a permanent occupant provides care for children from outside households in a protective setting for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day. The number counted includes the family's natural or adopted children and all other persons under the age of twelve (12). A child day care home does not include homes that receive children from a single household. 
(1)  Day care home, small: Up to five (5) children, 
(2)  Day care home, large: Six (6) [to] twelve (12) children. 
    Day shelter: A facility operated by an organization or non-profit group that provides a place for indigent, needy, homeless or transient persons to wash and dry clothes, take showers; use the computer or other similar activities during the hours of 7:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. May include offices for social agencies and may provide meals. 
    Dedicate/dedication: The intentional appropriation or conveyance of land or an interest in land by the property owner to the city for public use. 
    Demolition by neglect: The destruction of a building through abandonment or lack of maintenance. 
    Density: The number of dwelling units that are allowed on an area of land, which area of land shall be permitted to include dedicated streets contained within the development. 
    Design standards: Specific criteria and limitations placed on development and uses that are intended to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. 
    Designee: Person or persons designated by the mayor and/or department head to check, review and comment on all submissions regarding their nonconformance to these regulations. 
    Detention/retention pond: (Also known as bio-retention pond) A man-made basin designed to protect against flooding by storing storm water for a limited period of time. 
    Development agreement: An agreement between a developer and the City of Monroe that clearly establishes the developer 's responsibility regarding project phasing, the provision of public and private facilities, improvements and any other mutually agreed to terms and requirements. 
    Development: The act of installing site improvements, building structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling or other activity on improved or unimproved real estate. 
    Development plan: A generalized plan that becomes part of the zoning for a property. The plan depicts site characteristics and development information and provides guidance for site plans. 
    Diameter breast height (DBH): The diameter of a tree trunk or the cumulative diameter of multiple trunks measured four and one-half (4.5) feet above natural grade. 
    Digital flood insurance rate map (DFIRM): An official map of the community, on which the Administrator of the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) has delineated both the special flood hazard areas and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Discontinuance: (Also see abandonment) The abandonment of a property or of a particular use for a period of at least twelve (12) months. The determination of discontinuance for non-conforming uses or structures shall be supported by evidence, satisfactory to the planning and zoning division (e.g., the actual removal of equipment, furniture, machinery, structures, or other components of the non-conforming use and not replaced, the turning off of the previously connected utilities, or where there are no business receipts/records or any necessary licenses available to provide evidence that the use is in continual operation). 
    Dock: A wharf or a row of piers with no enclosed buildings or roofs, where boats can be moored, loaded, etc., including "U" shaped or other shaped structures. 
    Dormitory: A structure specifically designed for the long-term stay by students of a college, university or non-profit organization, for the purpose of providing rooms for sleeping purposes. A common kitchen and common gathering rooms for social purposes may also be provided. 
    Drainage plan: A plan showing proposed site drainage features for controlling storm water runoff and conveying it to public outfalls. A drainage plan shall also include runoff calculations and storm water pollution control (as needed) for engineering review, evidence that the drainage plan has been submitted to and reviewed by the storm water drainage authority with jurisdiction over the site, and that the drainage plan and storm water pollution control plan (as needed) has been approved by said authority. 
    Drive-through establishment: Premises used to provide or dispense products or services through an attendant, window or automated machine to persons remaining in their vehicle. A drive-through facility may be in combination with other uses such as a "financial institution," a "retail goods establishment" or "restaurant." A "car wash," "gas station" or "motor vehicle service and repair" shall not be considered a drive-through facility. 
    Driveway: A private accessway, not classified as a street, road or highway, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel in which it is located. 
    Dwelling: Any structure or portion thereof, which is designed or used for residential purposes. 
Dwelling, multi-family: A building or portion thereof designed for occupancy by three (3) or more families living independently in which they may or may not share common entrances and/or other spaces. Individual dwelling units may be owned as condominiums, or offered for rent. 
Dwelling, single-family: An individual dwelling unit in a structure, which is not physically connected with any other dwelling unit. 
Dwelling, townhouse: A building on its own separate lot of record containing one dwelling unit that occupies space from the ground to the roof, and that is attached to one or more other townhouse dwelling units by at least one common wall. 
Dwelling, two-family: A building designed or arranged to be occupied by two (2) families living independently, with the structure having only two (2) dwelling units. 
Dwelling, zero lot line: Single-family dwellings arranged on individual lots as either detached structures with one or more side walls on a side property line. 
    Dwelling unit: Any room or group of rooms located within a structure forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitation by one family. 
    Easement: The right, granted by the property owner, to use a portion of a parcel of land for specified purposes, such as public utilities, drainage and other public purposes, the title of which shall remain with the property owner, subject to the right of use designated in the reservation of the easement (See servitude). 
    Eave: The projecting sides of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
    Educational facilities: (Also see schools) Any building or part thereof that is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
Educational facility, college/university: A post-secondary institution for higher learning that grants associate or bachelor degrees. The institution may also have research facilities and/or professional schools that grant master and doctoral degrees. This also includes post-secondary theological schools for training ministers, priests or rabbis. 
Educational facility, elementary: A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the elementary, middle and/or junior high school level. Religious facilities with elementary educational facilities shall be considered educational facilities, elementary. 
Educational facility, secondary: A public, private or parochial school offering instruction at the senior high school level. This also includes secondary schools for training ministers, priests or rabbis. Religious facilities with secondary educational facilities shall be classified as educational facilities, secondary. 
Educational facility, vocational school: A school established to provide for the teaching of industrial, clerical, computer, managerial, automotive, repair (electrical, plumbing, carpentry, etc.) or artistic skills; or a school conducted as a commercial or non-profit enterprise, such as a driving school, an adult training facility, or school for general education development. This definition applies to schools that are owned and operated privately and that do not offer a complete educational curriculum. Vocational educational facilities do not include university educational facilities. 
    Elderly housing: A facility consisting of three (3) or more dwelling units, the occupancy of which is limited to persons sixty (60) years of age or older. The facility may also include medical facilities or care. 
Elderly housing, assisted living: A model of senior housing that provides a combination of residential quarters, supportive services, personalized assistance, 24-hour supervision, and health care. These facilities generally provide basic services such as laundry, light housekeeping, communal meals, and health-related services in an independent residential environment. 
Elderly housing, continuing care community: Housing planned and operated to provide a continuum of accommodations and services for seniors including, but not limited to, independent living, congregate housing, assisted living, and skilled nursing care. 
Elderly housing, nursing home: A facility designed and intended to provide nursing service on a continuing basis to persons, the majority of whom require such service under trained professional nurses or physicians, and for whom medical records are maintained. The term "nursing home" shall include post-operative convalescent centers but shall not include any facility used for providing service to any inmate of any prison or other correctional institution. 
Elderly housing, retirement housing: A residential complex containing multi-family dwellings designed for and principally occupied by senior citizens. Such facilities may include a congregate meals program in a common dining area, but excludes institutional care such as medical or nursing care and are distinguished from assisted living centers as elsewhere defined. 
    Electric theft deterrent device: A free-standing, electric security fence installed inside an existing perimeter fence. This security fence issues a pulsating, short duration shock lasting only three-ten-thousandths (3/10,000) of a second. Attempts to climb or cut the fence will trigger an immediate audible alarm. 
    Emergency homeless shelter: (See also transitional housing) A facility that provides temporary or transitional shelter for the homeless in general or for specific populations of the homeless. 
    Emergency services: Publicly-owned safety and emergency services, such as, but not limited to, fire stations, police stations, and emergency medical and ambulance service. 
    Enclosed structure: A building enclosed by a permanent roof and by solid exterior walls pierced only by windows and customary entrance and exit doors. 
    Enclosure: The process of enclosing a previously open, or partially open, accessory structure or architectural feature adjacent to the front, rear or side of the principal structure with a roof or walls, or other screened or framed enclosure. 
    Encroachment: The extension or placement of any structure or component of a structure into a required yard, setback, street right-of-way, or floodplain/floodway. 
    Facade: The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or that wall viewed by persons not within the building. 
    Fair: (see also carnival) A temporary outdoor event, with rides, animal events, art shows, concerts, craft fairs, itinerant shows and/or religious revival meetings, which is located outside of permanent structures and has a duration of no more than ten (10) days in a month. 
    Family: One or more persons related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship, the occupants of a community or group home for mentally or physically challenged individuals or not more than four (4) persons not so related occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single housekeeping unit shall be considered a family. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, this definition does not include individuals required to be assembled under one living unit for the purpose of drug or substance abuse rehabilitation or persons assigned to same as the result of criminal activity. 
    Family violence shelter: (See also residential care center) A program or facility that provides comprehensive residential and/or non-residential services to victims of family violence. A family violence shelter must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as such, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
    Farmer's market: The seasonal selling or offering for sale at retail of vegetables or produce, flowers, orchard products, and animal agricultural products, occurring in a pre-designated area, where the vendors are individuals who have raised the vegetables or produce or have taken the same on consignment for retail sale. (Includes vendors selling non-agricultural products as well.) 
    Fence: An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, ornamental iron or other material erected to enclose, screen or separate uses. A fence may or may not include a gate, but a gate does not include a fence. 
    Financial institution: A bank, savings and loan, credit union, mortgage office, or automated teller machine (ATM). 
    Floodplain: The special flood hazard lands adjoining a watercourse, whose surface elevation is lower than the base flood elevation, that are subject to periodic inundation during floods. 
    Floodway; The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the 100-year flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot at any point determined by FEMA. 
    Floor area: The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of the main building but not including the area of roofed porches, terraces, or breezeways. All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of the walls. 
    Footcandle: A footcandle is a measure of light intensity. A footcandle is defined as the amount of light received by one square foot of a surface that is one foot from a point source of light equivalent to one candle of a certain type. 
    Foundation, permanent: A full, poured concrete or masonry foundation, or any foundation which, pursuant to the building code of the City of Monroe, is permitted for single-family dwellings. 
    Fraternity: A club or social activity officially associated with and recognized by and supervised by an institution for higher education whose membership is limited exclusively to students of said institution. 
    Fraternity house: A building used as a group living quarter for students of a college, university or seminary, who are members of a fraternity that has been officially recognized by the related college, university or seminary. 
    Freestanding solar energy system: A solar energy system with a supporting framework that is placed on, or anchored in, the ground and that is independent of any building or other structure. 
    Frontage: That portion of a lot abutting a street right-of-way measured along the property line of the public right-of-way and the private property. 
    Funeral home: (Also see mortuary) An establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings, and/or display of funeral equipment. 
    Gaming: The dealing, operating, carrying on, conducting, or maintaining for pay of any game. 
    Garage: An enclosed structure that is an accessory use to a dwelling unit that is used for the parking and storage of vehicles owned and operated by the residents thereof, and is not a separate commercial enterprise available to the general public. 
    Gas station: A business where flammable or combustible liquids or gases used as fuel for motor vehicles are stored and dispersed from fixed equipment into the tanks of motor vehicles. Accessory activities shall be permitted to include automotive repair and maintenance, car wash service, and food sales. 
    Gate: An opening in a fence. An artificial barrier capable of being opened and closed, permitting or denying access across a driveway or path. 
    Gated community: A limited access subdivision with privately owned streets and maintained infrastructure. 
    Government facility: A building or structure owned, operated or occupied by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public, and shall include public works and public safety facilities. 
    Grade: The average level of the surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of a building. 
Grade, finished: The final elevation of the average ground surface adjoining a building at all exterior walls after man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling or excavating. 
Grade, natural: The existing grade or elevation of the ground surface that exists or existed prior to man-made alterations, such as grading, grubbing, filling or excavating. 
    Group home or community home: A single-family residential structure, licensed by the State of Louisiana, designed or adapted for occupancy by unrelated developmentally disabled persons, not including alcohol and drug abuse clientele, former inmates of prisons or correctional institutions, or former patients of mental illness institutions who have been found not guilty of a criminal charge by reasons of insanity shall be excluded as occupants. 
Group or community home (small): A small, residential facility located within a community, designed to serve children or adults with chronic disabilities. Small group homes may have six (6) or fewer occupants who are mentally, physically or developmentally disabled, and one or more resident counselors/trained caregivers on staff twenty-four (24) hours a day. A small group home must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana, the political subdivision, and/or a state-licensed child placement agency, as a group home, receiving home, or similar care facility. 
Group or community home (large): A residential facility located within a community, designed to serve children or adults with chronic disabilities. Large group homes may have twelve (12) or fewer occupants who are mentally, physically or developmentally disabled, and two (2) or more resident counselors/trained caregivers on staff twenty-four (24) hours a day. A large group home must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana and/or a state-licensed child placement agency, as a group home, receiving home, or similar care facility. 
    Gross floor area: The total area of all the floors of a building, including intermediately floored tiers, mezzanine, basements, etc., as measured from the exterior surfaces of the outside walls of the building. 
    Halfway house, penal: A licensed home for inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. A halfway house must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as a halfway house or similar facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
    Hazardous waste: A waste, or combination of wastes, regulated by Title 33, Part V of the Louisiana Environmental Regulatory Code (LAC 33.V), which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics may do either of the following: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or increase or serious irreversible or incapacitating reversible illness; 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Hazardous waste disposal facility: All structures, appurtenances and improvements on the land used for treatment, storage or disposing of hazardous waste, including all operations or storing areas, diked overflows, or emergency spillway areas. A hazardous waste disposal facility may consist of several treatment, storage or disposal operational units; it includes all areas where hazardous waste may be received, stored, handled or processed. 
Hazardous waste incinerator; An enclosed device using controlled flame combustion, where the primary purpose of which is to thermally break down hazardous waste. 
Hazardous waste processing facility: Any commercial facility, as defined by LAC 33.V  106, that treats or stores hazardous waste generated on properties other than those on which the processing facilities are located. 
Hazardous waste storage: Any environmentally sound facility used to store hazardous waste for a temporary period as regulated by LAC 33.V. 
Hazardous waste treatment: The physical, chemical or biological processing of any hazardous waste so as to neutralize such waste or so as to render such waste nonhazardous, safer for transport, amenable for recovery, amenable for storage, or reduced in volume. 
    Heavy sales, rental and service: This use includes retail, rental and/or service establishments that have permanent outdoor service or storage yards, or partially enclosed structures including, but not limited to, large-scale home improvement centers with outdoor storage and rental components, lumberyards, playground equipment sales and rental, truck repair establishments, and uses with permanent outdoor service or storage areas for heavy equipment such as truck rental establishments, large-scale moving centers, and temporary storage container facilities. 
    Height: The vertical distance of a structure measured from the finished grade to the roofline. No height limitation in this ordinance shall apply to any of the following structures: silos, barns and other agricultural structures; church spires; cupolas; domes; monuments; water towers; smoke stacks; derricks; flag poles; masts; solar energy facilities; air conditioning equipment; elevator penthouses and similar structures required to be placed above the roof level and not intended for human occupancy. 
    Heritage preservation commission: The term "heritage preservation commission" shall mean the Monroe Heritage Preservation Commission created under Monroe Chapter 18.5-26, which shall have the powers to review and approve or deny requests for exterior alterations to structures in designated historic districts as provided for by Louisiana law and as may be provided for in this chapter 37, zoning of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
    Home occupation: A business, profession, occupation or trade conducted within the principle structure of a residential use by a resident of the dwelling which is incidental and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling, does not change the essentially residential character of the use, and which complies with the requirements of (subsection 37-92(g)) home occupations. 
    Homeless shelter: A facility providing temporary housing to indigent, needy, homeless, or transient persons; may also provide ancillary services such as counseling, vocational training. Such assistance may include food and/or shelter and may, in addition, include religious instruction. Such shelters shall not provide lodging on a regular basis and shall not provide shelter for the same individuals. 
    Hospital: An institution designed for the diagnosis, treatment and care of human illness or infirmity and providing health services, primarily for inpatients, and including as related facilities, laboratories, outpatient departments, training facilities and staff offices. A hospital may also include accessory uses such as "retail goods establishments" and "restaurants," provided that such facilities are incidental and subordinate to the main use and part of the main structure. 
    Hotel or motel: An establishment providing, for a fee, sleeping accommodations and temporary living accommodations to the general public. Related ancillary uses may include, but shall not be limited to, conference and meeting rooms, restaurants and recreational facilities. 
    House of worship: (Also see church) A building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and which is maintained and controlled by a religious body organized to sustain religious expression, together with all accessory buildings and uses customarily associated with such primary purpose. 
House of worship, small: A place of religious worship having four hundred (400) or fewer seats or no more than eight thousand (8,000) square feet of total gross floor area. 
House of worship, large: A place of religious worship having more than four hundred (400) seats or eight thousand (8,000) square feet of total gross floor area. 
House of worship, mega: A large, specialized type of house of worship that includes such non-traditional accessory uses as retail sales, residential uses, amusement parks, and/or sports and entertainment facilities, as an integrated part of the development. 
    Hydrostatic force: Standing water or slowly moving water that can induce horizontal force (collapse) or vertical force (flotation) against a structure when floodwater levels on different sides of a wall are not equal. 
    Independent living facility: A multi-family dwelling for persons with physical or developmental disabilities. Units may be comprised of efficiency, one, two (2) or more bedrooms with three (3) or more bedroom units restricted to occupancy by families comprised of at least one person with a disability. Each unit shall contain a kitchen and a bath. Related ancillary uses may include a congregate dining facility, community space, laundry facilities, small administrative offices, management staff residential quarters and/or storage. These facilities are generally developed and operated by non-profit organizations, and services may vary with the target population but could include case management, training in independent living skills, and employment assistance. 
    Intensity: Relative measure of development impact as defined by characteristics such as the number of dwelling units, amount of traffic generated, and amount of site coverage. To alter the character of a use to the extent that the use generates new or different impacts to the surrounding neighborhood constitutes an intensification of use. 
    Junkyard: A tract of land, including any accessory structure thereon, that is used for buying, selling, storing, baling, packing, disassembling, or handling waste or scrap materials. Such scrap materials include vehicles, machinery, and equipment not in operable condition, and metals, glass, paper, plastics, rags, and rubber tires. A lot on which three (3) or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a junkyard. 
    Kennel: Any premises, except where accessory to an agricultural use, where domestic animals, such as dogs and cats, are boarded, trained, or bred. 
    Laboratory: A facility for scientific laboratory analysis of natural resources, medical resources, and manufactured materials. The scientific analysis is generally performed for an outside customer, to support the work of that customer. This category includes environmental laboratories for the analysis of air, water, and soil; medical or veterinary laboratories for the analysis of blood, tissue, or other human medical or animal products; and forensic laboratories for analysis of evidence in support of law enforcement agencies. 
    Landscape plan: Shall mean the preparation of graphic and written criteria, specifications, and detailed plans to arrange and modify the effects of natural features such as planting ground and water forms, circulation, walks and other features to comply with the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Landscaping: The installation of plant material or seed as a part of development. 
    Light trespass: The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. The shining of light produced by a luminaire beyond the boundaries of the property on which it is located. 
    Line of sight clearance area: The triangular area formed by the lines extending from any corner of a corner lot adjacent to two (2) intersecting streets to a distance of twenty (20) feet along both property lines from the corner (constituting two (2) sides); and the diagonal connecting such lines (constituting the third side). 
    Live entertainment venue: An establishment for the presentation of live performances, including musical acts (including karaoke), theatrical plays or acts (including stand-up comedy and magic), revues, dance acts, or any combination thereof, performed by one (1) or more persons, whether or not they are compensated for the performance. 
    Loading space: A space within a main building on the same lot as a main building, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks. 
    Lot: A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision or as otherwise permitted by law, to be separated owned, used, developed or built upon. 
Lot area: The total area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street rights-of-way. 
Lot, corner: A lot or parcel of land abutting two (2) or more streets at their intersection or on two (2) parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. 
Lot coverage: The area of the lot covered by a structure or impervious surfaces. 
Lot depth: The horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines. 
Lot, through: A lot having frontage on two (2) approximately parallel streets or places. 
Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot. 
    Lot lines: The lines bounding a lot as defined below: 
Front lot line: The line separating the lot from the street on the narrow side. Where no method determines conclusively the front of the lot, the planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall select one frontage on the basis of traffic flow on adjacent streets, so that the lot is considered to front on the street with the greatest traffic flow. 
Rear lot line: The line opposite and most distant from the front lot line. In the case of a triangle or otherwise irregularly shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. 
Side lot line: A lot line other than the front or rear lot line. 
    Lot of record: A lot that exists as shown or described on a plat or deed as recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Courts of Ouachita Parish. 
    Lot width: The distance parallel to the front lot line measured between side lot lines. 
    Maintenance/repair services: An establishment providing appliance repair, office machine repair, or building maintenance services. This use does not include the maintenance and repair of vehicles. 
    Manufacturing, heavy: The assembly or fabrication of goods and materials, which may include the storage of large volumes of highly flammable or toxic matter. Heavy manufacturing processes ordinarily have greater impacts than average impacts on the environment, or that ordinarily have significant impacts on the use and enjoyment of adjacent property in terms of noise, smoke, fumes, odors, glare or health and safety hazards. 
    Manufacturing, light: The manufacturing from previously prepared materials of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, treatment and packaging of such products, and incidental storage, sales and distribution such products, providing all industrial activities are contained entirely within a building and noise, odor, smoke, heat, glare and vibration resulting from the industrial activity are confined within the building. 
    Marina: A facility for the storage, servicing, fueling, berthing and securing of boats, including eating and retail facilities. 
    Medical/dental clinic: A facility operated by one or more physicians, dentists, chiropractors, psychiatrists or other licensed health care practitioners for the examination and treatment of persons where neither meals nor lodging are provided. 
    Medical evacuation heliport: A public or private use helicopter landing area for the transport of persons in need of emergency medical care; the transport of patients needing specialized treatment; or the emergency transport of organs, blood, medicine, or medical equipment. 
    Metes and bounds: A system of describing and identifying land by measures (metes) and direction (bounds) from an identifiable point of reference such as a monument or other marker, the corner of intersecting streets, or, in rural areas, a tree or other permanent feature. It is the most precise of the three (3) most common forms of urban land description (the others are by street number of house and by blocks and lots in tract subdivision). 
    Microbrewery: A facility for the production and packaging of malt beverages of low alcoholic content for distribution, retail, or wholesale, on or off premises, with a capacity of not more than fifteen thousand (15,000) barrels per year. The development may include other uses such as a standard restaurant, bar or live entertainment as otherwise permitted in the zoning district. 
    Mini-warehouse: A structure that rents individual compartments for the purpose of storing personal property. Individual compartments shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) square feet. 
    Mixed-use: A tract of land or building or structure developed for two (2) or more different uses such as, but not limited to, residential, office, manufacturing, retail, public, or entertainment. 
    Mobile food truck: A double-axle vehicle that is completely mobile with no permanent fixed location, the vendor of which prepares all or most of its victuals on-board the vehicle to serve or distribute to its customers, in a form suitable for immediate ingestion or consumption. This definition excludes vendors selling only fresh, uncooked, or unprepared produce or seafood, or farmers selling their own produce or value-added products (oils, jams, jellies, etc.) directly to customers from their vehicles. Vendors selling only fresh, uncooked, or unprepared produce or seafood, or farmers selling their own produce or value added products (oils, jams, jellies, etc.) shall be regulated by the City Code. 
    Mortuary: (Also see funeral home) An establishment in which the dead are prepared for burial or cremation. The facility shall be permitted to include a chapel for the conduct of funeral services and spaces for funeral services and informal gatherings, and/or display of funeral equipment. 
    Non-conforming lot of record: A lot, the area, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
    Non-conforming structure: A structure or building, the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
    Non-conforming use: Any use of any land, building or structure, which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
    Office: A room or group of rooms used for conducting the affairs of a business, profession, service, industry or government and generally furnished with desks, tables, files and communication equipment. 
    Open space: That part of a lot, including all yards, which is open and unobstructed from grade level upward and is not occupied by off-street parking, streets, drives, or other surfaces for vehicles. 
    Outdoor storage yard: The storage of any material, as a principal use of the lot, or for a period of more than twenty-four (24) hours, including items for sale, lease, processing and repair not in an enclosed structure. Items within an outdoor storage yard must be owned or leased by the owner of the storage yard. 
    Owner/proprietor dwelling: Structures or spaces within a structure that are used jointly for commercial/industrial and residential purposes where the residential use is principally used by one or more of the commercial/industrial tenants. 
    Parapet wall: That portion of the wall that extends above the roofline. 
    Parcel: 
(1)  A piece or area of land formally described and recorded with block and lot numbers, by metes and bounds, by ownership or in such a manner as to specifically identify the dimensions and/or boundaries; 
(2)  informally, as land in general. 
    Parish: Ouachita Parish, Louisiana. 
    Parking lot: An open, hard-surfaced area, other than a street or public way, used for the storage of operable passenger motor vehicles for limited periods of time. Parking may be available for residents, visitors, employees, clients, customers or similar users whether for compensation or at no charge. 
    Parking space, automobile: A space within a building, private or public parking lot for the parking of an automobile. 
    Parking lot, commercial: A tract of land that is used for the storage of motor vehicles, that is not accessory to any other use on the same or any other lot, and that contains parking spaces rented to the general public or reserved for individuals by the hour, day, week, or month. 
    Parking structure: A structure or portion thereof composed of one or more levels or floors used exclusively for the parking or storage of motor vehicles. A parking structure may be totally below grade (as in an underground parking garage) or either partially or totally above grade with these levels being either open or enclosed. 
    Parks/playgrounds: A facility designed to serve the recreational needs of the residents of the community, and shall include but not be limited to, ball fields, basketball courts, skateboard parks, playgrounds and field house which may have indoor recreation facilities. 
    Party wall: A wall starting from the foundation and extending continuously through all stories to or above the roof that separates one building from another, but is in joint use by each building. 
    Passenger terminal: A facility or location where the principal use is the handling, receiving, and transfer of passenger traffic, and may include as an accessory use the loading, unloading, storing, receiving, assembling, dispatching, weighing, consolidating, classifying, switching, distribution, movement, or transfer of freight, as well as all equipment and facilities used to accomplish the foregoing activities. 
    Pay-day loan agency: (See also check cashing facility) An establishment providing loans to individuals in exchange for personal checks as collateral. 
    Pedestrian connection: A continuous, unobstructed, reasonably direct route between two (2) points that is intended and suitable for pedestrian use. Pedestrian connections include but are not limited to sidewalks, walkways, accessways, stairways, and pedestrian bridges. 
    Penthouse, mechanical: An enclosed structure above the roof of a building, other than a roof structure or bulkhead, that shelters mechanical equipment or vertical shaft openings in a roof. 
    Permitted use: A use meeting all of the requirements established by this ordinance for the district in which the use is located. 
    Person: An individual, corporation, public agency, business, trust, partnership, association, two (2) or more persons having a joint or common interest, or any other legal entity. 
    Personal services establishment: An establishment or place of business primarily engaged in the provision of frequent or recurrent services of a personal nature. Typical uses include, but are not limited to, beauty shops, barbershops, tanning salons, massage parlors, health club/gym, shoe repair, personal item repair shops, laundromats, dry cleaners, and tailors. Personal services establishments shall not include any adult uses. 
    Pet care facility: A facility designed for the indoor temporary housing and non-veterinary care of domestic pets such as dogs and cats. The facility shall include individual rooming units, but not the breeding or raising of household pets or animals. 
    Pet day care: A facility designed for the temporary and non-veterinary care of domestic pets such as dogs and cats. The pets shall be kept for a limited time (no more than twelve (12) hours) and the facility may also provide on-site grooming and training. This shall not include the breeding or raising of household pets or animals. 
    Pet grooming: An establishment providing services for domestic animals, such as dogs and cats, that may include bathing, clipping, or grooming for which a fee is charged. 
    Photovoltaic (PV): A semiconductor based device that converts light directly into electricity. 
    Planned unit development (PUD): A residential, commercial or mixed-use development guided by a total design plan in which one or more of the zoning or subdivision regulations, other than use regulations, shall be permitted to be waived or varied to allow flexibility and creativity in site and building design and location, in accordance with general guidelines. 
    Planning and zoning director: A person who is responsible for reviewing and providing recommendations on all zoning, rezoning, subdivision, re-subdivision, variance, and appeals requests to the city planning commission, the historic preservation commission and/or the board of adjustment. 
    Planning commission: The term "planning commission" shall mean the Monroe Planning Commission created under LA.R.S. 33:101 et seq., which shall have the powers to develop the master plan and administer the zoning map and ordinance as provided for by Louisiana law and as may be provided for in this chapter 37, zoning, of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
    Plat: A map representing a tract of land, showing the boundaries and location or individual properties and streets; or a map of a subdivision or a site plan. 
    Prefabricated housing: Any housing with structural or mechanical components manufactured and assembled away from the construction site. For purposes of this definition, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
Manufactured housing: Dwelling units constructed primarily at a plant or facility on a production line basis and delivered to the site as an assembled unit or in modular form. Manufactured housing specifically refers to housing built to 42 U.S.C. Sec. 5403 Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards set by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Mobile home: Prefabricated trailer-type housing units that are semi-permanently attached to land, either the owner's fee land or leasehold. A mobile home is a moveable or portable structure designed and constructed on its own chassis and intended for connection to utilities for year-round occupancy as a dwelling. Any dwelling unit that qualifies as a manufactured or modular home according to the definitions herein is not considered a mobile home. Furthermore, a travel trailer is not considered a mobile home. 
Manufactured home community: A unified development of two (2) or more manufactured home sites, plots or stands, arranged on a large tract usually under single ownership, meeting the area and yard requirements of this article, and designed to accommodate manufactured homes for a more or less permanent duration. Such term may include travel trailer accommodations, provided that no more than twenty-five (25) per cent of the park is used for such purpose. 
Modular home: Modular homes are houses divided into multiple modules or sections, which are manufactured in a remote facility and delivered to their intended site of use. The modules are then assembled on a permanent foundation without a permanent chassis, into a single residential building. Unlike other prefabricated construction, modular homes conform to all state, local and regional codes (International Building Code standards) where the structure is to be located. 
Manufactured housing sales lot: A facility for the display, service, and retail sale of manufactured housing or preassembled storage buildings. 
Travel trailer: A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis, designed to be used as a temporary dwelling and may be hauled along a highway. 
    Prefabricated commercial structure: Any building with structural or mechanical components manufactured and assembled away from the construction site and intended for commercial use. 
    Principal building: A structure in which the primary use of the lot on which the building is located is conducted. 
    Principal use: The primary use and chief purpose of a lot or structure. 
    Property line: The lines forming the boundary of a lot, whether those lines are determined by metes and bounds, single lot or combination of lots or portions of lots of record. 
    Public buildings and facilities: Any building used exclusively for public purposes by any department or branch of government. 
    Public improvement: Any drainage ditch, storm sewer or drainage facility, sanitary sewer, water main, roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrian way, off-street parking area, lot improvement or other facility for which the local government may ultimately assume the responsibility for maintenance and operation, or for which the local government responsibility is established. 
    Public use: Any use operated by an agency of government which provides a direct service to the public including police, fire, library, schools (whether operated by a public body or not) and recreational services. 
    Public utility station: A structure or facility used by a public or quasi-public agency to store, distribute, and/or generate electricity, gas telecommunications and related equipment, or to pump or chemically treat water. This does not include storage or treatment of sewage, solid waste or hazardous waste. 
    Quasi-public: Essentially a public use, although under private ownership or control. 
    Quorum: A majority of the appointed board members of a board or commission for the transaction of all business. Any time the full body shall fall below the number of members of a full board or commission, a majority of the sworn members shall constitute a quorum. 
    Rail yard: An area of land and structures, a portion of which is covered by a system of tracks, that provides for the making up of trains by one or more railroads or private industry concerns. Necessary functions of a rail yard include but are not limited to the classifying, switching, storing, assembling, distributing, consolidating, moving, repairing, weighing, or transferring of cars, trains, engines, locomotives, and rolling stock. 
    Reception hall: (See also banquet hall) An establishment that is rented by individuals or groups to accommodate private functions including, but not limited to, banquets, weddings and other celebrations, which may also include on-site kitchen/catering facilities. The sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption may only occur during scheduled events and is not open to the general public. 
    Recreational facilities: Any facility that provides recreational opportunities such as tennis courts, health clubs or golf courses. 
Recreational facilities, indoor: A commercial establishment providing completely enclosed recreation activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and serving of food and/or sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Included in this definition shall be archery, bowling, roller-skating or ice-skating, billiards, swimming pools, rifle ranges, and related amusements. 
Recreational facilities, outdoor: An area free of buildings except for restrooms, dressing rooms, equipment storage, maintenance buildings, open-air pavilions and similar structures used primarily for commercial recreational activities. 
    Recreational vehicle park: Any lot or parcel of land upon which two (2) or more recreational vehicle sites are located, established, or maintained for occupancy for a fee by recreational vehicles of the general public as temporary living quarters for recreation or vacation purposes. 
    Rehabilitative care center: (See also halfway house; substance abuse treatment facility) A building other than an apartment hotel, hotel, small or large group home, rooming house, tourist home, motel or motor lodge, providing temporary lodging and board and a special program of specialized care and counseling on a full-time basis. Such a center includes, but is not limited to, centers that provide for alcohol and drug abuse clientele, former inmates of prisons or correctional institutions, or former patients of mental illness institutions. A rehabilitative care center must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as a rehabilitative or similar care facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
    Residential care center: (See also family violence shelter; children's residential facility) A building, other than an apartment, hotel, small or large group home, or rooming house, providing temporary lodging and board and a special program of specialized care and counseling on a full-time basis for twelve (12) or more adults or children who are displaced from their normal living environment. A residential care center must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as a residential or similar care facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. Alcohol and drug abuse clientele, former inmates of prisons or correctional institutions, or former patients of mental institutions who have been found not guilty of a criminal charge by reasons of insanity shall be excluded as occupants. 
    Restaurant: Any establishment whose primary purpose is the service of food for consumption on or off the premises. Restaurants shall be classified as follows: 
Restaurant, carry-out: An establishment where food, frozen desserts or beverages are primarily sold in a packaged, ready-to-consume state, intended for ready consumption by the customer on or off the premises. Carry-out restaurants shall not offer alcoholic beverages for sale. 
Restaurant, fast-food: An establishment where most customers order and are served their food at a counter or in a motor vehicle in packages prepared to leave the premises, or able to be taken to a table or counter to be consumed. Fast-food restaurants shall not offer alcoholic beverages for sale. 
Restaurant, full-service: A restaurant with table service (order placement and delivery on site) provided to patrons, also including cafeterias; carry-out service, if any, shall be a limited portion of the facility and activity. Full-service restaurants shall only offer alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption. 
Restaurant, specialty: Establishments whose primary business is the sale of a single type of food or beverage that is not considered a complete meal (e.g., candy, coffee, or ice cream). The sale of other food, beverages or merchandise is incidental to the sale of the specialty food or beverage. Food and beverages are for customer consumption on or off-premises. Specialty restaurants shall not offer alcoholic beverages for sale. 
    Retail goods establishment: A commercial enterprise that provides physical goods, products or merchandise directly to the consumer, where such goods are typically available for immediate purchase and removal from the premises by the purchaser. Retail goods establishments shall not include alcohol, unless alcohol beverage sales for off-premises consumption is allowed within the district and a separate approval is obtained for such use. 
    Retail manufacturing: A commercial enterprise engaged in light manufacturing such as baking, confectionary, dressmaking (seamstress), tailoring, upholstering and similar establishments and businesses of a similar and no more objectionable character, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  All goods and products manufactured or processes shall be sold as retail on the premises. 
(2)  All such manufacturing pr processing shall be done on the premises, and not more than five (5) persons, exclusive of drivers and owners, shall be so employed at any one time. 
    Revival church: A gathering of worshipers in a temporary structure or location erected specifically for a religious revival meeting, healing crusade or church rally. 
    Revocation: The intentional termination of a public interest in land by the city, with conveyance or sale to a property owner for private use. 
    Right-of-way: The term used to describe the publicly owned improved or unimproved areas between property lines. This area is dedicated for use by the public for pedestrian and vehicular travel, and may include elements such as streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street furniture, bus stops, utility poles, landscaping and signage. 
    Roofline: The highest continuous horizontal line of a roof. On a sloping roof, the roofline is the principal ridgeline, or the highest line common to one or more principal slopes of roof. On a flat roof, the roofline is the highest continuous line of the roof or parapet, whichever is higher. 
    Rooming house: A building, other than a hotel, where for compensation and by prearrangement, five (5) or more persons other than occasional or transient customers are provided with lodging. 
    Setback: The required minimum horizontal distance between the building line and the related front, side, and rear property lines. For the purpose of this section, the setback will be measured to the nearest point of the foundation wall of the building. A roof overhang or projection not to exceed two (2) feet will be allowed to project past the foundation wall. 
    Setback line: The line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line and that establishes the area within which the principal structure may be erected or placed. 
    Schools: (See educational facilities) Any building or part thereof that is designed, constructed, or used for education or instruction in any branch of knowledge. 
    Servitude: Same as easement. 
    Sewage: All effluent carried by sewers, whether sanitary sewage, residential, commercial or industrial wastes, or storm water runoff. This also includes the entire system of sewage collection, conveyance, treatment and disposal. 
    Sewage treatment facility: Any plant or other facility providing service, maintenance, or repair of essential public water/wastewater utilities to one or more developments including but not limited to wells, pumping stations, boosters, reservoirs, repeaters, water storage tanks, lift stations, regulators, and other similar facilities. 
    Shelter: A facility providing temporary protective sanctuary for victims of crime or abuse, including emergency housing during crisis intervention for individuals, such as victims of rape, child abuse, or beatings. 
    Sidewalk: A paved pedestrian footpath within the public right-of-way between the curb lines or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines. 
    Sight triangle: The triangle at either side of an access way or public right-of-way at its junction with a public street with sides of not less than twenty (20) feet in length each along the public right-of-way and/or accessway within which clear visibility of approaching vehicular or pedestrian traffic must be maintained in all directions. 
    Sign: A board or other display used to identify or advertise a place, event, article or price that is affixed to, painted on, or otherwise placed upon any building, structure or property, and which is visible from a public right-of-way, sidewalk, alley park or other public open area. 
A-frame sign: A double-faced advertising device, ordinarily in the shape of an "A" or some variation, located on the ground but not permanently attached and is easily movable. 
Animated sign: A sign, or portion of a sign, that uses movement or changes in lighting to depict action or to create a special effect or scene. Time/temperature signs are not considered animated signs. 
Attached sign: A sign attached to, applied on, or supported by any part of a structure. 
Awning sign: A sign painted on, or attached to, the surface of an awning (see also marquee sign and canopy sign). 
Banner sign: Any sign printed or displayed on cloth, canvas, fabric, or other temporary material, with or without a structural frame and intended for a limited period of display. 
Canopy sign: A sign mounted on, printed on, or attached to a canopy. 
Changeable copy sign: A sign that allows characters, letters, or illustrations to be changed without altering the sign. 
Construction sign: A sign that identifies the name of contractors, architects and lending institutions responsible for construction on the site, limited in display to the duration of construction. 
Copy: The wording on a sign surface that is either permanent or removable. 
Detached sign: A sign that is attached to a self-supported structure and not attached to a building. (See also freestanding sign) 
Directional sign: An on-premises sign identifying parking lot entrances and exits, restrooms, pedestrian/bicycle facilities, and features of a similar nature but no advertising copy. 
Directory sign: A sign that serves as common or collective classification for a group of businesses operating within a multi-tenant structure. The sign may name the businesses and location for a business within the structure, but no advertising copy. 
Dynamic display sign: A sign, or portion of a sign, that appears to have movement caused by any method, whether the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure itself, the lighting, or any other component of the sign. 
Electronic message sign: A sign, or portion of a sign, that displays an electronic image or video, which may or not include text. This definition includes television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, light emitting diode (LED) screens, video boards, flipper matrices, holographic displays, and signs lit with incandescent lamps. Time/temperature signs are not considered electronic message signs. 
Flashing sign: An illuminated sign on which the artificial or reflected light changes in intensity or color when in use, and gives the impression of flashing or blinking. Rotating signs are not considered flashing signs. 
Flip sign: A sign, usually the size of a traditional billboard that displays two (2) or more different ad messages in the space of just one sign face. The sign utilizes a turning triangle, cube or "louver" to achieve this look. Each side of the louvers together displays a different ad or message. 
Freestanding sign: A sign that is attached to a self-supported structure and not attached to a building. (See also monument sign or pole sign). 
Government sign: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, parish, state, or federal government for traffic direction or for designation of or direction to any school, hospital, or public service property or facility. 
Identification sign: A sign containing only the name and address of the structure, institution, or person, and/or to the activity or occupation being identified. (See also nameplate). 
Incidental sign: A sign, usually smaller in size and of a non-commercial nature, permitted without the need for a sign permit (e.g., credit card signs, hours of operation, etc.). 
Light emitting diode (LED): A semiconductor diode that emits light when a voltage is applied to it and that is generally used in electronic devices. 
Marquee sign: Any sign attached to, or hung from, any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond the wall of a building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from the weather. 
Monument sign: Any sign, other than a freestanding pole sign, placed upon or supported by the ground and an internal structural framework, and typically with a low overall height. The base of a monument sign must be a minimum of seventy-five (75) per cent of the width of the sign face situated upon the base. 
Nameplate: A non-electric on-premises identification sign giving only the name and address and/or occupation of the occupant(s). Nameplates are limited to one square foot in size and shall be attached flat against the structure. 
Non-conforming sign: Any sign which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment to conform to the present requirements of the zoning district. 
Off-premises advertising sign: Any sign advertising a commercial use, facility, service, or product that is not located, sold, or manufactured on the same premises as the sign, and whose advertising or information content is visible from the interstate highway or any public street in the city. 
On-premises sign: A sign that pertains to the use of the premises on which it is located. 
Parking lot directional sign: A sign within a parking lot that identifies entrances and exits. 
Permanent sign: A sign attached to a structure of the ground that is made of materials intended to remain indefinitely. 
Point of purchase display: An advertising device used to call attention to a retail item(s) sold at a particular commercial location. 
Political sign: A temporary sign advocating action on a political issue, recommending a candidate for public office, or advocating a position on a local, state, or national election. 
Portable sign: Any sign not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including but not limited to, signs mounted on wheels or trailers and A-frame signs. 
Projecting sign: A sign attached to, and projecting more than twelve (12) inches from, a building wall, but does not project above the parapet or eave line of the building. 
Real estate sign: A temporary sign that relates to the sale, lease, or rental of a property or building. 
Residential identification sign: A sign that identifies the name and address of a multi-family dwelling or residential subdivision. 
Roof sign: Any sign erected and constructed wholly or partially above the roofline of a building, that is fastened to, and supported by the roof of the structure. 
Sign clearance: The smallest vertical distance from the finished grade directly below the sign to the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishments. 
Sign face: The particular area of a sign upon which a message, copy, or advertisement is displayed for viewing, excluding the base, supports, and other structure elements. 
Snipe sign: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, pole, stake, fence or other object. 
Temporary sign: A sign, banner, pennant, flag, or streamer that is constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, plywood or other light materials, intended to remain for a limited time. 
UL: Underwriters Laboratory, Inc., a nationally recognized testing laboratory. 
Under-awning sign: A sign attached to and suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, gallery or marquee. 
V-type sign: A structure or structure with two (2) or three (3) sign faces, forming the shape of a "V" or a triangle when viewed from above, with an angle between any two (2) faces of not more than forty-five (45) degrees. 
Wall sign: A sign mounted flat against, or painted on, the wall of a structure and not projecting more than sixteen (16) inches from the wall surface. 
Window sign: A sign that is attached to or printed on the interior or exterior of the windowpane of a door or structure, or mounted directly inside the window intended for viewing from the exterior of such building. A window sign may be either permanent or temporary. 
    Site improvements: Construction of, or improvements to, streets, access roadways, parking facilities, sidewalks, drainage structures and utilities in connection with any development. 
    Site plan: (Also called development plan) An accurate, scaled drawing showing the location of buildings, the landscaping, parking, circulation and such other features as floor plans and elevations to help describe the existing and proposed development of a specified area. 
    Social club or lodge: Buildings and facilities or premises used or operated by an organization or association for some common purpose, such as, but not limited to, a fraternal, social, educational or recreational purpose, but not including clubs organized primarily for profit or to render a service that is customarily carried on as a business. Such organizations and associations shall be incorporated under the laws of the State of Louisiana as a non-profit corporation or registered with the Secretary of State of Louisiana. 
    Social service agency: A facility operated by an organization which provides services such as training, counseling, health, or the distribution of food or clothing. This term includes, but is not limited to, a facility offering life skills training, substance abuse counseling, or housing services. This term does not include an emergency residential shelter. 
    Solar collector: A device, structure, panel or part if a device or structure for which the primary purpose is to transform solar radiant energy into thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical energy. 
    Solar energy: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector. 
    Solar energy system: A device or structural design feature intended to provide for collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for heating or cooling, electricity generation, or water heating. 
    Solar farm: The use of land where a series of one or more solar collectors are placed in an area on a parcel of land for the purpose of generating photovoltaic power and said series of one or more solar collectors are placed in an area on a parcel of land collectively and has a generation capacity of at least fifteen (15) kilowatts (kW) direct current (dc) or more when operating at maximum efficiency. 
    Solid waste: Any garbage, refuse, or sludge from a waste treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility, and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations, and from community activities. However, the term "solid waste" does not include solid or dissolved material in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permits under LA R.S. 30:2074; source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (68 Stat. 923 et seq.), as amended (42 U.S.C. Section 2011 et seq.); or hazardous waste subject to permits under LA R.S. 30:2171 et seq. 
Solid waste collection facility: A facility that is used to accumulate solid waste generated by and delivered by more than one household or commercial establishment for pickup by a transporter, including, but not limited to, facilities typically located in rural areas where garbage collection does not occur. This definition does not include containers that receive only solid waste generated on property that is contiguous with the property on which the container is located (e.g., containers located at and receiving solid waste only from a multiunit dwelling or a commercial establishment or an industrial establishment). 
Solid waste compost facility: A facility where organic matter is processed by natural or mechanical means to aid the microbial decomposition of the organic matter. 
Solid waste transfer station: A solid waste processing facility where solid waste is transferred from collection vehicles, processed, and placed in other vehicles for transportation (e.g., a facility that separates recyclables from industrial or putrescible waste streams). 
    Sorority: A club or social activity officially associated with and recognized by and supervised by an institution for higher education whose membership is limited exclusively to students of said institution. 
    Sorority house: A building used as a group living quarter for students of a college, university or seminary, who are members of a sorority that has been officially recognized by the related college, university or seminary. 
    Soup kitchen: A place where food is prepared and offered to the hungry for free or at a below-market price and is staffed by volunteer organizations such as church or community groups. 
    Storage, large: A space or place of over five thousand (5,000) square feet where goods, materials, or personal property is stored in a fixed location for a specific or unspecified period of time. 
    Storage, small: A space or place of five thousand (5,000) square feet or less, where goods, materials or personal property is stored in a fixed location for a specific or unspecified period of time. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next to it; or, if there is no floor above it, the space between the floor and the ceiling above it. 
    Streets: A public right-of-way or private thoroughfare, which provides vehicular and pedestrian access to adjacent properties. All streets will be within dedicated rights-of-way that have been properly processed, approved and recorded. The following shall be used to classify all streets: 
Arterial streets: Public thoroughfares that serve the major movements of traffic within and through Ouachita Parish. 
Collector streets: Public thoroughfares that serve to collect and distribute traffic primarily from local residential streets to arterial streets. 
Local streets: Facilities that are used primarily for direct access to abutting properties and leading into the collector street system. 
Frontage road or service road: A street adjacent to a freeway, expressway or an arterial street separated there from by a dividing strip and providing ingress and egress from abutting property. 
Cul-de-sac: A street having an outlet at one end only and having the other end permanently closed with facilities permitting vehicles to turn around. 
Dead-end street: A street having an outlet at one end only and terminated at the other end by undeveloped property. It may or may not have facilities permitting vehicles to turn around. 
Public streets: A public street is a road, thoroughfare, alley, highway, or bridge under the jurisdiction of a public agency. 
Private streets: Private streets are owned by residents, and have a publicly recognized indenture, or covenant, that outlines governance and acts as a deed restriction. In order to create a private street, property owners must pay the fees to support upgrades and maintenance of said street. The City of Monroe shall provide police and fire protection, as well as trash removal services. The residents shall pay for maintaining or paving sidewalks and street surfaces, maintaining or planting trees, and maintaining or installing streetlights and entry gates. Private streets must meet minimum design standards for drainage and storm water regulations, pedestrian safety regulations, and fire/emergency street design requirements. 
Major state or interstate highway: Those highways, which have an average daily total of at least twenty-five thousand (25,000) vehicles at the intersection or section nearest to the use in question. 
    Structure: A combination of materials constructed or erected with a fixed location on, above or below the surface of land or water. 
Structure, permitted: A structure meeting all the requirements established by this ordinance for the district in which the structure is located. 
    Subdivision: The division of a parcel of land into two (2) or more lots, tracts, or parcels for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease or building development, or if a new street is involved, any division of a parcel of land. The term includes re-subdivision and when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the process of subdivision or to the land subdivided. 
    Subdivision regulations: The City of Monroe Subdivision Regulations. 
    Substance abuse treatment facility: (See also rehabilitative care center) A facility for the purposes of temporary or long-term treatment of victims of alcohol or drug use addiction. 
Substance abuse treatment facility, halfway house: A facility used for the treatment of alcohol or other drug abuse, which provides training, care, supervision, treatment or rehabilitation to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. A halfway house must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as a substance abuse halfway house or similar facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
Substance abuse treatment facility, inpatient: A facility used for the treatment of alcohol or other drug abuse where one or more patients are provided with care, meals and lodging. An inpatient substance abuse treatment facility must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as an inpatient substance abuse treatment facility or similar facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
Substance abuse treatment facility, outpatient: A facility used for the treatment of alcohol or other drug abuse where neither meals nor lodging is provided. An outpatient substance abuse treatment facility must be licensed by an agency of the State of Louisiana as an outpatient substance abuse treatment facility or similar facility, and shall be operated by an entity that is similarly licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
    Surveyor: A qualified registered land surveyor in good standing with the Louisiana Board of Registration. 
    Tattoo parlor: Establishments where services offered are tattooing, body piercing and non-medical body modification. 
    Taxidermy: The business of preparing, stuffing, and mounting the skins of animals. 
    Telecommunications tower: A tower, pole, or similar structure that supports a telecommunications antenna operated for commercial purpose above ground in a fixed location, freestanding, guyed, or on a building or other structures. 
    Tire store: A place where the principal business is the sale or installation of new, used, or retread tires and tubes. 
    Tract: A parcel of land identified by letter or number the boundaries of which are shown on the recorded subdivision or development plat. A tract need not be suitable for development. 
    Traffic calming: the installation of speed bumps, traffic circles, roundabouts, or similar devices intended to reduce motorist speed, discourage through traffic, decrease vehicle volumes, and increase pedestrian/cyclist safety. 
    Traffic impact analysis: A technical analysis of the effect of traffic generated by a development on the capacity, operations and safety of the adjacent public street, affected intersections, and/or community highway system including traffic signals, as appropriate. 
    Transitional housing: (See also emergency homeless shelter) A type of supportive housing designed to facilitate the movement of homeless individuals and families to permanent housing. Shelter is provided for the homeless for an extended period of time, often as long as twenty-four (24) months, and is generally integrated with other social services and counseling programs to assist in the transition to self-sufficiency through the acquisition of stable income and permanent housing. 
    Trash/garbage storage area: That area of a development used for the storage and containment of refuse and refuse containers (i.e. dumpsters). 
    Urban agriculture: An activity that produces, processes and markets food and other products within the urban areas of the city, applying large-scale, intensive production methods to yield a diversity of crops. 
    Use: The activity occurring on a lot or parcel, for which land or a building is arranged, designed or intended, or for which land or a building is or may be occupied, including all accessory uses. 
Use, change of: The change within the classified use of a structure or parcel. 
Use, permitted: A use meeting all of the requirements established by this ordinance for the district in which the use is located. 
Use, temporary: A use that is authorized by this code to be conducted for a fixed period of time. Temporary uses are characterized by such activities as the sale of agricultural products, contractors' offices and equipment sheds, carnivals flea markets, and garage sales. 
    Variance: A deviation from the height, bulk, setback, parking or other dimensional requirements established by this code. 
    Vehicle Any means of transport on land, especially on wheels (e.g., a car, bus, bicycle etc.) 
Vehicle, commercial: Those exceeding one ton in size with advertising or special equipment, which distinguish it from private automobiles. Any vehicle used for commercial purposes, except passenger vehicles used for to and from work. All vehicles with more than two (2) axles, except motor homes used for recreation and not used in commerce. Note: A sign alone on a vehicle does not make the vehicle commercial. 
Vehicle, recreational: A vehicle designated as temporary living quarters for camping, traveling, or recreational use. It may have its own motive power, or be mounted on or pulled by another vehicle. 
    Vehicle storage yard: Any land or buildings used primarily for the permanent or temporary storage of inoperable vehicles, machinery, or other equipment on a temporary or permanent basis. 
    Veterinary hospital: An establishment where animals or pets are given medical or surgical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be incidental to said hospital use. 
    Video bingo: A machine designed for the specific purpose of playing the game of bingo where a random number generator is utilized to select numbers in lieu of the drawing of numbers from a receptacle and that one or more video images containing numbers or other designations five (5) or more in one line may be utilized instead of a card. 
    Warehouse, wholesale: A building or premises in which goods, merchandise or equipment are stored for eventual distribution. 
    Yard: An open space at grade between a building and the adjoining lot lines, unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of structure upward except as otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard to determine the width of a yard, the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line and the maximum permissible main building shall be yard dimension. 
Yard, front: A yard extending across the full width of a lot between the side lot lines and between the front property line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the building site. The depth of the front yard shall be measured between the front line of the building and the street line. On corner lots, the front yard shall be considered as parallel to the street upon which the lot has the least dimension. This space is considered open space. 
Yard, rear: A yard extending across the rear of the lot between the side lot lines and being the minimum horizontal distance between a rear lot line and the rear of the maximum main building. The rear yard shall be at the opposite end of the lot from the front yard. However, on through lots fronting two (2) streets, two (2) front yards shall be provided. 
Yard, required: The minimum open space between a lot line and the building setback line within which no structure is permitted to be located as provided in this ordinance. 
Yard, side: A yard extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the side lot line within which no structure is permitted to be located as provided in this ordinance. 
Yard, side corner: The area extending between the front yard and the rear yard and situated between the side street lot line and the side of the principal building which is parallel to, or most nearly parallel to, the side street lot line. 
Yard, through: A through yard is any single zoning lot that is not a corner lot and that connects two (2) generally parallel streets. On through yards fronting two (2) streets, two (2) front yards shall be provided. 
    Zoning commission: The term "zoning commission" shall mean the Monroe Zoning Commission created under La. R.S. 33:4721 et seq., which shall have the powers provided for by Louisiana law and as may be provided for in this chapter 37 zoning of the City of Monroe, Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,549, 3-10-15; Ord. No. 11,584, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 11,590, 7-28-15; Ord. No. 11,641, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 11,704, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 11,757, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 11,758, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 11,810, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 11,828, 2-27-18; Ord. No. 11,883, 10-23-18) 
Secs. 37-22-37-29. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - USE DISTRICTS 

Sec. 37-30. - District classifications. 
    In order to classify, regulate and restrict the locations of uses and locations of buildings designated for specific areas; and to regulate and determine the areas of yards, courts and other open spaces within or surrounding such buildings, property is hereby classified into districts as prescribed in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-31. - Rules for interpretation of district boundaries. 
    Except where specifically shown by dimension or otherwise on the zoning map, the boundaries of districts are lot or property lines; the centerlines of streets, alleys, or such lines extended; railway right-of-way lines, natural boundary lines such as watercourses, and the municipal corporate limits of the City of Monroe. The board of adjustment shall decide questions concerning the exact location of any district boundary. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-32. - Applications of district regulations. 
(a)  No building, structure, or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered: 
(1)  To exceed the height; 
(2)  To accommodate or house a greater number of families; 
(3)  To occupy a greater per centage of lot area; 
(4)  To have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required, or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  No part of a yard, open space, off-street parking or loading space required, in connection with any building shall be included as part of the like requirements for any other building. 
(d)  No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this ordinance shall be reduced in size or area below the minimum requirements set forth herein except where to do so would lead to lots that are less non-conforming than prior to the resubdivision. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-33. - Establishment of districts. 
    All land within the corporate limits of the City of Monroe is hereby divided into the following base zoning districts: 
R-1 Single-family residential district; 
R-2 Single-family attached residential district; 
R-3 Medium density residential district; 
R-4 High density residential district; 
RMH Manufactured home district; 
B-1 Neighborhood mixed-use district; 
B-2 Neighborhood business district; 
B-3 General business/commercial district; 
CBD Central business district; 
B-4 Heavy commercial district; 
I-1 Commercial/industrial business park district; 
I-2 Heavy industrial/manufacturing district; 
C Campus district; 
RF Riverfront district; 
OS Open space/recreation district. 
(1)  If, in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance and statutes, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be made on this official zoning map quarterly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, and attached to this ordinance. Each such quarterly change of the map shall be dated, signed, and certified. However, amendments shall become effective when adopted by the council. 
No change of any nature shall be made in this official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedure set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized changes of whatever kind, by any person or persons, shall be considered a violation of the ordinance and punishable under section 37-121 of this ordinance. 
The official zoning map, which shall be located in Monroe in the planning and zoning department shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land, buildings, and other structure in the city. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall keep the map. 
(2)  Classification of annexed territory. All areas taken into the city limits of the City of Monroe shall be classified in the zoning district of the City of Monroe that is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan, adjacent zoning classifications, adjacent uses, and the proposed use. The appropriate city zoning shall be determined by the planning and zoning director of the City of Monroe or his/her designee before adoption of an annexation ordinance by the city council of the City of Monroe. 
However, the said areas taken into the city may be classified as any district set forth in section 37-33 provided that: 
a.  Application be made to the planning and zoning commission by an owner with the area to be annexed for whatever other classification or classifications that may be desired; and 
b.  A public hearing shall have been held by the planning and zoning commission meeting the requirements of section 37-130 hereof; and 
c.  The planning and zoning commission recommends approval of a district classification or classifications requested to the city council; and 
d.  The city council approves by ordinance the district classification approved by the planning and zoning commission. 
e.  If the planning and zoning commission and city council do not act upon the application within ninety (90) days from date of the application, it shall be deemed denied. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-34. - Zoning map. 
    The boundaries of each zoning district are to be indicated upon the official zoning map as approved by the city council of the City of Monroe. Said map and subsequent amendments thereto shall be considered as a part of this code. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-35. - Exemptions for essential services. 
    The following essential services may be permitted, erected, constructed, altered, or maintained in any zoning district (See subsection 37-130(e)): 
(1)  Traffic signals, fire hydrants, and similar equipment and accessories. 
(2)  Gas, electric, communication, water supply, and transmission/distribution systems. 
(3)  Elevated or underground water storage tanks. 
(4)  Storm water and sanitary sewer collection and disposal systems. 
(5)  Utility poles, wires, mains, drains, pipes, conduits and cables reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by public utilities, municipal or other governmental agencies for the public health, safety and welfare. 
(6)  Streets. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-36. - Residential use districts. 
(a)  R-1 single-family residential district. The purpose and intent of the R-1 single-family residential district is to provide for the location and grouping of low-density, single-family residences with accompanying accessory uses that are protected from the adverse impacts of incompatible nonresidential land uses. 
(b)  R-2 single-family attached residential district. The purpose of the single-family attached residential district is to provide for a variety of single-family housing opportunities, at development densities compatible with adjoining single-family detached neighborhoods, which are protected from the adverse impacts of incompatible non-residential land uses. 
(c)  R-3 medium density multi-family residential district. The purpose and intent of the R-3 medium density multi-family residential district is to provide for the location and grouping of a variety of single-family and small-scale multi-family residential options while maintaining a single-family neighborhood character. 
(d)  R-4 high density multi-family residential district. The purpose and intent of the R-4 high density multi-family residential district shall be to provide moderate to high-density residential neighborhoods for individual buildings on individual lots or for more than one (1) building on one (1) lot. The R-4 district shall accommodate single-family attached dwellings that have common walls, including townhouses, condominiums, congregate and cluster developments as well as multi-family structures ranging in type from triplexes to apartment buildings. 
(e)  RMH manufactured home district. The RMH manufactured housing community district is intended to promote orderly planned development of manufactured housing and related accessory uses. Regulations are designed to preserve and protect the residential character of the district and to ensure compatibility with adjacent districts. 
Table 3.1: Residential District Permitted and Conditional Uses Uses Districts Use Standards R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RMH   Adult Day Care, Home P P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Adult Day Care, Small Cm Cm P Subsection 
37-92(c) Adult Day Care, Large C Subsection 
37-92(c) Bed and Breakfast C C Cm Cm Subsection 
37-92(b) Boarding House Cm Cemetery Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Child Day Care, Home P P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Child Day Care, Small Cm Cm P Subsection 
37-92(c) Child Day Care, Large C Subsection 
37-92(c) Community Center Cm Cm Cm Cm P Community Garden P P P P P Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P P P P Dwelling, Single-Family Attached P P P Dwelling Two-Family P P Dwelling, Townhouse P P P Dwelling, Three-Family P P Dwelling Four-Family P P Dwelling Multi-Family P Educational Facility Cm Cm P P P Elderly Housing, Assisted Living C P Elderly Housing, Continuing Care C P Elderly Housing, Nursing Home C P Elderly Housing, Retirement Housing C P Emergency Services P P P P P Fraternity/Sorority House C C Cm Subsection 
37-92(e) Golf Course Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Group/Community Home, Small C P P Subsection 
37-92(f) Group/Community Home, Large P P Subsection 
37-92(f) House of Worship, Large C C Cm P Cm House of Worship, Small P P P P P Library Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Modular Housing P P P P P Manufactured Housing, Class A P P P P P Subsection 
37-92(i) Manufactured Housing, Class B C P P Subsection 
37-92(i) Museum C C Cm Cm Park or Playground P P P P P Transitional Housing C Accessory Clubhouse Cm Cm Cm Cm P Columbarium Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Subsection 
37-76(e) Crematorium Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Home Occupation P P P P P Subsection 
37-92(g)  
Key: P = Permitted Use; Cm = Conditional Use Permit, minor; C = Conditional Use Permit, major; (blank) = Not Permitted 
TABLE 3.2: RESIDENTIAL USE BULK AND YARD REGULATIONS Bulk and Yard 
Regulations Districts R-1 R-2 R-3 R-4 RMH Bulk Regulations Minimum 
District Size 1 Acre 1 Acre 2 Acres 2 Acres 3 Acres Minimum Lot 
Area SFD: 7,200 sf 
Other: 10,000 sf SFD: 6,000 sf 
SFA: 4,000 sf 
Townhouse: 2,500 sf d 
Other: 10,000 sf SFD: 7,200 sf 
SFA: 4,000 sf 
2F: 8,000 sf 
3F: 12,000 
4F: 15,000 
Townhouse: 2,500 sf d 
Other: 10,000 sf SFD: 6,000 sf 
SFA: 4,000 sf 
2F: 8,000 sf 
Townhouse: 2,500 sf e 
MF =;10 unit: 
20,000 sf 
MF 11-12 unit: 
1,700 sf 
MF 13-14 unit: 
1,600 sf 
MF 15-16 unit: 
1,500 sf 
MF 17+ unit: 
1,700 sf 
Other: 10,000 sf MFH: 3 Acres 
Other: 10,000 sf Maximum 
Building 
Height 35 ft 35 ft 35 ft 65 ft 35 ft Minimum Yard Requirements Front Yard 25 ft 20 ft 20 ft 25 ft 20 ft a /10 ft b Interior Side 
Yard 5 ft SFD: 5 ft 
SFA: none 
Townhouse: none SFD & 2F: 5 ft 
SFA: none 
Townhouse: none SFD: 5 ft 
SFA: none 
Townhouse: none 
MF 1-story: 5 ft 
MF 2-story: 10 ft 
MF 3-story +: 20 ft 10 ft/unit Corner Side 
Yard 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft n/a Rear Yard 25 ft 25 ft 20 ft 20 ft 10 ft/unit c a From dedicated internal street b From private driveway or accessway c Rear or side yards may be reduced to 5 ft/unit if there are no entrances to the rear d Not to exceed 4 attached dwellings 
e Not to exceed 8 attached dwellings  
Key: SFD = Single-Family Detached; SFA = Single-Family Attached; 2F = Two-Family; MF = Multi-Family 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-37. - Commercial use districts. 
(a)  B-1 neighborhood mixed use district. This district is intended for limited-sized professional and business offices in close proximity to purely residential uses. Moderate density multiple-family residential is permitted. The district is not commercial in character; however, certain limited commercial uses are permitted. 
(b)  B-2 neighborhood business district. The purpose of a B-2 neighborhood business district is to provide for the location and grouping of sites for small-scale office, professional services, and retail establishments to support adjacent residential neighborhoods. This district includes establishments that conduct all business operations within an enclosed facility, and which have a limited impact on adjacent residential areas especially in terms of lighting, signage, traffic, odor, noise, and hours of operation. Permitted uses in this district shall be no larger than ten thousand (10,000) square feet in gross floor area. 
(c)  B-3 general business/commercial district. The B-3 general business/commercial district is intended to provide sufficient space in appropriate locations for a wide variety of commercial and miscellaneous service activities, generally serving a wide area and located along major arterials. The B-3 district is intended for medium to large-scale, auto or pedestrian-oriented commercial uses and strip commercial developments that require significant parking. 
(d)  CBD central business district. The CBD central business district is representative of the core downtown business and retail area. The intent of the district is to recognize the unique and historic character of downtown and the pedestrian orientation of the neighborhood by combining residential uses with commercial, service and office establishments. Lot sizes, setbacks, parking and landscaping requirements shall be more flexible to address the characteristics of an area substantially developed as a commercial district with smaller lots and greater development densities than newer areas of the city. 
(e)  B-4 heavy commercial district. The regional commercial district is intended to accommodate a wide variety of commercial and retail uses, as well as offices, businesses and personal services that serve the needs of the community and the region. The intent is to provide for large-scale commercial uses that are typically land intensive and are not well suited to being located in neighborhoods or the central business district. These districts are best located along major arterial streets and highway intersections. 
Table 3.3: Commercial Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses Uses Districts Use Standards B-1 B-2 B-3 CBD B-4 Adult Day Care, Small P P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Adult Day Care, Large P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Adult Day Care, 
Commercial P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Adult Use P Subsection 
37-92(a) Art Gallery P P P P P Arts Studio P P P P P Automobile/Vehicle 
Dealership P P Automobile Rental P P Automotive Repair, Major C P P P Automotive Repair, Minor Cm P Cm P Bar C P P P Bed and Breakfast P Subsection 
37-92(b) Bingo Hall P P P Boarding House P P P Brewpub P P P P Car Wash P P P P Caterer C P P P P Cemetery Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Check Cashing Facility C P P Subsection 
37-92(j) Child Day Care, Small P P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Child Day Care, Large P P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Child Day Care, 
Commercial P P P Subsection 
37-92(c) Community Center Cm P P P P Community Garden P P P Convalescent Center P P P Craft Brewery C Day Shelter/Facility (Homeless) C C C Dwelling, Multi-Family P P Dwelling, Owner/ 
Proprietor P P Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P Dwelling, Townhouse P Dwelling, Single-Family Attached P Dwelling, Two-Family P Educational Facility (Vocational) Cm Elderly Housing, 
Continuing Care P P P Elderly Housing, 
Nursing Home P P P Elderly Housing, 
Retirement Housing P P P Emergency Services P P P P P Farmer's Market P P P P P Financial Institution Cm P P P P Fraternity/Sorority House P Subsection 
37-92(e) Funeral Home/Mortuary P P Gas Station P P P P Government Facility P P P P Group/Community Home, Small P Subsection 
37-92(i) Group/Community Home, Large Cm P Subsection 
37-92(i) Halfway House C C Homeless Shelter C C C Hospital P P P Hotel/Motel P P P House of Worship, Small P P C P House of Worship, Large Cm Cm C P House of Worship, Mega P Independent Living 
Facility P Kennel P P P Laboratory P P P Library P P P P P Maintenance/Repair 
Services P P P P Manufactured Housing Sales Lot P Manufacturing, Light P Cm Medical/Dental Clinic P P P P P Microbrewery C Mini-Warehouse C Cm P Museum P P P P P Office P P P P P Off-Premises Advertising Sign Cm Cm Cm Cm Park or Playground P P P P P Parking Lot, Commercial C P P Parking Structure C P P Passenger Terminal P P P Pay-Day Loan Agency C P P Subsection 
37-92(j) Personal Services 
Establishment P P P P P Pet Care Facility P P P P Pet Day Care P P P P Pet Grooming P P P P P Radio/Television Antennae/Towers Cm Cm Cm Cm Reception/Banquet Hall P P P P Recreational Facility, 
Indoor P P P Recreational Facility, 
Outdoor P Recreational Vehicle Park P Cm Rehabilitative Care 
Center C P Residential Care Center C P P P Restaurant, Carry-Out P P P P Restaurant, Fast Food P P P P Restaurant, Full-Service P P P P Restaurant, Specialty P P P P P Retail Goods 
Establishment P P P P P Retail Manufacturing Cm P P Shelter C C C Social Club/Lodge Cm P P P Social Service Agency C C C Soup Kitchen C C C Storage, Large Cm P Storage, Small Cm Storage Yard, Vehicle Cm Substance Abuse 
Treatment Facility C C Tattoo Parlor P P P Taxidermy P P P Tire Store Cm P Cm P subsection 
37-92(k) Transitional Housing C Cm Urban Agriculture P Veterinary Hospital Cm P P P Warehouse, Wholesale Cm P Accessory Alcohol Beverage Sales, Off-Premises C C P P Alcohol Beverage Sales, On-Premises C P P P Columbarium Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Subsection 
37.76(e) Crematorium Cm Cm Cm Cm Cm Drive-Through Cm P P P Live Entertainment P P P Subsection 
37-92(h) Parking Garage C P P Temporary Cargo Container Cm Cm Carnival/Fair C C C Revival Church C C C  
Key: P = Permitted Use; Cm = Conditional Use Permit, minor; C = Conditional Use Permit, major; (blank) = Not Permitted 
Table 3.4: Commercial Use Bulk and Yard Regulations Bulk and Yard 
Regulations Districts B-1 B-2 B-3 CBD B-4 Bulk Regulations Minimum District Size 3 Acres 3 Acres 3 Acres 3 Acres 3 Acres Minimum Lot Area SFD: 7,200 sf 
SFA: 6,000 sf 
2F: 8,000 sf 
Townhouse: 2,500 sf a 
Other: 10,000 sf MF =10 unit: 
20,000 sf 
MF 11-12 unit: 
1,700 sf 
MF 13-14 unit: 
1,600 sf 
MF 15-16 unit: 
1,500 sf 
MF 17+ unit: 
1,700 sf 
Other: 10,000 sf n/a n/a n/a Maximum Building Height 35 ft 35 ft 35 ft 100 ft 40 ft Maximum Commercial Square Footage 5,000 sf 10,000 sf n/a n/a n/a Minimum Yard Requirements Front Yard 20 ft 20 ft 25 ft n/a 25 ft Interior Side Yard SFD: 5 ft 
SFA: none 
Townhouse: none 
Other: 5 ft MF 1-story: 5 ft 
MF 2-story: 10 ft 
MF 3-story +: 20 ft 
Other: 5 ft n/a n/a 10 ft Corner Side Yard 20 ft 20 ft 20 ft n/a 20 ft Rear Yard 20 ft 10 ft c & d 10 ft c & d n/a 10 ft c & d a Not to exceed 4 attached dwellings b Not to exceed 8 attached dwellings c A rear yard abutting a publicly-dedicated alley need only be five feet (5') in depth d A rear yard abutting a lot in a residential or B-1 district shall have the same minimum depth as the abutting district  
Key: SFD = Single-Family Detached; SFA = Single-Family Attached; 2F = Two-Family; MF = Multi-Family 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,519, 10-28-14; Ord. No. 11,549, 3-10-15; Ord. No. 11,584, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 11,642, 1-12-16; Ord. No. 11,644, 1-26-16; Ord. No. 11,757, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 11,758, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 11,805, 9-26-17; Ord. No. 11,828, 2-27-18; Ord. No. 11,848, 4-24-18; Ord. No. 11,883, 10-23-18; Ord. No. 11,925, 3-26-19) 
Sec. 37-38. - Industrial use districts. 
(a)  I-1 Industrial business park district. The purpose of the I-1 industrial business park district is to permit the development of commercial and industrial uses on individual lots or within commercial or industrial parks, including buildings, roadways, storage yards, loading areas, parking facilities, open space, landscaping, utilities, and storm water management facilities. Whenever possible, uses shall be planned as a unified development with individual buildings and lots integrated into an overall harmonious design. The industrial business park district shall also protect commercial and industrial development against intrusive uses that are incompatible with it. 
(b)  I-2 Heavy industrial district. The I-2 heavy industrial district establishes locations within Monroe for existing and future medium to heavy intensity industrial uses. The I-2 district is intended for use by large manufacturing operations, heavy equipment facilities, construction and maintenance yards, fuel businesses and other basic intensive industrial activities normally found in an urban environment. Hazardous uses shall require environmental impact analyses and public review. 
Table 3.5: Industrial Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses Uses Districts Use 
Standards I-1 I-2   Adult Uses P P Subsection 37-92(a) Airport P P Animal Shelter P P Arts Studio P P Automobile/Vehicle Dealership P P Automobile Rental P P Automotive Repair, 
Minor P P Automotive Repair, 
Major P P Bar Cm Car Wash P P Cargo Terminal P P Caterer P P Contractor Storage Yard P P Correctional Facility C Craft Brewery Cm Dwelling, Owner/ 
Proprietor C Emergency Services P P Government Facility P P Hazardous Waste 
Disposal Facility C Hazardous Waste 
Incinerator C Hazardous Waste 
Processing Facility C Hazardous Waste 
Storage C Hazardous Waste 
Treatment C Heavy Sales, Rental and Storage P P Junkyard C Kennel P Cm Laboratory P P Maintenance/Repair Services P P Manufacturing, Heavy P Manufacturing, Light P P Microbrewery P P Mini-Warehouse P P Office P P Off-Premises 
Advertising Sign Cm Cm Parking Lot, 
Commercial P P Passenger Terminal P P Rail Yard P P Retail Sales 
Establishment P Retail Manufacturing P P Tattoo Parlor Cm Sewage Treatment 
Facility P Social Club/Lodge P Cm Solar farm P P Solid Waste Collection Facility C Solid Waste Compost Facility C C Solid Waste Transfer Station C Storage Yard, Outdoor P P Storage Yard, Vehicle P P Taxidermy P P Used Tire Stores Cm Warehouse 
Wholesale/Storage P P Accessory Alcohol Beverage Sales, On-Premises Cm Cargo Container Cm Cm Dwelling, Caretaker Cm Radio or Television 
Antennae/Towers 
(Commercial) P P Temporary Carnival/Fair C Revival Church C  
Key: P = Permitted Use; Cm = Conditional Use Permit, minor; C = Conditional Use Permit, major; (blank) = Not Permitted 
Table 3.6: Industrial Use Bulk and Yard Regulations Bulk and Yard Regulations Districts I-1 I-2 Bulk Regulations Minimum District Size 5 Acres 5 Acres Minimum Lot Area 10,000 sf 10,000 sf Maximum Building Height 35 ft 45 ft Minimum Yard Requirements Buffer Yard Requirements 25 ft 25 ft Front Yard 25 ft 25 ft Interior Side Yard 5 ft 10 ft Corner Side Yard 20 ft 20 ft Rear Yard 10 a & b 10 a & b a A rear yard abutting a publicly-dedicated alley need only be five feet (5') in depth b A rear yard abutting a lot in a residential or BX district shall have the same minimum depth as the abutting district  
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,584, 6-23-15; Ord. No. 11,704, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 11,757, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 11,883, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 37-39. - Special use districts. 
(a)  C campus district. The C institutional campus district is intended for large educational or medical campus developments to facilitate an orderly and efficient regulation process for these types of uses. The district establishes a process that is flexible enough to accommodate evolving changes and expansions in campus plans, and creates the proper transitions between campus activities and adjacent neighborhoods. Within the district, development will proceed in accordance with an approved campus master plan that relates to the adjacent districts, the community as a whole, and the needs of the institution. 
(b)  RF riverfront district. The purpose of the RF riverfront district is to establish development standards that will enhance redevelopment opportunities along the Ouachita River. The district is intended to encourage and promote the revitalization of the waterfront area, to protect and preserve appropriate areas for public use, and to maintain the unique characteristics of the area. 
(c)  OS open space/recreation district. The purpose of the OS open space recreation district is to provide a classification for parks located within neighborhoods; large regional parks and recreation facilities; and greenway corridors that provide connections between neighborhoods and public amenities such as cultural centers and large parks. OS districts may serve both active and passive recreation needs, and includes waterfront recreational activities. OS districts may also include certain ancillary commercial activities such as performance venues and concessions. 
Table 3.7: Special Districts Permitted and Conditional Uses Uses Districts C RF OS Use Standards   Adult Day Care, Commercial P Subsection 
37-92(c) Adult Day Care, Large P Subsection 
37-92(c) Adult Day Care, Small P Subsection 
37-92(c) Amphitheater/ 
Outdoor 
Performance 
Venue P P P Bar P Campground Cm Cemetery P Child Day Care, Commercial P Subsection 
37-92(c) Child Day Care, Large P Subsection 
37-92(c) Child Day Care, Small P Subsection 
37-92(c) Children's Residential Facility P Community Garden P Convalescent Center P Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P Dwelling, Single-Family Attached P Dwelling, 
Two-Family P Dwelling, Multi-Family P P Dwelling, Owner/Proprietor P Dwelling, Caretaker P P Educational Facility 
College/University P Educational Facility 
Elementary P Educational Facility 
Secondary P Educational Facility 
Vocational P Elderly Housing, Assisted Living P Elderly Housing, Continuing Care P Elderly Housing, Nursing Home P Elderly Housing, Retirement Housing P Emergency Services P P P Fairgrounds P Farmer's Market P P Fraternity/ 
Sorority 
House P Subsection 
37-92(e) Funeral Home/Mortuary Cm Golf Course/Driving Range P Government Facility P P Halfway House C Hospital P Hotel P House of Worship, Small P C Cm House of Worship, Large P C Laboratory P Library P P Cm Marina P P Off-Premises Advertising Sign Cm Office P P Medical/Dental Clinic P Museum P P P Park or Playground P P P Personal Services Establishment P P Public Pier P P Recreational Facility, Indoor P P Recreational Facility, Outdoor Cm P Restaurant/ 
Reception Facility Cm P Retail Goods Establishment P Stadium C C Substance Abuse Treatment Facility P Theater P P Transitional Housing C Urban Agriculture P Accessory Alcohol Beverage Sales, On-Premises C P C Clubhouse P P Columbarium Cm Subsection 
37.76(e) Live Entertainment P P P Subsection 
37-92(h) Medical Evacuation Heliport Cm Parking Garage P C  
Key: P = Permitted Use; Cm = Conditional Use Permit, minor; C = Conditional Use Permit, major; (blank) = Not Permitted 
Table 3.8: Special Districts Use Bulk and Yard Regulations Bulk and Yard Regulations Districts C RF OS Bulk Regulations Minimum Lot Area SFD: 7,100 sf 
SFA: 6,000 sf 
2F: 7,100 sf 
MF 3+ unit: 7,100 + 2,000 sf/unit 
Other: 7,100 sf n/a n/a Maximum Building Height 100 ft 35 ft 35 ft Minimum Yard Requirements Front Yard 20 ft 20 ft 10 ft Interior Side Yard SFD: 10 ft 
SFA: none 
Townhouse: none 
Other: 10 ft 
Dormitory 1-2 story: 25 ft 
Dormitory 3+ story: 50 ft 10 ft Corner Side Yard 20 ft 20 ft 10 ft Rear Yard 20 ft a & b 10 ft a & b 10 ft a A rear yard abutting a publicly dedicated alley need only be five feet (5') in depth b A rear yard abutting a lot in a residential or BX district shall have the same minimum depth as the abutting district  
Key: SFD = Single-Family Detached; SFA = Single-Family Attached; 2F = Two-Family; MF = Multi-Family 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,564, 4-28-15; Ord. No. 11,703, 8-9-16; Ord. No. 11,816, 12-27-17; Ord. No. 11,829, 2-27-18) 
Secs. 37-40-37-59. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENTS 

Sec. 37-60. - Planned unit development procedures. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these provisions is to encourage flexibility, innovation and variety in the development of land in order to promote its most appropriate use; to improve the design, character and quality of development; to facilitate the adequate and economic provision of streets, utilities and services; to achieve beneficial land use relationships with the surrounding area; to preserve the unique natural and scenic features of the landscape; and to preserve open space as development occurs. 
(b)  The following criteria represent the objectives of the planned district: 
(1)  Environmentally sensitive design that is of a higher quality than would be possible under the regulations otherwise applicable to the property. 
(2)  Diversification in the uses permitted and variation in the relationship of uses, open space and the setbacks in developments intended as cohesive, unified projects. 
(3)  Functional and beneficial uses of open space areas. 
(4)  Preservation of natural features of a development site such as ponds, lakes, creeks, streams, wetlands, animal habitats, etc. 
(5)  Creation of a safe and desirable living environment for residential areas characterized by a unified building and site development program. 
(6)  Rational and economically sound development in relation to public services. 
(7)  Efficient and effective traffic circulation, both within and adjacent to the development site. 
(8)  Creation of a variety of architectural styles and housing types compatible with surrounding neighborhoods to provide greater housing choice. 
(c)  Application of the districts. To enable the planned unit development (PUD) to operate in harmony with the plan for land uses and population density embodied in this article, the PUD is created as a special district, to be superimposed on the base districts contained in article III, and to be designated as a PUD on the zoning map. The housing types, minimum lot requirements, maximum height, minimum yard requirements and signage shall be determined by the requirements and procedures set forth in this article, which shall prevail over conflicting requirements of this ordinance or the subdivision ordinance of the City of Monroe. 
(d)  Minimum area. The minimum area for PUDs under this article shall be as follows: 
(1)  In residential districts three (3) contiguous acres; 
(2)  In all other zoning districts five (5) contiguous acres; 
(3)  In calculating the minimum area for a PUD district, the measurement shall not include the area of any dedicated street or alley. 
(e)  PUD application requirements. As outlined in subsection 37-130(h) of this ordinance, the PUD shall be processed in three (3) stages: conceptual review, preliminary plan and subdivision review, and final plan. The following outlines the requirements for each stage of PUD application: 
(1)  Conceptual review. This stage of processing is to allow the exchange of information between the proposed developer, planning and zoning staff, and all other applicable city agencies. As outlined in subsection 37-130(h)(4), each applicant is required to have a pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, and all other applicable city agencies, in connection with the preparation of the PUD application. The general characteristics of the proposal, evidenced schematically by sketch plans, shall be considered before submission of the PUD application. Thereafter, staff shall furnish the applicant with written comments from the pre-application conference, including appropriate recommendation to inform and assist the applicant prior to preparing the components of the PUD application. 
(2)  Preliminary plan. Upon completion of the pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, and after the recommendations from the conference have been made, an application may be filed for PUD on a preliminary basis. Materials pertaining to the preliminary plan must be submitted to planning and zoning staff at least three (3) weeks prior to the meeting of the planning commission at which the preliminary plan will be considered (See subsection 37-130(h)). The application for the preliminary plan shall include the following: 
a.  Site plan and supporting maps containing the following information: 
1.  Proposed lot lines. 
2.  Proposed location and floor area of all existing and proposed buildings, structures and other improvements, including maximum building heights. 
3.  Density of residential uses. 
4.  Location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, reserved, or otherwise used as common open space, public park, recreational areas, schools sites, and similar public and semi-public uses. 
5.  Existing and proposed circulation system of streets and pedestrian ways, including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading zones, major points of access to public rights-of-way, and ingress and egress to the development. Street standards shall be consistent with the minimum street standards for the city. 
6.  General landscape plan for non-residential areas. 
7.  Vicinity map of the area surrounding the site within a distance of at least one mile, at a scale of not less than 1"=500'. 
8.  Proposed treatment of the perimeter of the PUD, including materials and techniques used (i.e., fences, walls, and other landscaping). 
9.  Adequate drainage facilities for surface water, including storm sewers, gutters, paving, and the proper design of finished grades. 
10.  Any additional fiscal, traffic, or environmental information as required by the city to evaluate the character and impacts of the PUD. 
b.  The preliminary plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission, who will approve, approve conditionally, or reject the plan as per subsection 37-130(h) of this ordinance. 
(3)  Final plan. 
a.  Submission. After approval of the preliminary plan, application may be made for approval of the final plan. Application for the final plan shall not be made until substantial completion of the requirements of the approved preliminary plan, provided the final plan does not violate any provision of this ordinance and does not: 
1.  Involve a reduction of more than five per cent (5%) of the area reserved for common open space and/or usable open space. 
2.  Increase the floor area proposed for non-residential use by more than five per cent (5%). 
3.  Increase residential densities more than five per cent (5%). 
4.  Increase the total ground area covered by buildings by more than five per cent (5%). 
b.  Revisions. If the final plan is not in substantial compliance with the approved preliminary plan, the revisions shall require the same review and public hearing process required for approval of the preliminary plan. 
c.  Final site plan. The final site plan shall also serve as the official subdivision plat. This plat must conform to the subdivision ordinance of the city except as waived by the approved preliminary plan for the PUD. The plat shall contain proper dedications for public streets, utility easements, and all other public rights required by the preliminary plan. Approval by the planning commission of the final PUD shall be required before filing the plat with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court or issuance of building permits. The final site plan shall contain the following: 
1.  Lot lines. 
2.  Location and floor area of all existing and proposed buildings, structures, and other improvements, including maximum building heights, types of dwellings, and density per building type. All buildings shall be dimensioned with distances shown from clear reference points. 
3.  Location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be conveyed, dedicated, reserved, or otherwise used as common open space, public park, recreational areas, schools sites, and similar public and semi-public uses. 
4.  Existing and proposed circulation system of streets and pedestrian ways, including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading zones, major points of access to public rights-of-way, and ingress and egress to the development. Street standards shall be consistent with the minimum street standards for the city. 
5.  Existing and proposed circulation system of streets and pedestrian ways, including off-street parking areas, service areas, loading zones, major points of access to public rights-of-way, and ingress and egress to the development. Street standards shall be consistent with the minimum street standards for the city. 
6.  Final landscape plan shall be submitted, and no certificates of occupancy shall be issued until the landscaping is in place for all non-residential areas. 
7.  Detailed utility plans for sewer, water, electrical, street improvements, and other public improvements must be submitted and approved by the director of public works. The developer shall execute an agreement in proper form providing for the installation of such improvements prior to submission of the final plan to the planning commission. All utilities shall be placed underground. 
8.  Adequate drainage facilities for surface water, including storm sewers, gutters, paving, and the proper design of finished grades. 
d.  Amendments. Minor changes to the location, sizing, height, and siting of buildings and structures may be authorized administratively by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee without additional public hearing as per subsection 37-130(h)(10) of this ordinance. 
e.  Approval. The final plan shall be reviewed by the planning commission, who will approve, approve conditionally, or reject the plan as per subsection 37-130(h) of this ordinance. 
f.  Penalties. No plat of land within a PUD shall be transferred, sold, or agreed to be sold before such a plat of a subdivision has been approved by the planning commission and filed with the Ouachita Parish Clerk of Court. Whoever, owner or agent, who transfers, sells, or agrees to sell unrecorded lots shall pay a penalty of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each lot or parcel so transferred, sold, or agreed to be sold; and the description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties or from remedies herein provided. The city may enjoin such transfer, sale, or agreement by injunction brought in any court of competent jurisdiction or may recover the penalty by a civil action in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-61. - Special conditions for planned unit developments. 
    All planned unit development (PUDs) shall meet the requirements herein set forth and no final plan shall be approved that does not meet all of these requirements: 
(1)  Open space maintenance plan. The developer shall submit a legal instrument(s) setting forth a plan for permanent care and maintenance of open spaces, open recreational areas, community-owned facilities, and private streets. If the common area is to be maintained by the homeowner's association, the applicant shall file the following documents governing the association: 
a.  The homeowner's association shall be established before any residences are sold. 
b.  Membership in the association must be mandatory for each residential owner. 
c.  Open space restrictions must be permanent and not for a period of years. 
d.  The governing body of the association shall consist of owners of property in the PUD. 
(2)  Guarantees for open space preservation. Open space shown on the approved final plan shall not be used for the construction of any structures not shown in the final plan. 
(3)  District regulations. 
a.  Every PUD developed under these provisions shall comply with all of the regulations established herein for the district(s) in which the PUD is located unless the regulations have been waived by the planning commission approval or as otherwise stated in this ordinance. 
b.  PUDs shall be located with respect to major streets, highways, or other transportation facilities as to provide direct access while minimizing traffic along major streets in residential neighborhoods. 
c.  Commercial uses are limited to those set forth in the base district(s) in which the PUD is located. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-62. - Design standards for planned unit developments. 
    The following design standards shall apply to any planned unit development (PUD): 
(1)  Open space. 
a.  Required open space shall comprise at least thirty per cent (30%) of the total gross area of any residential PUD. 
b.  Within said thirty per cent (30%), one-half (1/2) of the same may be developed for planting, pedestrian connections, and landscape elements, or may remain in a natural state. The remaining one-half (1/2) shall be developed for active recreational uses. 
c.  Recreational facilities or structures and their accessory uses located in approved areas shall be considered open space. 
d.  Public dedications may not contribute to the open space requirement. 
(2)  Infrastructure. All public or private streets, paving, curbs, sidewalks, utilities, storm water, lights, and similar facilities shall be developed according to City standards, unless specifically modified by the city engineer. Waivers, variances or modifications to the private or public street standards, utilities, and other infrastructure through a planned unit development are not allowed. 
(3)  Spacing of buildings. The provisions for spacing of buildings as outlined in section 37-78 (supplementary regulations) shall apply to all PUDs that are maintained on a separate building site. 
(4)  PUD perimeters. Where PUDs adjoin public streets or lands with a different zoning classification, the installation and maintenance of a landscaped buffer area at such perimeter may be required. The detailed landscape plan for any such buffer required shall be part of the landscape plan filed in conjunction with the final plan. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-63. - Planned manufactured home communities. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards for development and maintenance of manufactured home communities pursuant to, and in compliance with, the procedures and regulations provided in this ordinance. It is intended that manufactured home communities be provided with necessary community services in a setting that provides a high quality of life for residents. 
(b)  District regulations. Every manufactured home community erected and maintained under the provisions of this section shall comply with all of the special regulations and conditions established by this ordinance for the districts in which the manufactured home community is located. 
(c)  Engineering requirements. Improvements required by these regulations shall be made in accordance with the specifications and under supervision of the city engineer, planning and zoning director, parish health officer, utility agencies and companies, and all other applicable authorities or agencies deemed appropriate by the planning and urban development director of the City of Monroe. 
(1)  Water and sewer service. All manufactured home communities shall be served by water and sewage systems that meet the requirements of the Ouachita Parish Health Department and all applicable state agencies and departments. The plumbing connections to each manufactured home site shall be constructed so that all lines are protected from freezing, accidental bumping, or from creating a nuisance or public health hazard. 
(2)  Storm drainage. All developed portions of the manufactured home community shall be served by adequate storm drainage facilities, designed and constructed to drain into natural watercourses or into the municipal storm water drainage system. Necessary facilities for drainage of roadways and for drainage of surface water in the park shall be installed in dedicated servitudes, and shall have such width or construction adequate for proper function and maintenance. 
(3)  Utilities. Utility service shall be provided to each building site. Subsurface utilities, including electric, telephone, cable TV and all other lines, shall be placed along streets within a dedicated right-of-way or along rear or side lines of mobile home sites or lots in servitudes provided for this purpose. 
(4)  Access and fire protection. A plan of safe ingress and egress to the property shall be included in the development plans for review and approval by the planning commission. This access plan shall include adequate access for fire and/or emergency vehicles to the property. 
(d)  Required improvements. 
(1)  Recreation areas. No less than eight per cent (8%) of the gross area of the manufactured home community shall be reserved and developed as recreational facilities, generally provided in a central location, or in larger communities, conveniently distributed in smaller sites. Recreation areas may include space for community buildings and community use facilities such as adult recreation areas, senior centers, playgrounds, and swimming pools. 
(2)  Service buildings. 
a.  One (1) or more service buildings shall be provided at such locations as to be reasonably accessible to residents of the park. Service buildings shall include space and separation for a park manager's office, storage of maintenance equipment and supplies, and recreation management. Service buildings shall also include space for tenant storage of outdoor equipment, furniture, and tools for inactive storage of such materials used seasonally or infrequently. 
b.  A minimum of ninety (90) cubic feet for general storage for each mobile home lot shall be provided on the lot or within one hundred feet (100') of the lot. No service building shall be located closer than twenty feet (20') to any manufactured home or other structure and shall not be placed over any utility or drainage servitude. 
c.  Any non-residential building such as a clubhouse, storage building, recreation building or facility, office or laundry, planned as an integral part of the manufactured home community shall be for the sole use of the occupants of the manufactured home community and shall be of a design and constructed of material that are in character with and compatible to the dwelling units placed in the manufactured home community. 
(3)  Common walks and private walks. 
a.  Common pedestrian walks shall be provided where pedestrian traffic is concentrated and where necessary for convenient access to recreation areas, service buildings, and other community use facilities. 
b.  Preferably, common pedestrian walks should be located though interior areas, removed from the vicinity of streets. 
c.  Common pedestrian walk standards shall be consistent with the minimum sidewalk standards for the city and shall be so designed in alignment and gradient as to promote safety, convenience, and appearance. 
d.  Private walks shall be provided to each manufactured home site from a common walk or paved street as from a paved driveway or parking space. Private walks shall be at least three inches (3") thick and three feet (3') wide. 
(4)  Tie-down requirements. Every mobile home approved for a manufactured home community under the provisions of this section shall be equipped with adequate foundations and tie-downs, intended to secure the units against movements, settling, and overturning for the protection of life and property. Frame, over-the-roof, or a combination of these methods, shall be mandatory to be installed as provided below. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any manufactured home unit until tie-down requirements have been met. 
a.  Number of tie-downs required. 
Table 4.1: Manufactured Housing Tie-Down Requirements Length of Frame Number of Ties Up to 30 feet 2 per side 30 feet to 50 feet 3 per side 50 feet to 70 feet 4 per side Over 70 feet 5 per side  
b.  Ground anchor specifications. 
1.  Anchors shall be bolted in concrete, screw auger or anchor driven or any other type manufactured and approved for use as a mobile home anchor. 
2.  All anchors shall be galvanized, high tensile steel, not less than five-eighths-inch ( 5/8 ") diameter, with a drop forged closed eye or any other approved method of anchorage. All anchors shall be not less than four feet (4') in length, installed to full depth according to manufacturers recommendations, with only the eye protruding above grade for connecting the tie-down system. 
3.  Connections to the mobile home I-beam frame shall be five-eighths-inch ( 5/8 ") or larger drop forged closed eye bolted through a hole drilled through the frame or by any other approved and adequate wrap-around, hook or any clamp method. 
4.  Not less than five eighths-inch ( 5/8 ") drop forged turnbuckles with closed eyes and screw pins shall be attached to the frame above and ground anchor below and securely tightened in place. Steel straps or cabled may be used in lieu of turnbuckles if they are of equal or greater strength and are securely tightened in place with a tensioning tool and clamped. 
5.  When concrete slabs, runners or strips are provided tie-downs may be set in the concrete slab, strip or runners, provided that such strips or runners are minimum of four inches (4") in thickness and reinforced with not less than 28-gauge wire mesh. Such strips or runners shall be a minimum of thirty inches (30") wide and not less than the length of the mobile home unit if tie-downs are to be set in the concrete slab. 
(5)  Illumination. Adequate lights shall be provided to illuminate streets, driveways, and pedestrian connections for the safe movement of vehicles and pedestrians at night. Such lights shall meet all requirements of section 37-75 of this ordinance. 
(6)  Landscaping. Lawn and ground covers shall be provided and maintained for all exposed ground surface not paved or covered with other solid materials, or in such areas as ravines or woods that are preserved in their natural state. Landscaping and screen planting shall be proved as necessary and outlined in chapter 19.5 of the Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
(7)  Required buffer protection. There shall be constructed and maintained on the manufactured home community property, minimum buffer protection as outlined in section 37-77 of this ordinance. 
(8)  Undedicated streets. All undedicated streets designed primarily for the use of residents living within the RMH district shall be constructed to conform to the following widths: 
Table 4.2: Undedicated Street Regulations Type of Street Minimum Width Requirement Entrance or Collector Streets With guest parking: 26 feet With no parking submitted: 24 feet All Other Streets With parking on one (1) side: 28 feet With no parking permitted: 20 feet  
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-64. - Gated communities. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide minimum standards for the development and maintenance of gated communities. The City of Monroe recognizes that gated communities may be appropriate in certain locations in certain limited circumstances such as planned unit developments and subdivisions. 
(b)  Requirements. Gated communities shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  [General provisions.] The general provisions of the planned unit development ordinance and other City Codes as they relate to development, streets, and utilities will apply to all such development. A vehicular turn around shall be provided at entry gates to allow vehicles that have been denied entry the ability to exit without having to backup. All plans concerning gated communities are subject to review and approval by the Monroe Fire Department. 
(2)  [Definitions.] The definition of a "subdivision," "planned unit development," and "street," as contained in the zoning and subdivision ordinances, will apply to all subdivisions, planned unit developments or streets, whether public or private. All streets within a gated community shall be private. 
(3)  [Plat depiction.] Plats for the planned unit development shall depict all fences, gates, private streets and alleys, and all utilities. 
(4)  Design and construction standards. Private streets shall conform to the same standards regulating the design and construction of public streets. These standards shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  City of Monroe street standards. 
b.  Street naming and addressing policy. 
c.  Streets excluded. The Monroe Planning Commission may deny the creation of any private street if in the commission's judgement the private street would negatively affect traffic circulation on public streets or impair access to property either on-site or off-site to the planned unit development, impair access to or from public facilities including schools, parks and libraries, or delay the response time of emergency vehicles. 
d.  Private street lot. Private streets and alleys must be constructed within a separate lot owned by the homeowners or property owners association. This lot must conform to the city's standards for public streets and alley rights-of-way. An easement covering the street lot shall be granted to the city providing unrestricted use of the property for utilities and the maintenance of same. This right shall extend to all utility providers operating within the city. The easement shall also provide the city with the right of access for any purpose related to the exercise of a governmental service or function, including but not limited to fire and police protection, inspection and code enforcement. The easement shall permit the city to remove any vehicle or obstacle within the street lot that impairs emergency access. 
e.  Construction and maintenance cost. The city shall not pay for any portion of the cost of constructing or maintaining a private street. 
f.  Plans and improvements. Developments proposed with private streets must submit to the city the same plans and engineering information required to construct public streets and utilities. Requirements pertaining to inspection and approval of improvements prior to the final plat approval shall apply. The city may periodically inspect private streets and require repairs necessary to ensure emergency access. All private traffic regulatory signs shall conform to the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices. 
(5)  [Gate installation.] Any gate installation must conform to the following provisions: 
a.  No gate shall be allowed on a public street. If a planned unit development is converted to a gated community, the dedicated rights-of-way must be revoked prior to the acceptance of a planned unit development. 
b.  All gate installations shall be approved by the Monroe Fire Department and the traffic engineering division prior to installation. The access code must be provided to the traffic engineering division who will provide the code to the Monroe Fire and Police Department and any other services that require access. The installation must be completed and tested prior to the city's acceptance of the planned unit development. 
c.  Emergency access may be provided by siren activation and key pad or another method as approved by the Monroe Fire Department. 
d.  The gate shall be delineated by standard traffic control devices (signs and permit markings) as determined by the traffic engineering division. 
e.  If the gate does not open properly and causes a back-up into the street, the traffic engineering division can cancel approval or take whatever other action is necessary to ensure proper access from the public roadway. 
f.  Gate designs may incorporate one or two gate sections to meet the required minimum gate width of twenty-four (24) feet. If the entrance will incorporate a median, guard shack, or similar structure that necessitates a divided gate arrangement, the gate widths may be reduced if approved by the Monroe Fire Department, but in no case shall any single gate or street pavement have a clear opening of less than eighteen (18) feet. 
g.  If a gate design incorporates any overhead obstruction, said obstruction must be a minimum of fourteen (14) feet above the finished road surface. 
h.  Approach and departure areas on both sides of a gated entrance must provide adequate setbacks and proper alignment to allow free and unimpeded passage of emergency vehicles through the entrance area. 
i.  All components of the gate system must be maintained in an approved operating condition, with all components services and maintained on a regular basis as needed to ensure proper gate operation. A proper power supply shall be maintained to all electrical and electronic components at all times. 
j.  Gates must release and open upon electrical power failure or equipment malfunction and remain open until the problem is resolved. 
k.  Failure to meet requirements. Each security gate regulated under this section will be subject to a performance test on a regular basis as determined by the Monroe Fire Department. Upon failure of a performance test, the security gate system shall be disabled and maintained in the open position until repaired, and shall not be placed back in service until tested and authorized by the Monroe Fire Department. 
l.  Owners responsibility. The person or corporation in control of the property is responsible for, and liable for, any violations of this section. This includes, but is not limited to, the developer, property owner, the homeowners or property owners association and its officers, if applicable, or others who may own or exercise control over the property. 
(6)  Homeowners or property owners association required. Planned unit developments developed with private streets and alleys must have a mandatory homeowners or property owners association which includes all property served by the private streets. The association shall own and be responsible for the maintenance of private streets and appurtenances. The association documents must establish a reserve fund for the maintenance of streets and other improvements. The association documents shall be reviewed and approved by the city attorney to ensure that they conform to this and other applicable city ordinances. The documents shall be filed of record prior to the approval of the final plat. Lot deeds must convey membership in the association and provide for the payment of dues and assessments required by the association. The association my not be dissolved without the prior written consent of the city. No portion of the association documents pertaining to the maintenance of the private streets and alleys and assessments therefore may be amended without he written consent of the city. 
(7)  City utilities. Water, sewer, drainage facilities, street lights and signs placed on the private street and alley lot shall be installed to city standards and dedicated to the city prior to approval of the final plat. All city regulations relating to infrastructure financing, developer cost participation and capital cost recovery shall apply to developments with private streets with the exception of those applying to street construction. 
(8)  Petition to convert to public streets. The homeowners or property owners association documents shall allow the association to request that the city accept private streets and alleys and the associated property as public streets and right-of-way upon written notice to all association members and the favorable vote of fifty-one (51%) per cent of the membership. However, in no event shall the city be obligated to accept said streets and alleys as public. Should the city elect to accept the streets and alleys as public, the city may inspect the private streets and assess the lot owners for the expense of needed repairs concurrent with the city's acceptance of the streets and alleys. The city will be the sole judge of whether repairs are needed. The city may also require, at the association's expense, the removal of guard houses, access control devices, landscaping or other aesthetic amenities located within the street lot. The association documents shall provide for the city's right to such assessment. Those portions of the association documents pertaining to the subject matter contained in this paragraph shall not be amended without the written consent of the city. 
(9)  Hold harmless. On the planned unit development final plat shall be language whereby the homeowners or property owners association, as owner of the private street and appurtenances, agrees to release, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, any governmental entity, and public utility for damages to the private street occasioned by the reasonable use of the private street by the city, governmental entity or public utility; for damages and injury (including death) arising out of the use by the city, governmental entity or public utility of any restricted access gate or entrance; and for damages and injury (including death) arising out of an use of the subdivision by the city, governmental entity or public utility. Further such language shall provide that all lot owners shall release the city, governmental entities and public utilities for such damages and injuries. The indemnification's contained in this paragraph apply regardless of whether or not such damages and injury (including death) are caused by the negligent act or omission of the city, governmental entity or public utility, or their representative officers, employees or agents. 
(10)  Sidewalks . Sidewalks shall be constructed in accordance with city standards for all lots adjoining streets and in other areas where pedestrian walkways are necessary. Sidewalk construction may be delayed until development of the lots. 
(11)  Drainage and storm sewers. 
a.  General requirements. All plats shall conform to the city's standards for drainage facilities. 
b.  Design of facilities. Design of storm sewer systems shall be in accordance with the city's standards for such systems. Materials and construction shall conform to the city's standard specifications. 
(12)  [Single entrance requirement.] Proposed planned unit developments shall have only one entrance into the development. 
(c)  Existing planned unit developments. 
(1)  Existing planned unit developments may be converted to gated communities if the following requirements are met: 
a.  The planned unit development has only one entrance into the development. 
b.  Seventy-five (75%) per cent of the property owners must approve the conversion to a gated community. 
c.  The home or property owners association will bear the expense of liability, installation and maintenance. 
d.  The gates must also have access for emergency vehicles. 
e.  Any dedicated rights-of-way will need to be revoked before the planned unit development is accepted. 
(2)  PUD application requirements as per subsection 37-130(h) will need to be followed to convert an existing planned unit development into a gated community. 
(Ord. No. 11,641, 1-12-16) 
Secs. 37-65-37-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 

Sec. 37-71. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to address the site improvements on a lot other than the principal building. This includes adequate public facilities, protection standards, exterior lighting regulations, accessory structures and uses, architectural projections into required yards, landscaping, and corridor design standards. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-72. - Adequate public facilities. 
    Land proposed for development must be served adequately by essential public facilities and services. Land will not be approved for development unless and until adequate public facilities exist or provision has been made for water facilities, wastewater facilities, drainage facilities, and transportation facilities necessary to serve the proposed development, whether such facilities are located within the property being platted or outside the site. This policy may be defined further and supplemented by other city ordinances. 
(1)  Conformance to plans. Proposed improvements should conform to the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and all applicable public facilities and capital improvements plans. 
(2)  Water. All platted lots must be connected to a public water system or properly permitted to ensure water for health and emergency purposes, including adequate fire protection. 
(3)  Wastewater. All platted lots must be served by an approved means of wastewater collection and treatment. 
(4)  Streets. All streets must provide a safe, convenient, and functional system for vehicular and pedestrian circulation and must be appropriate for the traffic characteristics and impacts of the proposed development. 
(5)  Drainage. Drainage improvements must accommodate potential runoff from upstream drainage areas, and be designed to prevent overloading the capacity of the downstream drainage system. The city engineer may require the phasing of development; the use of control methods such as retention, detention, or pumping systems; and/or the construction of off-site drainage improvements to mitigate the impacts of the proposed development. 
(6)  Phasing. The city may require the phasing of development or improvements to maintain current levels of service for existing public services and facilities, or for other reasons based upon maintaining the health, safety and general welfare of the city's inhabitants. 
(7)  Subdivision regulations. All subdivisions must comply with the City of Monroe Subdivision Regulations. 
(8)  Wetlands. Any development of lots located, or partially located, within the area subject to the Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. 1344, as amended, shall not be issued a development permit or building permit until a jurisdictional wetland determination has been completed and either of the following occurs: 
a.  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that there are jurisdictional wetlands present on the proposed development site, a Section 404 permit is required, and either a Section 404 permit or a letter of permission is issued by the Corps for the proposed development; or 
b.  The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determines that jurisdictional wetlands are not present on the proposed development site, and no Section 404 permit or letter of permission is required. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-73. - Protection standards. 
    All uses must be operated to comply with the performance standards described in this section below and all other relevant building, fire, and safety codes. In addition to these performance standards, all uses must be constructed, maintained, and operated to prevent negative impacts to the use and occupation of adjacent properties, including impacts from the emission or creation of noise, vibration, odor, radiation, fire, explosive hazards, or glare. Nothing in this section is intended to alter, change, modify or abrogate any authority granted exclusively to any state commission, or to exempt developers, property owners, or lessees from all other relevant regulations. These standards do not apply to construction sites. 
(1)  Noise. No activity or use may be conducted in a manner that generates a level of sound, which at any property line is in excess of the average intensity of street and traffic noise at that same boundary. 
(2)  Glare, heat and vibration. Any activity or the operation of any use that produces glare, heat, or vibration must be conducted so that no glare, heat, or vibration from the activity or operation is detectable from any point at the property line. 
(3)  Dust and air pollution. Dust and other types of air pollution, borne by the wind from sources such as storage areas, yards, conveying equipment and the like, within lot boundaries, must be kept to a minimum by appropriate landscaping, screening, sheltering, paving, fencing, wetting, collecting or other acceptable means. 
(4)  Radioactive, toxic and hazardous waste. The discharge of fluid and the disposal of solid radioactive, toxic, and hazardous waste materials must comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws and regulations governing such materials or waste. No operation that produces radioactive, toxic, and/or hazardous materials may commence without prior notice to the city as required by all local, state, and federal regulations. Radioactive, toxic and hazardous materials and waste must be transported, stored, and used in conformance with all applicable federal, state, and local laws. 
(5)  Odors. Any condition or operation that results in the creation of odors of such intensity and character as to be detrimental to the health and welfare of the public, or that interferes unreasonably with the comfort of the public, must be removed, stopped, or modified so as to remove the odor. 
(6)  Fire and explosive hazards. Materials that present potential fire and explosive hazards must be transported, stored, and used only in conformance with all applicable federal, state, and local regulations. 
(7)  Proper drainage. The operation of any use in any district must provide for adequate storm water drainage of the site and be designed to prevent overloading of the capacity of the drainage system. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-74. - Use of land and structures. 
(a)  Number of structures on a lot. Only one (1) principal building per lot is permitted in R-1, R-2, R-3, and B-1 zoning districts, unless approved as part of a planned unit development as described in Article IV of this ordinance. In all other districts, more than one (1) principal building may be erected on a single lot, provided that each structure complies with all yard and bulk requirements of the district as if it were a principal building on an individual lot. 
(b)  Frontage on a public or private street. All lots must front on a public or private street. 
(c)  Applicability of bulk and yard requirements. All structures erected after the effective date of this ordinance must meet the bulk and yard requirements for the zoning district in which the structure is located. No existing structure may be enlarged, altered, reconstructed or relocated in such a manner that conflicts with the requirements of the zoning district in which the structure is located, unless a variance (subsection 37-130(d)) is approved by the board of adjustment. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-75. - Exterior lighting. 
(a)  Light trespass and distraction. 
(1)  No exterior lighting may glare into, or upon, the neighboring properties or any residential premises. In addition, no exterior lighting may be used in any manner that could interfere with the safe movement of motor vehicles on public streets. 
(2)  Specifically, the following types of light trespass are prohibited: 
a.  Any light not designed for roadway illumination that produces direct or reflected glare that could disturb the operator of a motor vehicle. 
b.  Any light that may be confused with, or construed as, a traffic controls device, except as authorized by state, federal or local government. 
(b)  Unshielded light. The use of unshielded lighting, including incandescent light bulbs hung or strung on poles, wires, or other type of support, are prohibited, except on a temporary basis in areas where approved fairs, Christmas tree sales, or similar activities are held and only when such activities are taking place. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-76. - Accessory structures and uses. 
(a)  General application. 
(1)  All accessory structures and uses are subject to the requirements of this section and the requirements of subsection 37-78(c) (architectural projections) below. Additional accessory structures not regulated in this section may be regulated in subsection 37-78(c) (architectural projections). 
(2)  Only those accessory structures permitted by this section or subsection 37-78(c) (architectural projections) are permitted in required yards. 
(3)  The combined square footage of all detached accessory structures located in the rear yard are limited to no more than thirty per cent (30%) of the required rear yard. 
(4)  No accessory structure shall exceed the height of the main structure. 

FIGURE 5.1: ACCESSORY STRUCTURE ON CORNER LOT SETBACK 
(5)  No accessory structure shall occupy any part of the required front, side or side corner yard. 
(6)  In the case of a corner lot, when an accessory structure is located in the rear yard and the rear yard abuts the interior side and/or front yard of a lot, the accessory structure must be located five feet (5') from the rear yard line and may not be located in the front of the abutting structure's front or side building line. In such case, the accessory structure may encroach into the corner side yard but may not be located in front of the abutting structure's front or side building line. (See figure 5.1: accessory structure on corner lot setback) 
(7)  No detached accessory structure may be constructed prior to construction of the principal building to which it is an accessory. 
(8)  No detached accessory structure may be used for habitation. 
(b)  Accessibility ramp. 
(1)  Accessibility ramps are permitted in a required front, interior side, or rear yard. 
a.  Ramps within the front yard must be designed to minimize encroachment into the front yard. 
b.  Ramps may extend or project into a required rear yard without limitation. 
(2)  Weather protection may be provided over the ramp and landing provided there is a two-foot (2') distance between the awning or canopy and any lot line. 
(c)  Animal regulations commercial kennels. Commercial kennels for breeding of dogs and cats are subject to the following requirements: 
(1)  The minimum site area shall be three (3) acres; 
(2)  Run areas shall be completely surrounded by an eight foot (8') solid wall or fence; and 
(3)  Structures housing animals and outdoor animal runs shall be a minimum distance of fifty feet (50') from property lines abutting residential zones. 
(d)  Boathouses and docks. In those instances where the standards of all applicable ordinances of the city and applicable regulatory agencies have been met, boathouses and docks must meet the following conditions: 
(1)  There is a limit of one (1) each per building site. 
(2)  No boathouse or pier shall extend more than thirty feet (30') from a retaining wall into the public body of water. 
(3)  Boathouses and docks together shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet in total size. 
a.  The measurement of the square footage for a boathouse shall be the length times the width of the entire structure. 
b.  The measurement of the square footage for the dock shall be the length times the width of the entire dock. 
c.  The structure shall not include any kitchen, sleeping, and/or sanitary facilities. 
d.  Boathouses shall not exceed a single story, or fourteen feet (14'), in height. 
e.  All boathouses and docks shall be considered accessory structures. A primary structure must be present on the lot to which a boathouse and/or dock is attached. 
f.  No boathouse or dock shall be constructed so as to interfere with normal navigation or with responsible access to adjacent docks. 
(e)  Columbarium. A columbarium is permitted as an accessory structure to places of worship or cemeteries on lots with a minimum area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. No columbarium shall be closer than five feet (5') from any lot line. 
(f)  Fences, gates and walls. 
(1)  Reserved. 
(2)  No person shall construct or rebuild any fence without obtaining a fence permit from the planning and zoning office. The fee for the fence permit shall be available from the planning and zoning director's office and may be altered or amended only by the city council. 
(3)  General requirements. 
a.  No person shall erect or rebuild any fence, gate, retaining or free-standing wall that extends beyond the property line. 
b.  No person shall plant the trunk of any hedge closer than two feet (2') within any property line. 
c.  No person shall erect or rebuild any fence, gate, retaining or free-standing wall, or any combination thereof, in excess of eight feet (8'), except as allowed under subsection 37-76(f)(6) (exceptions) of this article. 
d.  The height of any fence, gate or wall shall be measured from the highest grade of the property along the fence, gate, wall or property line on the non-owners side. 
e.  All commercial and industrial uses shall have all enclosed outdoor storage and materials within a fenced area at least eight feet (8') in height. The fence shall be solid along the rear and side property lines and open along the front property lines. 
f.  All fences, gate or wall must be maintained in a clean, orderly and stable condition at the expense of the owner or lessee. 
g.  Materials. 
1.  Solid fences, gates and walls shall be constructed of the following materials: wood, brick, stone or rock, masonry, vinyl, hedges, or any combination thereof. (Solid fences should include "weep-holes" if applicable.) 
2.  Open fences or gates shall be constructed of ornamental iron, wood, woven wire, or chain link, or a combination ornamental iron and brick, stone/rock, or masonry. 
3.  Commercial and Industrial businesses may use metal as a fence material provided that: 
  Any exposed edges with the exception of the bottom of the fence be trimmed with factory made accessory trim with hemmed edges. 
  It is only allowed in B-3, General Business/Commercial; B-4, Heavy Commercial District; I-1, Commercial/Industrial Business Park District; and I-2 Heavy Industrial/Manufacturing Districts 
(4)  Location. 
a.  All residential and B-1 districts. 
1.  Any solid fence, gate, divisional, retaining, or free-standing wall or hedge not over thirty-six inches (36") in height and fences at least fifty per cent (50%) open and not over forty-two inches (42") in height may be erected or rebuilt along the front yard boundaries of a lot or yard in a residential or B-1 district, except as limited in other sections of this article. 
2.  No chain link fence shall be erected or rebuilt in any required front or side corner yard in any residential or B-1 district that exceeds five feet (5') in height. 
3.  Any fence, gate, divisional, retaining, or free-standing wall or hedge not over eight feet (8') in height in a residential or B-1 district may be erected or rebuilt along the side or rear yard boundaries, except in the line of sight clearance area. 
b.  Non-residential districts. 
1.  Any fence, gate, divisional, retaining, or free-standing wall or hedge not to exceed eight feet (8') in height may be erected or rebuilt along any boundaries of a lot or yard in non-residential districts, excluding B-1 districts, except as limited in other sections of this article. 
2.  Any fence, gate, divisional, retaining, or free-standing wall or hedge constructed on vacant property may be allowed, but only for recreational or security purposes, and only at the discretion of the zoning administrator. 
(5)  Prohibited fences. 
a.  The installation of an electronically charged fence is prohibited, with the exception of invisible dog fences. 
b.  No barbed wire or razor wire fence shall be erected or maintained, except that not more than four (4) strands of horizontal wire may be strung in the top of chain link fences for security purposes on land zoned B-4, I-1, I-2, or C (campus), provided that the lowest strand of wire is a minimum of six feet (6') above the ground. 
c.  Temporary fences. Land under development may be surrounded by a construction fence or a temporary chain link fence up to seven feet (7') in height and allowed for a specified period of time as a temporary fence at the discretion of the zoning administrator, upon application. Gates into the fence enclosure may be located at the discretion of the zoning administrator, upon application. 
(6)  Height and location exceptions. 
a.  The zoning administrator at his/her discretion may, after finding the circumstances meet the following criteria, consider exceptions to the location and height requirements of a fence: 
1.  That the adjacent property owner will not be adversely affected; 
2.  That pedestrian access will not be hampered, and; 
3.  The line of sight clearance area will be clear. 
b.  For location exceptions: On through lots; 
c.  For height exceptions: 
1.  Recreational fences and walls such as those surrounding tennis courts, baseball fields, driving ranges and other similar uses may exceed eight feet (8') to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community. 
2.  In the event of a use that is particularly noxious or detrimental to environmental or aesthetic values, it may deemed necessary for the general health, safety and welfare of the community to erect a fence around commercial or industrial uses higher than the eight feet (8') presently allowed by ordinance. 
(7)  Electronic theft deterrent device. The construction and use of electric theft deterrent devices shall be allowed in the city only as provided in this section, subject to the following standards: 
a.  Unless otherwise specified herein, electric theft deterrent devices shall be constructed or installed in conformance with the specifications set forth in International Electro Technical Commission (IEC) Standard No. 60335-2-76. 
b.  Electrification: 
i.  The energizer for electric theft deterrent devices must be driven by a commercial storage battery not to exceed twelve (12) volts DC. The storage battery is charged primarily by a solar panel. However, the solar panel may be augmented by a commercial trickle charger. 
ii.  The electric charge produced by the fence upon contact shall not exceed energizer characteristics set forth in paragraph 122.108 of the IEC code. 
c.  Perimeter fence or wall: 
i.  No electric theft deterrent devices shall be installed or used unless it is completely surrounded by a non-electrical fence or wall that is not less than six feet (6'). 
d.  Location: Electric theft deterrent devices shall be permitted in B-4-heavy commercial district, I-1-industrial business park district and I-2-heavy industrial district (uses with outdoor storage). 
e.  Height: Electric theft deterrent devices shall be no taller than eight (8') feet. 
f.  Warning signs: Electric deterrent devices shall be clearly identified with warning signs that read: "Warning-Electric Fence" at intervals of not less than sixty (60') feet. 
g.  Electric theft deterrent devices shall require a fence permit and any other permit required by the city such as an electrical permit. 
h.  It shall be unlawful for any person to install, maintain, or operate an electric theft deterrent device in violation of this section. 
(g)  Mechanical equipment. 
(1)  Ground-based mechanical equipment including, but not limited to, heating, ventilating and air-conditioning (HVAC) units, swimming pool equipment and back-up electrical generators, may be located in the interior side or rear yard but must be located at least five feet (5') from a rear lot line and three feet (3') from an interior side lot line, where at least two feet (2') of that distance remains open to the sky. Ground-based mechanical equipment is prohibited in the front or side corner yard. 
(2)  Any roof-mounted mechanical equipment must be set back at least six feet (6') from any wall of the building to permit safe access to the roof. 
(h)  Outdoor sales, storage and display. 
(1)  Outdoor sales and display. Retail goods establishments and motor vehicle dealerships are allowed to have outdoor sales and display of merchandise, by either a storeowner or occupant, outside of the store and within the same lot under the following conditions: 
a.  No sales and display is permitted in any public right-of-way or located so as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
b.  No sales and display is permitted in a required yard for retail goods establishments, motor vehicle dealerships are exempt. 
c.  No required parking areas may be used as an outdoor sales and display area. 
d.  The outdoor sales and display of automobile parts, such as tires, is prohibited. 
e.  Ice and propane storage machines must be placed against the exterior of the principal commercial building and cannot encroach into any public right-of-way or into any required yard. 
f.  All other vending machines, such as DVD vending machines and coin converter machines, must be located inside the principal building. 
(2)  Outdoor storage. The following uses are allowed to have outdoor storage: nursery, including the growing of plants in the open, heavy sales, rental and service, motor vehicle dealership and rental establishment, motor vehicle service and repair (minor or major), light and heavy-manufacturing, outdoor storage yards and contractor yards. These uses are permitted outdoor storage under the following conditions: 
a.  No outdoor storage is permitted in any public right-of-way or located so as to obstruct pedestrian or vehicular traffic. No outdoor storage is permitted in a required front yard. 
b.  All manufacturing, assembly, repair or work activity must take place inside an enclosed building. This does not apply to heavy industrial uses that are typically conducted outside or have an outdoor component. 
c.  No required parking area may be used as an outdoor storage area. 
d.  No materials stored or displayed outdoors may be of a greater height than that of the required screening, with the exception of storage of construction equipment. 
e.  All outdoor storage must comply with the screening requirements of section 37-77. 
(i)  Swimming pools. 
(1)  Swimming pools may not be located in the required front or side yard abutting a public street. Swimming pools may be located within a required rear or side yard provided the pool is not located closer than five feet (5') to a rear or interior side lot line. 
(2)  Every swimming pool of five thousand (5,000) gallon capacity or greater must be protected by a safety fence of at least six feet (6') in height. A walk space at least three feet (3') in width must be provided between the pool and the protective fence. 
(j)  Solar panels. 
(1)  Roof-mounted solar panels should be placed in a location least visible from the public street; however, this does not prohibit the installation of solar panels on a roof that may be visible when that exposure, particularly southern exposure, is the most viable location. When feasible, solar panels must be integrated into the surface as an architectural feature. 
(2)  Solar panels must be mounted to minimize glare onto adjacent properties. 
(3)  A solar panel is considered a permitted appurtenance and is not subject to the building height limitations of the district. 
(k)  Cargo containers. 
(1)  Cargo containers may be placed, used, allowed or maintained on property on a temporary basis for additional storage to support seasonal events or for the duration of a construction project. Proposed length of time shall be approved by the planning commission. 
(2)  Cargo containers may not be placed, used, allowed or maintained on property where permitted, unless there is a legal primary use located on the site. 
(3)  Cargo containers shall not be stored in a manner that impedes access to public rights-of-way, utility or drainage easements or adjacent structures and buildings. The cargo container(s) shall not block, obstruct, or reduce in any manner any required exits, windows, vent shafts, parking spaces and/or access driveways. 
(4)  Cargo containers shall not be used for human habitation or for commercial business purposes. 
(5)  Cargo containers shall not be used to store hazardous materials in violation of any local, state or federal requirements. 
(6)  No signage shall be allowed on any cargo container. 
(7)  Cargo containers shall not be stacked on top of each other or on another structure. 
(8)  Containers shall be prohibited from having windows, heating and cooling, plumbing, or multiple entrances. Cargo containers may include passive systems to provide appropriate ventilation. 
(9)  Cargo containers shall not contain any holes, peeling paint, rust, damage or structural modifications and shall be painted a non-reflective neutral color that is compatible with the primary structure or to blend in with the surrounding environment. 
(10)  Nothing should be stored or stacked on top of any permitted container. 
(11)  Containers shall be screened. Acceptable screening features include landscaping, terrain, existing structures, exterior architectural enhancements or a combination of these features. 
(12)  Cargo containers require a minor conditional use permit. 
(13)  Location: 
  The rear or other non-conspicuous areas of the site. 
  The containers shall not be located within the front yards of the site or high visibility areas from the public right-of-way. 
  Containers may not occupy any required off-street parking spaces, loading/unloading areas or fire lanes. 
  Parking spaces may be used for temporary storage in commercial zones for construction projects and to support seasonal events provided the amount of spaces is not more than ten (10) per cent of the required parking spaces for the sponsoring business or five (5) per cent of the overall spaces within a commercial center containing multiple tenants. Cargo container(s) may not be placed within any designated landscape or storm water facility. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,590, 7-28-15; Ord. No. 11,757, 2-28-17; Ord. No. 11,810, 11-28-17; Ord. No. 11,860, 6-12-18) 
Sec. 37-77. - Buffer protection and screening. 
(a)  Purpose. Landscaped buffers are required to be provided and maintained when certain land uses are adjacent to, or directly across from each other in order to protect uses from the traffic, noise, glare, trash, vibration, and odor likely to be associated with a more intensive land use. Landscaped buffers are also required to conserve the values of land and buildings and to provide adequate light and air. 
(b)  Buffer and screening requirements. Buffering shall be provided in accordance with the following requirements: 
Table 5.2: Buffer Zone Requirements Use Adjacent to R-1, R-2 & R-3 Adjacent to R-4 & B-1 Adjacent to B-2 or B-3 Adjacent to B-4, I-1, I-2 Multi-family Residential 1 B NA A A Institutional/Government and Public Service Facilities B C C C Business/Commercial A C NA NA Industrial and Major Shopping Centers A B B NA 1 Multi-family shall include the following uses: townhouses, apartments, congregate housing, lodging, boarding houses and manufactured housing communities.  
Table 5.3: Description of Required Buffer Zones Buffer Zone Minimum 
Width Screen Plant Materials A 25 ft 8 ft 
Solid Fence Combination of dense plant materials and fencing/walls to create an opaque screen B 15 ft None Combination of plant materials and groundcover C 8 ft None Combination of plant materials and groundcover  
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-78. - Supplemental height, yard, and open space regulations. 
(a)  Height exceptions. The height limits for each zoning district shall not apply to the following: church spires, belfries, cupolas, mechanical penthouses or appurtenances, domes not use for human habitation, chimneys, water tanks, ventilators, skylights, solar panels, parapet walls, cornices. 
(b)  Supplementary yard regulations. 
(1)  Front yard depth. In any residential district, any building site lying between two (2) building sites having dwellings erected on them shall have a front yard equal in depth at least to the average depth of the front yards of the adjacent building sites; provided, however, that no front yard shall be less than twenty feet (20') in depth, and no front yard shall be required to be more than thirty per cent (30%) of the depth of the building site. 
(2)  Minimum side yard widths. In any district where side yards are not required by the district regulations, if side yard is provided it shall have a width of at least five feet (5'). 
(3)  Corner building sites. In any district, a corner building site having to its rear a building site with the potential of facing toward the intersecting or side street shall provide on the intersecting or side street side a side corner yard having a width of at least twenty feet (20'); however, this regulation shall not be applied to reduce the buildable width of the corner lot to less than thirty feet (30'). 
(4)  Major street lines. Front yard depth and, in the case of a corner building site, side corner yard width shall be measured from the current or future street right-of-way line of a major street where such line has been established and where such major street follows the general direction of, and includes the right-of-way contained in, an existing street on which said building abuts. 
(c)  Architectural projections into required yards. 
(1)  Every part of a required yard shall be open and unobstructed from the ground to the sky except for permitted accessory structures for the ordinary projections of sills, belt courses, cornices, buttresses, eaves, and similar architectural features, provided that such projections shall not extend more than two feet (2') into any required yard. 
(2)  Open fire escapes may extend into any required yard not more than three and one-half feet (3.5'). 
(3)  Open-air carports and patio covers, when attached to the main dwelling unit may occupy any required yard under the following circumstances: 
a.  The carport is no closer than five feet (5') to the side or rear property line; and/or 
b.  The carport is no closer than ten feet (10') to the street right-of-way line in a R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, and RMH district. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-79. - Off-street parking and loading requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The off-street vehicle parking, bicycle parking and loading regulations of this ordinance are intended to provide accessible, attractive, secure and well-maintained off-street parking and loading areas, provide the appropriate number of spaces in proportion to the demands of the proposed use, increase public safety by reducing congestions of public streets, and encourage the use of alternative modes of transportation. 
(b)  General. Off-street parking and loading facilities shall be provided in compliance with this section whenever any building or use is erected, altered, enlarged, converted or otherwise increased in size or capacity. The provision and maintenance of the off-street parking and loading facilities herein required shall be the joint responsibility of the operator and/or owner of the use and the owner of the property or structure on which the use requiring off-street parking and loading facilities are located. 
(1)  Existing facilities. The existing number of off-street vehicle and bicycle parking and loading spaces shall not be reduced below the minimum requirements of this section. 
(2)  Provision of additional vehicle spaces. 
a.  Nothing in this section prevents the voluntary provision of additional off-street vehicle and bicycle parking spaces above that required by this ordinance. There is no limit on the number of bicycle parking spaces that may be provided. 
b.  In an effort to limit the amount of impervious surface associated with development, the maximum number of vehicle parking spaces shall be one hundred twenty-five per cent (125%) of the number of required parking spaces. Structured parking facilities are exempt from this maximum. 
c.  Where a use exceeds the minimum number of vehicle spaces required by subsection 37-79(d), the area used for additional spaces must be paved with semi-pervious material, such as permeable pavers, porous asphalt, porous concrete, grass-crete, reinforced grass, or gravel-crete. 
(3)  Prohibition on use of parking spaces. The sale, repair, dismantling or servicing of any vehicles, equipment, materials or supplies, or the display of goods on off-street parking areas is prohibited, unless otherwise permitted by this ordinance. 
(4)  Shared parking facilities. Off-street parking spaces for separate uses may be provided collectively for two (2) or more uses with different hours of operation in order for each use to meet its minimum off-street parking requirements. 
a.  Authorization. 
1.  The director of planning and zoning or a designee is authorized to approve shared parking arrangements for uses with different hours of operation. 
2.  The director of planning and zoning or his/her designee may permit parking required for one use to be supplied by the off-street parking spaces provided for another use if he/she determines that the uses or activities will have peak parking demands at different periods of the day or week. 
3.  In order to approve a parking plan for shared parking, the director of planning and zoning or designee must find, based on competent evidence provided by the applicant, that there is no substantial conflict in the principal operating hours of the uses for which the sharing of parking is proposed. 
4.  A request for approval of a shared parking arrangement must be accompanied by such information determined by the director of planning and zoning or his/her designee to be necessary to evaluate the peak parking demand characteristics or difference in hours and/or days of operation, including, but not limited to, a description of the uses and their operational characteristics, a site plan, and a parking plan that justifies the reduction in parking requested. 
5.  Once all information deemed necessary by the Director of Planning and Zoning or his/her designee to evaluate the shared parking arrangement has been received, approval (with or without conditions) or denial from the director of planning and zoning will occur within fifteen (15) days. 
b.  Specifications for shared parking. 
1.  The use of such facility by each user does not take place at the same hours during the same days of the week. 
2.  The shared parking facility must be located within three hundred feet (300') of both uses. 
3.  All other location and design requirements of this article are met. 
c.  Shared parking agreement. 
1.  The users of the shared parking facility must submit a written, notarized agreement to share parking facilities. A copy of the notarized agreement must be filed with the planning and zoning office. 
2.  Shared parking agreements are binding upon applicants and their successors. Shared parking privileges remain in effect only as long as the agreement, binding on all parties, remains in force. If a shared parking agreement lapses or is no longer valid, then parking must be provided as otherwise required by this article. 
3.  Pursuant to the same procedure and subject to the same limitations and requirements by which the parking plans was approved and recorded, any parking plan may be amended or withdrawn, either partially or completely, if all land and structures remaining under the parking plan comply with all requirements of this section. 
(c)  Computation of parking and loading requirements. 
(1)  Where multiple uses with different parking requirements occupy the same structure or lot, the required vehicle and bicycle parking and loading spaces is the sum of the requirements for each use computed separately, unless otherwise permitted by this ordinance. 
(2)  A fraction of less than one-half (1/2) is disregarded, and a fraction of one-half (1/2) or more is considered one (1) parking or loading space. 
(3)  For uses where patrons or spectators occupy benches, pews or open floor areas used for service, each twenty-four (24) linear inches of benches, pews or permanent seating is counted as one (1) seat for the purpose of determining the requirement for the required number of parking and loading spaces. 
(4)  Parking or loading spaces required on a public use floor area basis is based on the total floor area accessible to the public. This excludes areas such as locker rooms, storage rooms and similar functions that are accessible only to employees. Public use floor area includes seating areas in restaurants, the entire bar area, and all public waiting areas. When a use includes both public use areas and private offices, the office areas are not considered part of the public use area calculations but must be calculated separately. 
(d)  Required off-street vehicle parking spaces. The off-street parking spaces required for each use permitted by this ordinance shall not be less than that found in table 5.4. For uses not mentioned in this section, the director of planning and zoning or his/her designee shall determine the requirements for off-street parking and loading facilities. The determination shall be based upon the most comparable use listed, AASHTO or ITE standards, and/or the specific needs of the development as determined by the city. 
Table 5.4: Off-Street Vehicle Parking Requirements Use Number of Parking Spaces Required Adult Use 3 spaces/1,000 sf GFA Airport 5 spaces/1,000 sf GFA Art Gallery 2 spaces/1,000 sf GFA Art Studio 4 spaces/1,000 sf of public use area Auditorium/Arena 1 space/6 seats Automobile Vehicle Dealership 2 spaces/1,000 sf of indoor sales area Automotive Repair 2 spaces/service bay Automobile Vehicle Dealership 2 spaces/1,000 sf of indoor sales area Automobile Vehicle Rental 2 spaces/1,000 sf of office and public waiting area Bar 1 space/100 sf GFA Bed and Breakfast 1 space/guest room plus 2 spaces/dwelling unit Boarding House 1 space/4 rooms Caterer 1 space/1,000 sf GFA Cemetery 1 space/20,000 of GFA plus 1 space/4 chapel seats plus 3 spaces/1,000 sf of office Community Center 4 spaces for the first 1,000 sf plus 3 spaces/each additional 1,000 sf GFA Contractor Storage Yard 3 spaces/1,000 sf storage area and public use area Convalescent Center 1 space/2 rooms Correctional Facility 2 spaces/20 inmates of rated inmate capacity Day Care Center, Adult or Child 2 spaces/1,000 sf GFA Dwelling, Single-Family 2 spaces/dwelling unit Dwelling, Two-Family 2 spaces/dwelling unit Dwelling, Townhouse 2 spaces/dwelling unit Dwelling, Three-Family 1.5 spaces/dwelling unit Dwelling, Four-Family 1.5 spaces/dwelling unit Dwelling, Multi-Family Efficiency units; 1 space/unit 
One bedroom units; 1.5 spaces /unit 
Two bedroom units; 1.5 spaces/units 
Three or more bedroom units; 2.5 spaces/unit Dwelling, Owner/Proprietor 1 space/dwelling unit plus 2 spaces/1,000 sf commercial area Elderly Housing, Retirement Housing 1 space/dwelling unit Elderly Housing, Nursing Home .25 space/dwelling unit Elderly Housing, Assisted Living .5 space/dwelling unit Elderly Housing, Continuing Care To be calculated based on the type of facility or combination of facilities provided above Educational Facility, Secondary 4 spaces/classroom plus 3 spaces/1,000 sf of office Educational Facility, Elementary 2 spaces/classroom Educational Facility, 
University and Vocational 5 spaces/classroom plus 3 spaces/1,000 sf of office Financial Institution 2 spaces/1,000 sf GFA plus 3 stacking spaces/drive-through window Food/Beverage Processing 3 spaces/1,000 sf manufacturing area plus 2 spaces/1,000 sf office Fraternity/Sorority House 2 spaces/bedroom Funeral Home/Mortuary 1 space/4 chapel seats + 1 space/300 sf of office Gas Station 2 spaces/pump plus 3 spaces/1,000 sf of retail area plus 2 spaces/accessory motor vehicle service and repair plus 4 stacking spaces/car wash bay Group/Community Home 1 space/3 residents Halfway House 1 space/4 occupants (rated capacity) plus 1 space/300 sf of office Heavy Sales, Rental and Storage 3 spaces/1,000 sf GFA plus 1 space/1,000 sf of outdoor sales and display area Hospital 1 space/room Hotel/Motel 1 space/guest room House of Worship 1 space/50 sf gross floor area without fixed seats used for assembly purposes plus 1 space/every 3 seats Independent Living Facility 1 space/dwelling unit Library 1 space/300 sf GFA Manufacturing 1 space/1,000 sf GFA Manufactured Housing 2 space/dwelling unit Marina 1 space/2 slips Medical/Dental Clinic 1.5 spaces/medical exam room Mini-Warehouse 1 space/25 storage units Mixed-Use Development Sum of the required spaces for the various uses computed separately Museum 1 space/300 sf GFA Office 1 space/300 sf GFA Personal Services Establishment 1 space/300 sf GFA Pet Day Care 2 spaces/1,000 sf GFA Pet Care Facility 1 space/350 sf GFA Pet Grooming 1 space/350 sf GFA Public Works or Emergency Services 2 spaces/1,000 sf of office and public use area Reception/Banquet Hall 1 space/200 sf of GFA Recreational Facility, Indoor Bowling Alley: 2 spaces/lane 
Movie theater: 1 space/4 seats plus 1 space/6 seats after 1 st 400 
Pool Hall: 1 space/100 sf GFA Recreational Facility, Outdoor 3 spaces/1,000 sf GFA including all outdoor areas Rehabilitative/Residential 
Care Center 1 space/4 rooms Residential Care Facility 1 space/4 residents Restaurant, Carry-Out 
and Fast-Food 2 spaces/400 sf GFA plus 3 stacking spaces for drive-through lane Restaurant, Full-Service 2 spaces/400 sf GFA Restaurant, Specialty 1 space/400 sf GFA plus 3 stacking spaces for drive-through lane Retail Goods Establishment 1 space/300 sf GFA Retail Manufacturing 1 space/300 sf GFA retail plus 1 space/1,000 sf manufacturing Shopping Center Under 500,000 sf GFA: 2 spaces/1,000 sf gross leasable area500,000 sf or more GFA: 4 spaces/1,000 sf gross leasable area Social Club/Lodge 1 space/300 sf GFA Tattoo Parlor 2 spaces/1,000 sf of public use area Veterinary Hospital 1 space/350 sf GFA Warehouse 1 space/20,000 sf of warehouse plus 2 spaces/1,000 sf office Wholesale Goods Establishment 1 space/20,000 sf of warehouse plus 2 spaces/1,000 sf office plus 2 spaces/1,000 sf public use area GFA = Gross Floor Area  
(e)  Maintenance. Off-street parking facilities shall be constructed, maintained and operated in accordance with the following specifications: 
(1)  Drainage. 
a.  Off-street parking facilities must be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion resistant material in accordance with applicable city standards. 
b.  Any new surface parking lot with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces or additions to existing parking lots of twenty-five (25) or more vehicle parking spaces must be designed to filter or store the first inch of rainwater during each rain event. This can be accomplished through the use of pervious paving, rain gardens, bio swales, detention areas, constructed wetlands, and other methods deemed appropriate by the city engineer. Where installed, detention areas should be appropriately designed and located to filter, store and convey the expected storm water flows from surrounding paved areas. 
c.  Off-street parking areas must be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee. A minimum of one (1) litter receptacle must be included in any parking lot. 
(2)  Surfacing. 
a.  All surface parking lots must be paved with a durable, all-weather material such as concrete or asphalt, or a semi-pervious material such as permeable pavers, porous asphalt, porous concrete, grass-crete or gravel-crete, or a similar surface. 
b.  All single-family and two-family dwellings are permitted to construct driveways that consist of two (2) concrete wheel strips, each of which is at least eighteen inches (18") wide and at least twenty feet (20') long. A permeable surface, such as turf, must be maintained between such wheel strips. 
c.  Shells, gravel, crushed stone, and bare earth paving are permitted paving materials only in the OS (open space district). 
(3)  Wheel guards and curbs. Wheel stops and curbing must be provided to prevent vehicles from damaging or encroaching upon and adjacent parking or loading space, sidewalk, landscaped area or parking lot island, fence, wall or building. Within non-residential or mixed-use development parking lots, box curbs at least six inches (6") in height are required. In some cases, where deemed appropriate by the director of planning and zoning or his/her designee, earth mounds not exceeding two feet (2') in height may be used. 
(4)  Striping. Off-street parking areas must be marked by painted or paved lines maintained in clearly visible condition, curbs or other means to indicate individual spaces. Signs or markers should be used as necessary to insure efficient and safe circulations within the lot. Vehicle parking spaces for handicapped persons must be clearly identified with the appropriate signage and striping, regardless of plant growth or other conditions. 
(5)  Lighting. Parking lot lighting must comply with section 37-75 of this ordinance. Adequate lighting must be provided for off-street parking spaces that are to be used at night. All lighting must be arranged to eliminate glare on residential property by location of light fixtures or use of fixtures designed to eliminate direct view of luminaries in fixtures from residential property. 
(6)  Landscaping requirement. All parking lots shall be landscaped in accordance with chapter 19.5, landscape requirements, of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
(f)  Required bicycle parking spaces. 
(1)  Where off-street parking facilities are provided, the number of bicycle parking spaces must be provided as required by table 5.5. 
a.  All uses listed within table 5.5 are required to provide short-term bicycle parking spaces, which are areas where bicycles will be left for short stops, requiring a high degree of convenience (close proximity to destination). 
b.  Certain uses listed within table 5.5 require a per centage of the required bicycle parking to provide long-term bicycle parking spaces, where bicycles will be left for longer periods of time and thus require a safe and weatherproof storage area, including racks in covered areas, lockers, storage rooms, and/or fenced areas with restricted access. 
(2)  In all cases where bicycle parking is required, a minimum of two (2) bicycle spaces is required. 
(3)  After the first thirty (30) required bicycle parking spaces are provided, additional bicycle parking spaces are required at one-half (1/2) space per unit of measure listed in table 5.5. 
(4)  When a use is exempt from vehicle parking requirements by the section, the use is also exempt from bicycle parking requirements. If a use exempt from vehicle parking provides parking, bicycle parking, as required by this section, is also required. 
(5)  The following reductions in the number of vehicle parking spaces are permitted when bicycle parking and facilities are provided. An applicant may only use one (1) of these two (2) options. 
a.  A non-residential use may use up to two (2) required vehicle parking spaces as space for bicycle parking. The area equivalent to two (2) vehicle parking spaces must be used for bicycle parking. 
b.  Where a non-residential use provides shower facilities for use by bicyclists, a reduction of up to two (2) vehicle parking spaces is permitted. The area of vehicle parking spaces must be used for bicycle parking. 
(6)  Shower and locker facilities for bicyclists are encouraged for offices and government offices, university and vocational school facilities, hospitals and industrial uses over twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet in gross floor area. 
a.  A minimum of two (2) showers in projects between twenty-five thousand (25,000) and one-hundred twenty-five thousand (125,000) square feet, and three (3) showers for any project over one-hundred twenty-five thousand (125,000) square feet. Dressing areas and lockers must be provided as part of the shower facilities. 
b.  Lockers for clothing and other personal effects must be located in close proximity to showers and dressing areas to permit access to the locker areas by either gender. A minimum of one (1) clothes locker is required for each long-term bicycle parking space provided. 
Table 5.5: Required Bicycle Parking Spaces Use Required Bicycle 
Spaces Required Per centage of Long-Term Spaces   Multi-family Dwelling 1 per 5 dwelling units 80% required long-term Dormitory; Fraternity/Sorority 1 per 4 beds 80% required long-term Retail Goods Establishment and Personal Services Establishment over 10,000 sf in GFA 1 per 2,500 sf GFA Office and Government Office over 10,000 sf in GFA 1 per 5,000 sf GFA 50% required long-term Indoor and Outdoor Amusement Facility over 10,000 sf in GFA 1 per 5,000 sf GFA Educational Facility, Primary 2 per classroom Educational Facility, Secondary 3 per classroom Educational Facility, University or Vocational 1 per 5,000 sf GFA 50% required long-term Place of Worship over 10,000 sf in GFA 1 per 5,000 sf GFA Hospital 1 per 25 beds 50% required long-term Cultural Facility 1 per 2,500 sf GFA Community Center 1 per 2,500 sf GFA Public Works and Safety Facility 1 per 5,000 sf GFA Industrial over 10,000 sf in GFA 1 per 10,000 sf GFA 50% required long-term  
(g)  Off-street loading facilities. 
(1)  General. 
a.  Except in the B-1 district, whenever a non-residential building is erected, altered, enlarged, converted or otherwise increased in size or capacity, the off-street loading facilities herein required shall be provided for uses that distribute or receive materials or merchandise by trucks or other commercial vehicles in accordance with table 5.6. 
b.  In the case of multi-tenant developments, required loading spaces are calculated on the basis of each individual tenant. For example, if only one (1) commercial tenant of a multi-tenant development is over ten thousand (10,000) square feet only one (1) loading space is required; if all tenants are less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet, no loading is required. 
(2)  Computation of off-street loading requirements. The off-street loading requirements for each use permitted by this ordinance shall not be less than that found in table 5.6. For uses not mentioned in this section, the director of planning and zoning or his/her designee shall determine the requirements for off-street loading facilities. The determination shall be based upon the most comparable use listed, AASHTO or ITE standards, and/or the specific needs of the development as determined by the city. 
(3)  Combined off-street loading facilities. Requirements for the provision of off-street loading facilities for two (2) or more structures may be satisfied by the permanent allocation of the requisite number of spaces for each use in a common loading facility, provided that the total number of spaces designated is not less than the sum of the individual requirements. 
Table 5.6: Off-Street Loading Requirements Use Type Number of Spaces Required Multi-Family 20,000-100,000 sf GFA 1 loading space 100,001-200,000 sf GFA 2 loading spaces Each additional 100,000 sf GFA (this applies only for each additional full 100,000 sf over 200,000 sf) 1 additional loading space Commercial and Institutional Use 10,000-100,000 sf GFA 1 loading space 100,001-200,000 sf GFA 2 loading spaces Each additional 50,000 sf GFA (this applies only for each additional full 50,000 sf over 200,000 sf) 1 additional loading space Industrial Uses 5,000-10,000 sf GFA 1 loading space 10,001-40,000 sf GFA 2 loading spaces 40,001-100,000 sf GFA 3 loading spaces Each additional 50,000 sf GFA (this applies only for each additional full 50,000 sf over 200,000 sf) 1 additional loading space  
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-80. - Parking design standard. 
(a)  Site plan review. 
(1)  Applicability. 
a.  Site plan review, in accordance with subsection 37-130(e) (site plan review), is required prior to any construction, alteration or addition of any vehicle parking lot or structure providing ten (10) or more vehicle parking spaces and for any loading facility. 
b.  For purposes of this section, construction, alteration or addition includes all paving of previously unpaved surfaces, replacement of pavement with new binder and surface courses, construction of curbing, and installation of new parking lot landscaping and bicycle parking facilities. Construction, alteration or addition does not include maintenance activities such as replacement of existing landscaping, repair of existing curbing, ordinary repairs, sealing, re-striping or placement of surface course pavement over previously paved areas. 
(2)  Requirements. Projects that require site plan review must incorporate all of the following items into the required site plan: 
a.  Setbacks; 
b.  Parking design including type of parking, parking space size, accessible spaces, paving, safety curbing, and visibility triangles; 
c.  Landscape requirements; 
d.  Fencing and visual screening for uses such as dumpsters; 
e.  Drainage of the parking lot including the path of storm water drainage, location of catch basins, storm water retention, and all other storm water devices; 
f.  Driveways. 
(b)  Permitted vehicle parking locations. 
(1)  Residential uses. 
a.  All residential off-street vehicle parking spaces required in this section shall be located on the same lot as the building or use being served, including residential uses in mixed-use developments. 
b.  For single-family, two-family and townhouse dwellings, required vehicle parking spaces are permitted in private driveways or parking pads, but must not encroach onto the public right-of-way. Tandem vehicle parking is permitted for residential uses but both spaces must be allotted to the same dwelling unit and located on the same lot as the dwelling. 
c.  No required off-street vehicle parking is permitted in any required front yard or in front of the front building line. This does not include parking in any permitted driveway. However, in all single-family districts non-required parking may be placed in up to thirty-five percent (35%) of the front yard, provided all driveways access a legal parking space. 
(2)  Non-residential users. 
a.  Vehicle parking for a non-residential use may be located within three hundred feet (300') of the use served. 
b.  No required off-street vehicle parking space is permitted in any required front yard in B-1 districts. However, in B-1 districts non-required parking may be placed in up to thirty-five per cent (35%) of the front yard, provided all driveways access a legal parking space. 
(c)  Dimensions of vehicle parking spaces. Off-street vehicle parking spaces must be designed in accordance with figure 5.2. 
(d)  Access requirements for off-street vehicle parking. 
(1)  Each off-street parking space must be open directly upon an aisle or driveway of adequate width to provide access to a vehicle parking space. All off-street vehicle parking facilities must provide access in a manner that least interferes with traffic movement. For all uses except single-family and two-family dwellings, the parking area must be designed so that the driver of the vehicle proceeds forward into traffic rather than backs out. 
(2)  All required off-street parking facilities must have vehicular access from a street, alley, driveway or cross-access connection. 
(3)  Within off-street parking lots and structures, one-way traffic aisles must be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width and two-way traffic aisles must be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24') in width. Furthermore, all aisles must be designed in accordance with Figure 5.2. 
(4)  A sight distance triangle must be provided for each driveway access point for a parking facility. The triangle is measured from the point where each side of the driveway intersects the property line. At the point of intersection at each side of the driveway and the property line, a line of fifteen feet (15') in length must be drawn toward the interior of the structure to form the sight-distance triangle. Parking, fencing, planting material or other obstructions taller than two feet (2') in height that would block the view of the driver are prohibited in the sight distance triangle (See figure 5.3: sight distance triangle). 
FIGURE 5.2: OFF-STREET PARKING DIMENSIONS (STANDARD SPACE) Parking Angle Stall Width 
(W) Stall Length 
(L) Aisle Width 
(A) Single Loaded Module 2 Width 
(SL) Double Loaded Module 2 Width 
(DL) 0 9' 26' 12'/24' 20.5'/32.5' 1 29'/41' 45 9' 18' 13' 32' 51' 60 9' 18' 18' 38' 58' 75 9' 19' 20' 40.8' 61.6' 90 9' 18' 24' 1 42' 1 60' 1 1 Two-way traffic permitted 2 A module is defined as a drive aisle with automobiles parked on one (1) side of the drive aisle. A single loaded module is this drive aisle and parking area indicated by an SL on the above diagram. A double-loaded module is the drive aisle flanked by parking areas on each side as indicated by a DL on the above diagram.  

(e)  Driveway design. 
(1)  All off-street parking facilities shall be provided with driveways so located as to result in no undue interference with traffic. When possible, entrances and exits shall be developed on two (2) or more frontages to facilitate traffic movement on through streets and to minimize congestion. 
(2)  The permissible number, arrangement, and width of driveways are dictated by the street frontage of the property. The number of driveways shall be the minimum number required to adequately serve the needs of the development. Non-residential uses with frontages less than seventy-five feet (75') are limited to the following: 
a.  One (1) two-directional driveway; or 
b.  Two (2) one-directional driveways. 
(3)  Driveway width. The width of required driveways shall be adequate to handle the anticipated volume and type of traffic, and shall conform with the dimensions outlined in table 5.7 and measured at the narrowest point parallel to the right-of-way. 
Table 5.7: Minimum Driveway Widths Minimum Maximum Residential     - Single and Two-Family 10' 20' - Multi-family 15' 24' Non-residential     - One-directional 12' 24' - Two-directional use 20' 30'  
(4)  Driveway approaches shall be at least twelve feet (12') wide at the curb and shall taper to driveway width at the front property line. 
(5)  Driveways must be located a minimum of two feet (2') from the side lot lines on residential properties and five feet (5') from the side lot lines on non-residential properties. Single-family residential driveways must be located a minimum of four feet (4') from the curb radius return on a corner lot. 
(6)  Driveway clearance at street rights-of-way. 
a.  All driveway approaches shall have a minimum clearance from the side property line as specified below: 
1.  Residential and B-1 districts: two feet (2') minimum side clearance. 
2.  All other districts: Ten feet (10') minimum side clearance. 
b.  All driveway approaches shall have a minimum corner clearance from an intersecting street, bridge, culvert crossing, overpass, underpass, tunnel, or similar obstruction as specified below: 
1.  Residential and B-1 Districts: Fifty feet (50') minimum corner clearance. 
2.  All other Districts: Sixty feet (60') minimum corner clearance. 
(f)  Accessible space design. All parking lots must comply with the "ADA Accessibility Guidelines for Buildings and Facilities" regulations issued by federal agencies under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) for the amount and design of accessible vehicle parking spaces required in parking lots and structures. 
(g)  Vehicle stacking spaces for drive-through facilities. Every drive-through facility must provide a minimum of three (3) vehicle stacking spaces per bay, unless otherwise required by table 5.4 of this ordinance. Vehicle stacking spaces provided for drive-through uses must be: 
(1)  A minimum of nine feet (9') in width, as measured from the outermost point of any service window to the edge of the driveway, and eighteen feet (18') in length (See figure 5.4 measurement of drive-through and figure 5.5: stacking spaces). 
(2)  Placed in a single line behind the drive-through facility. 
(3)  Located so that, when in use, they do not obstruct ingress or egress to the site and do not obstruct access to required parking or loading spaces. 
(4)  Stacking spaces must begin behind the vehicle parked at a last point of service, such as window or car wash bay. 

FIGURE 5.4: MEASUREMENT OF DRIVE-THROUGH 

FIGURE 5.5: STACKING SPACES 
(h)  Bicycle space design. 
(1)  Location. 
a.  The bicycle parking area must be convenient to building entrances and street access, but may not interfere with normal pedestrian and vehicle traffic. 
b.  Bicyclists must not be required to travel over stairs to access parking. 
c.  All required bicycle spaces must be located on the same lot as the use, or within fifty feet (50') of the lot on private property. 
d.  While all parking in the right-of-way is discouraged, the property owner may make suitable arrangement with the City of Monroe to place bike parking spaces in the public right-of-way through a use maintenance agreement at the city's discretion. Parking in the public right-of-way must be within fifty feet (50') of the zoning lot. 
e.  Short-term bicycle parking spaces must be located no more than fifty feet (50') for the principal building entrance and at the same grade as the sidewalk or an accessible route. 
f.  Long-term bicycle parking spaces must be located in a covered area that is easily accessible from the public right-of-way and building entrances. 
g.  Required bicycle parking for multi-family residential uses may be provided in garages, storage rooms, and other resident-accessible, secure areas. Spaces within dwelling units or on balconies do not count toward satisfying bicycle parking requirements. 
(2)  Design. 
a.  Required bicycle spaces must have a minimum dimension of two feet (2') in width by six feet (6') in length, with a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven feet (7'). Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle. There must be an aisle at least five feet (5') wide between each row of bicycle parking to allow room for bicycle maneuvering. 
b.  The area devoted to bicycle parking must be surfaced as required for vehicle parking areas. 
c.  All long-term bicycle parking spaces must be covered, which can be achieved through use of an existing overhang or covered pedestrian connection, weatherproof outdoor bicycle lockers or an indoor storage area. Where bicycle parking is not located within a building or locker, the cover design must be of permanent construction, designed to protect bicycles from rainfall and a minimum overhead vertical clearance of seven feet (7'). 
d.  Bicycle parking facilities must provide lockable enclosed lockers or racks, or similar structures, where the bicycle may be locked by the user. Racks must permit the bicycle frame and one (1) wheel to be locked to the rack and support the bicycle in a stable position. Structures that require a user-supplied locking device must be designed to accommodate U-shaped locking devices. All lockers and racks must be securely anchored to the ground or a structure to prevent the racks and locker from being removed from the location. 
e.  If required bicycle parking facilities are not visible from the street or principal building entrance, signs must be posted indicating their location. Signs must meet the requirements of article VII (sign regulations). 
(i)  Off-street loading design. 
(1)  Location. 
a.  All off-street loading spaces must be located on the same lot as the use served. 
b.  No off-street loading spaces may project into a public right-of-way. 
c.  No off-street loading space is permitted in a front yard. 
(2)  Dimensions. 
a.  All minimum off-street loading spaces must be a minimum of twelve feet (12') in width, and a minimum of twenty-five feet (25') in length, exclusive of aisle and maneuvering space, and maintain a vertical clearance of at least fourteen feet (14'). 
b.  Loading spaces for a funeral home may be reduced in size to ten feet (10') by twenty-five feet (25') and a vertical clearance reduced to eight feet (8'). 
c.  Structures that are fifty (50) years of age or older and maintain loading spaces that do not comply with the dimensions of this section, are deemed legally conforming in terms of loading space dimensions. If new loading spaces are constructed, such spaces may be designed to match the dimensions of existing loading spaces rather than the requirements of this section. 
(3)  Surfacing. All off-street loading spaces must be paved with a durable, all-weather material, such as concrete or asphalt. 
(4)  Drainage and Maintenance. Off-street loading facilities must be drained to eliminate standing water and prevent damage to abutting property and/or public streets and alleys, and surfaced with erosion-resistant material in accordance with applicable city specifications. Off-street loading areas must be maintained in a clean, orderly and dust-free condition at the expense of the owner or lessee. 
(5)  Lighting. Loading facility lighting must meet the requirements of section 37-75 of this ordinance. Illumination of an off-street loading facility must be arranged so as to deflect the direct rays of light away from adjacent properties and streets. 
(6)  Access control and signs. Each required off-street loading space must be designed with adequate means of vehicular access to a street or alley, in accordance with article VII (sign regulations) of this ordinance, and in a manner that will minimize interference with traffic movement. 
(7)  Landscaping and screening. All loading facilities must be landscaped and screened in accordance with chapter 19.5 (landscaping requirements). 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-81. - Corridor design standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of these standards is to provide guidance with respect to the appearance and function of development along the major corridors in the City of Monroe. These standards are intended to encourage high-quality design, including site planning, lighting, landscaping, screening, signage, infrastructure and traffic flow along Monroe's commercial corridors. These standards provide direction to potential developers, redevelopers, current landowners, and business owners on new development and the redevelopment of existing properties. Over time, adherence to and enforcement of these design standards in designated areas will improve the identity of Monroe, reduce the number of curb cuts, increase the amount and variety of vegetation, de-clutter signage, promote unified development planning of multiple tracts, diversify architecture and land uses, minimize surface runoff through a reduction of redundant parking, improve pedestrian safety, and integrate commercial and residential land uses along major corridors. It is the intent of these standards to provide substantive direction while providing flexibility in their application. 
(b)  Applicability. These corridor design standards assist in the design and review of both new construction and modifications to existing sites and structures along the city's major commercial corridors. Specifically, the boundaries of the commercial corridor design districts are hereby established as follows: 
(1)  Level one corridors. These standards apply to all properties within three hundred feet (300') of either side of the street right-of-way (existing or future if additional right-of-way has been identified) for the following identified corridors: 
a.  DeSiard Street, from Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive to the eastern Monroe city limit line. 
b.  Louisville Avenue, from Riverside Drive to Martin Luther King, Jr. Drive. 
(2)  Level two corridors. These standards apply to all properties within one hundred fifty feet (150') of either side of the street right-of-way (existing or future if additional right-of-way has been identified) for the following identified corridors: 
a.  N. 18th Street, from Forsythe Avenue to DeSiard St. 
b.  Forsythe Avenue Bypass (State Route 840-6) from N. 18th Street to Sterlington Road. 
(3)  New construction. These standards will be used to assist in the design and review process of new construction projects, major and minor conditional use permits, and site plan review in identified corridors. 
(4)  Redevelopment. For all development other than the construction of a new building or structure on a vacant site, these standards apply to all projects involving modifications to existing sites and structures that require planning commission approval. Where a change of building occupancy occurs, and no significant physical change is made to the building, the standards shall not be triggered. However, if a change in building occupancy occurs that requires modification to the site or planning commission approval, the standards shall be triggered. In such cases, opportunities to bring the existing site into compliance with the commercial corridor design standards shall be explored, with special consideration of those items that are most feasible and would achieve the greatest overall results in the appearance and functionality of the site. 
(5)  Additional applicability provisions. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this ordinance, development of tracts of land within indicated commercial corridor design districts shall be required to comply with this section when the approval of a site plan is required. 
(c)  Transit. 
(1)  Prior to the issuance of building permits on developments of thirty (30) or more dwelling units or on non-residential developments of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or greater, the planning and zoning director shall notify the City of Monroe Transit General Manager, who will determine if transit circulation or a transit stop is warranted within the development or at the intersection based on existing or future transit service and the roadway circulation pattern in the vicinity. 
(2)  Commercial structures of seventy-five thousand (75,000) square feet or greater shall provide at least one enclosed, protected transit shelter on-site if located on an existing or future transit route. The shelter shall be located such that it is close to the transit stop, as determined by the City of Monroe Transit General Manager. 
(d)  Circulation and parking. 
(1)  Access standard. The following site access standards are applicable to all commercial corridor design districts within the City of Monroe: 
a.  Adjacent properties shall utilize joint use driveways whenever possible and provide connections between parking lots. Owners shall provide cross access easement areas between adjacent properties and developments to provide vehicular access to adjacent sites without having to re-enter the public right-of-way. 
b.  Joint driveways and parking lot cross connections shall provide sufficient width to accommodate two-way vehicular travel. 
c.  Joint driveways and parking lot cross connections shall provide pedestrian and bicycle connections of at least six feet (6') in width that include a sidewalk. The driveway should be designed to provide the shortest practical length across the driveway for pedestrian and bicycle movement. 
(2)  Clearly define vehicular, pedestrian and bicycle patterns. The following standards shall be followed in all to create clearly defined patterns for both vehicles and pedestrians in all level one corridor areas and in parking lots over fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in level two corridors. 
a.  Clearly defined pedestrian/bicycle connections shall be provided: 
1.  Between a public right-of-way and building entrances when buildings are not located directly adjacent to the sidewalk. 
2.  Between parking facilities and building entrances. 
3.  Between parking facilities and sidewalks along streets and other public rights-of-way. 
4.  From adjacent developments to both residential and commercial developments, creating connections with existing and future developments. 
b.  Pedestrian/bicycle connections shall be clearly defined in a combination of two (2) or more of the following ways: 
1.  A continuous landscape area at least three feet (3') wide on at least one side of the pedestrian connection, except where connections cross over vehicular travel lanes. 
2.  Where pedestrian connections within parking areas abut a public right-of-way and/or driving aisles, a landscaped area shall be provided between the pedestrian connection and the public right-of-way or driving aisle and a six-inch (6") curb must be used. 
3.  Pedestrian connections within parking areas shall be clearly defined by pedestrian scale lighting, accent lighting or a combination thereof to aid pedestrian way-finding. 
4.  At intersections with traffic signals or stop signs and all other pedestrian crossings, connections shall be distinguished from driving surfaces with durable, low-maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete extended across vehicle lanes to define the pedestrian connections enhance pedestrian safety and comfort. 
c.  Concrete sidewalks shall be constructed along all streets and public rights-of-way that are a minimum of four feet (4') in width. 
(e)  Parking. In order for the city's commercial corridors to function efficiently and conveniently, vehicular, bicycle and pedestrian connections between individual commercial uses shall be provided. The following parking standards shall be applicable to all commercial corridor design districts within the City of Monroe: 
(1)  Parking lots of adjoining uses shall be connected to allow for convenient circulation between commercial uses and parking lots, and to maintain safety and efficiency on the city's roads by reducing multiple curb cuts. The city shall require proof of shared parking agreements or easements as outlined in subsection 37-79(b)(4) of this ordinance. 
(2)  Parking lot connections shall be provided in a manner that reinforces a clearly defined pedestrian and vehicular circulation pattern across multiple properties. 
(3)  Vehicular and/or pedestrian and bicycle links shall be made with adjoining residential areas and transportation networks. 
(f)  Landscaping/open space. Landscaping is an integral part of any site plan. Trees and shrubs soften parking lots, define pedestrian and automobile circulation, and are environmentally beneficial and aesthetically pleasing. The intent of these landscape standards is to maintain a consistent street frontage along commercial corridors in the City of Monroe. 
(1)  Every parking lot over fifty (50) spaces shall include landscaped islands within the parking area equivalent to at least ten per cent (10%) of the total paved area of the parking lot, not including pervious paving surfaces. 
(2)  Landscaping in parking lots shall contain at least one (1) shade tree (minimum six feet (6') tall and two inch (2") caliper diameter breast height (DBH) at time of planting and thirty-five feet (35') tall at maturity) for each two hundred (200) square feet of landscaping. Shade trees shall be planted in a bed of ground cover, sod, and/or low shrubbery. 
(3)  Landscaped islands and other pervious surfaces on the site shall be used as opportunities to treat storm water in an environmentally-friendly manner and to assist in water table recharge. Where feasible pervious materials shall be used instead of impervious surfaces to allow water to percolate. 
(g)  Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be provided to allow for a safe pedestrian and vehicular area, while protecting adjacent properties from light spillover. As such, more numerous, shorter and lower-powered lighting fixtures are preferred over fewer, tall, high-powered fixtures. The following provides lighting standards for all commercial corridor design districts within the City of Monroe: 
(1)  Parking lot lighting fixtures shall be designed to direct the light toward the development and prevent light spillage to other users and adjacent streets. 
(2)  Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be used to define pedestrian crosswalks, connections, bicycle parking and/or other pedestrian/bicycle areas within the development. 
(3)  Pedestrian-scale lighting shall be a maximum of fourteen feet (14') in height. 
(4)  All lighting shall be shielded from the sky and adjacent properties and structures, whether through exterior shields or through optics within the fixture. 
(5)  Using lighting to highlight, complement and reinforce landscape and architectural design focal points is strongly encouraged. 
(h)  Signage. The intent of this section is to ensure that signage within Monroe's commercial corridors is consistent with the location and appearance of buildings on the property and neighboring properties, and that the signage is part of an overall design approach to the development. The type, amount and size of signage allowed on a property shall be in accordance with article VII (sign regulations) of this ordinance. However, the following provides additional signage standards for all commercial corridor design districts within the City of Monroe: 
(1)  Lower, monument-style signs are preferred where visibility from the right-of-way is not an issue. Preferred monument signs are low, horizontal with raised lettering and set off by flowers, shrubs and/or a lawn. 
(2)  Sign materials shall relate to the materials and style of the building(s) they serve. 
(3)  The pole element of a pole-mounted sign shall be architecturally pleasing and in proportion to the sign that it carries. 
(4)  Ample landscaping shall be provided at the base of all signs. 
(5)  In general, multi-tenant signs are discouraged, especially where building mounted signs are easily read from the main street upon which the businesses front. In such cases, a single, plaza sign denoting the name of the plaza is preferred. 
(6)  Signs oriented to pedestrians (e.g., projecting signs supported by ornamental brackets) are strongly encouraged. 
(7)  Keep signs simple. Too many combinations of colors, type faces and symbols can result in visual chaos and should be avoided. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-82. - Floodplain overlay standards. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of the floodplain overlay is to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private loses due to flood damage and establish methods and provisions designed to recognize such hazards. 
(b)  Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply only to those areas of special flood hazards in the city identified as the floodplain overlay district, and includes those areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency Digital Flood Insurance Rate Map (DFIRM), or equivalent. The floodplain overlay district shall maintain its underlying zoning, and may be applied to any zoning district pursuant to this ordinance. All property within the floodplain overlay district shall be subject both to the provisions of this section and to the provisions of the underlying zoning district. Nothing in this section shall be construed as a waiver or suspension of the provisions of any underlying zoning district. 
(c)  Floodplain overlay district use provisions. All uses of land and water provided for in the underlying zoning district may be permitted in the floodplain overlay district, with the provisions that those uses shall be subject to the provisions set forth in subsection 37-82(d) of this ordinance. The following uses shall be exempt from these provisions, unless the uses involve fill or are otherwise determined to constitute construction or development: 
(1)  Accessory residential uses such as lawns, gardens, parking areas, and play areas. 
(2)  Agricultural uses such as farming, pasture, grazing, outdoor plant nurseries, horticulture, viticulture, truck farming, forestry, sod farming, and crop harvesting. 
(d)  Floodplain overlay district general standards. In all areas within the floodplain overlay district the following standards shall apply: 
(1)  Manufactured housing. 
a.  No new manufactured home communities or subdivisions shall be developed in the floodplain overlay district. 
b.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure by providing over-the-top and frame ties to ground anchors, subject to the following specifications: 
1.  Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each corner of the manufactured home, with two (2) additional ties per side at intermediate points, or with one (1) additional tie per side for manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') in length. 
2.  Frame tie shall be provided at each corner of the manufactured home, with five (5) additional ties per side at intermediate points, or with four (4) additional ties per side for manufactured homes less than fifty feet (50') in length. 
3.  All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of withstanding a force of four thousand eight hundred (4,800) pounds per square inch. 
4.  Any structure appurtenant to the manufactured home shall be similarly anchored. 
(2)  Construction materials methods and certification. 
a.  All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
b.  Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or otherwise elevated or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
c.  All new construction and substantial improvements with fully enclosed areas below the floor and subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic forces to exterior walls by allowing entry and exit of floodwaters. A minimum of two (2) openings having a net total area of not less than one (1) square inch for every foot of floor area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one (1) foot above grade, and may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other devices that automatically permit entry and exit of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 37-83-37-89. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - SUPPLEMENTARY USE STANDARDS 

Sec. 37-90. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to set forth additional requirements for certain uses of land. These standards are intended to ensure that the use is compatible with the surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-91. - Use of land and structures. 
(a)  A structure or land must be used or occupied in conformity with the regulations for the zoning district in which it is located. 
(b)  The use standards of this article apply to uses allowed in the zoning districts, whether considered permitted or conditional. Uses must comply with all other standards of this ordinance, including any design standards of the zoning district. 
(c)  Non-compliance with any of these standards, including any required impact management plans and operation plans, is considered a violation of this ordinance and subject to enforcement provisions. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-92. - Use standards. 
(a)  Adult uses. 
(1)  Location requirements. 
a.  Adult uses are prohibited within a one thousand five hundred foot (1,500') radius of the following uses: 
1.  Public parks, playgrounds, children's museums or libraries. 
2.  Public or private elementary or secondary educational facilities. 
3.  Places of worship. 
4.  Child day care centers. 
5.  Another adult use or structure that contains an adult use. 
b.  Adult uses are prohibited within a one thousand foot (1,000') radius of residential zoning districts. 
c.  Measurement. 
1.  Measurement of location shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the structure where an adult use is located or conducted to the nearest property line of the premises of a public park or playground, children's museum, library, place of worship, child day care center, or educational facility. 
2.  Measurement between any two (2) adult uses shall be made in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of one (1) establishment to the exterior wall of the other establishment. 
(2)  Exterior requirements. 
a.  It shall be unlawful for an owner or operator of an adult use to allow the merchandise or activities of the establishment to be visible from a point outside the establishment. 
b.  It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of the adult use to allow the exterior of the adult use to have flashing lights, or any words, lettering, photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or other pictorial representations of any manner except to the extent permitted by the provisions of this ordinance. 
(3)  Signage. 
a.  Primary signs shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or other pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
b.  Secondary signs shall have only one (1) display surface and shall contain no photographs, silhouettes, drawings, or other pictorial representations of any manner, and may contain only the name of the enterprise. 
(b)  Bed and breakfast. 
(1)  All bed and breakfast facilities shall be operated within the principal structure and not within accessory structures. 
(2)  A bed and breakfast facility shall have no more than seven (7) guest rooms. 
(3)  The maximum length of continuous stay for any guest shall be fourteen (14) days. 
(4)  The owner/proprietor shall live in the principal structure of the facility. 
(5)  Meals other than breakfast shall not be served, and shall only be served to paying overnight guests. 
(6)  Cooking facilities are prohibited in individual guest accommodations. 
(7)  Bed and breakfast facilities shall provide one (1) full bathroom per guest room, not including the owner/proprietor's bath. 
(8)  The bed and breakfast facilities in residential districts shall be permitted to have one (1) two-sided advertising sign, not to exceed four (4) square feet in total sign face area. Exterior signs for bed and breakfast facilities may be erected in the front yard at least ten feet (10') from the street right-of-way and shall conform to the general character of the surrounding neighborhood. 
(9)  No special activities may take place on the premises of the bed and breakfast facility in any residential district. Ancillary social gatherings, such as weddings, receptions, luncheons, fundraisers and similar events, attended by any non-lodger, may take place on the premises of a bed and breakfast facility within designated business districts. 
(c)  Day care center, adult or child. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  Each day care center must comply with all applicable state and federal regulations including regulations within the Louisiana Administrative Code. 
b.  The operator of any day care center must be licensed by the State of Louisiana, and must provide all permits and licenses to the City of Monroe Director of Planning and Zoning before obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  The number of children or adults permitted in a day care center is as follows: 
1.  Day care center, small: Up to fifteen (15) children or adults; 
2.  Day care center, large: Sixteen (16) to fifty (50) children or adults; 
3.  Day care center, commercial: Fifty-one (51) or more children or adults; 
(2)  Adult day care center. 
a.  No adult may remain on the premises of an adult day care center for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours in one (1) stay. 
b.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet of indoor space must be provided for each adult at the center, exclusive of kitchens, bathrooms, offices, halls, stairways, and storage areas. 
c.  If no elevator is available, all programs and activities must be located on the ground floor. 
d.  An on-site drop off and/or residential passenger zone is required. Stacked parking is permitted. The use of van or bus service is encouraged. 
(3)  Child day care center. 
a.  No child may remain on the premises of a child day care center for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours in one (1) stay. 
b.  The following square footage of available indoor and outdoor play/instruction area is required for each child day care center: 
1.  A minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet per child of available indoor play/instruction area, which includes all indoor classrooms and play areas available for use by the children, but does not include hallways, office space, restrooms, storage or food preparations areas. If rooms are used exclusively for dining or sleeping, they are not included in the play/instruction area. 
2.  A minimum of thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) square feet per child of available outdoor play area. The outdoor play area includes all outdoor play areas on the site available for use by children, but does not include any area within the required front yard. This requirement is not subject to variances. Day care centers in the CBD are exempt from this requirement. 
c.  An on-site drop off and/or residential passenger zone is required. Stacked parking is permitted. The use of van or bus service is encouraged. 
d.  The outdoor play area must meet the following requirements: 
1.  The outdoor play area must be enclosed to protect the children from traffic hazards on and off site and prevent the children from leaving the premises without proper supervision. 
2.  If the child day care home is located adjacent to a residential district there must be a six-foot (6') solid fence around the play area adjacent to any abutting property line. Security fences must be provided where there are open cisterns, wells, ditches, fish ponds, swimming pools, and to separate the parking from any play area. 
3.  A shade device (shade trees, overhangs, etc.) must be provided within the outdoor play area that covers at least twenty-five per cent (25%) of the outdoor play area. 
4.  Play equipment provided must be maintained in good repair, and there must be a soft surface (grass, sand, mulch, mats, etc.) under all climbing equipment. 
(d)  Day care home, adult or child. 
(1)  General requirements. 
a.  Each day care home must comply with all applicable state and federal regulations, including the Louisiana Administrative Code, and must provide all permits and licenses to the City of Monroe Director of Planning and Zoning before obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
b.  The amount of traffic or noise generated must not be excessive. 
c.  The day care home must retain a residential character and must not alter the residential character of the neighborhood. 
d.  Operation of the day care home must not adversely impact surrounding properties. 
e.  An on-site drop-off and/or residential passenger zone must be provided. A residential driveway may be acceptable for this purpose, but may not be shared with any required parking area. The drop-off area must be located so that clients of the facility are dropped off in front of the facility; drop-off areas across the street from the facility do not meet this requirement. 
f.  The number of children or adults permitted in a day care home is as follows: 
1.  Day care home, small: Up to five (5) children or adults; 
2.  Day care home, large: Six (6) to twelve (12) children or adults. 
(2)  Adult day care home. 
a.  No adult may remain on the premises of an adult day care home for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours in one (1) stay. 
b.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet of indoor space must be provided for each adult at the center, exclusive of kitchens, bathrooms, offices, halls, stairways, and storage areas. 
(3)  Child day care home. 
a.  No child may remain on the premises of a child day care home for more than twenty-four (24) consecutive hours in one (1) stay. 
b.  The following square footage of available indoor and outdoor play/instruction area is required for each child day care center: 
1.  A minimum of thirty-five (35) square feet per child of available indoor play/instruction area, which includes all indoor classrooms and play areas available for use by the children, but does not include hallways, office space, restrooms, storage or food preparations areas. If rooms are used exclusively for dining or sleeping, they are not included in the play/instruction area. 
2.  A minimum of thirty-seven and one-half (37.5) square feet per child of available outdoor play area. The outdoor play area includes all outdoor play areas on the site available for use by children, but does not include any area within the required front yard. This requirement is not subject to variances. 
c.  The outdoor play area must meet the following requirements: 
1.  The outdoor play area must be enclosed to protect the children from traffic hazards on and off-site and prevent the children from leaving the premises without proper supervision. 
2.  If the child day care home is located adjacent to a residential district there must be a six-foot (6') solid fence around the play area adjacent to any abutting property line. Security fences must be provided where there are open cisterns, wells, ditches, fish ponds, swimming pools, and to separate the parking from any play area. 
3.  A shade device (shade trees, overhangs, etc.) must be provided within the outdoor play area that covers at least twenty-five per cent (25%) of the outdoor play area. 
4.  Play equipment provided must be maintained in good repair, and there must be a soft surface (grass, sand, mulch, mats, etc.) under all climbing equipment. 
(e)  Fraternity/sorority house. 
(1)  Fraternity and sorority houses must be used and operated by a fraternal or sororal membership organization or association for residential and/or social uses only. Operations for which the chief activity is customarily carried on as a business are prohibited. The fraternal or sororal organization or association must be incorporated as such under the laws of the State of Louisiana. 
(2)  Fraternity and sorority houses must be located on the campus of the institution that permits said fraternity/sorority, on a parcel immediately adjacent to the campus, or within one thousand feet (1,000') of the college or university. 
(3)  No new fraternity or sorority houses located outside of the university campus are permitted within five hundred feet (500') of an existing fraternity or sorority house. Fraternity and sorority houses located on the campus of the institution are exempt from this separation requirement. 
(4)  Fraternity and sorority houses located outside of the university campus must be located on a site of at least seven thousand two hundred (7,200) square feet. 
(f)  Group home. 
(1)  Group homes must be licensed by the State of Louisiana. 
(2)  Group homes are subject to all local and federal regulations, and the regulations of the Louisiana Administrative Code. 
(3)  Group homes must be located no closer than four hundred (400) feet from any other existing group home, as measured from a point of the lot line on which the use is proposed to be located to the nearest point on the lot line on which any other existing similar use is located. 
(4)  A group home must encompass the entire structure. 
(5)  The location, design and operation of a group home must not alter the residential character of a neighborhood. The facility must retain a residential character, which must be compatible with the surrounding neighborhood in scale and appearance. 
(6)  Group homes are divided into the following sizes: 
a.  Small group homes: Up to six (6) residents; 
b.  Large group homes: Seven (7) to twelve (12) residents; 
c.  Congregate group homes: Thirteen (13) or more residents. 
(g)  Home occupation. 
(1)  Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to protect and maintain the residential character of established neighborhoods while recognizing that limited business activities may be carried on in the home, and may be compatible with the integrity of a residential neighborhood. 
(2)  Home occupations must meet the following requirements: 
a.  A home occupation must be conducted within the dwelling unit and not within any accessory structure. This includes, but not limited to, porches, balconies, carports, or garages. 
b.  The home occupation shall be incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes. No more than twenty-five per cent (25%) of the floor area of the residence or five hundred (500) square feet (whichever is less) may be used in connection with the home occupation. 
c.  The person conducting the home occupation must live at this location, and consider the property as their primary residence. Proof of owner occupancy may be established by submission of proof of a homestead exemption. 
d.  There shall be no sale of goods on premises in connection with said home occupation. 
e.  The use shall not require additional off-street parking spaces for clients or customers of the home occupation. 
f.  There shall be no advertising, display, or other exterior indications of a home occupation on the premises, other than one (1) sign attached to the dwelling unit itself. The sign shall be flat, non-illuminated, and shall not exceed one (1) square foot in area. 
g.  No more than one (1) home occupation or business shall be conducted within a dwelling unit, and services shall be limited to one (1) client at a time. The hours of operation for a home occupation shall be limited to 8:00 am to 6:00 pm. 
h.  Barber or beauty shops shall be limited to one (1) operator with no assistants, one (1) styling chair and one (1) shampoo bowl. Scheduling shall allow for one (1) appointment at a time only. All parking for customers and residents shall be located on the site. 
i.  No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive, or other restricted materials shall be used or stored on the site. 
j.  The use shall not produce offensive noise, odors, vibrations, smoke, fumes, heat, or dust detectable to normal sensory perception beyond the premises. 
k.  Storage of stock, supplies, and products shall be permitted only inside the premises where a home occupation is being operated. There shall be no outdoor storage of equipment or materials used in the home occupation. 
l.  The use shall not create greater vehicular or pedestrian traffic than normal for the residential district in which it is located, as determined by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee. 
(3)  Certificate of occupancy. An application for a certificate of occupancy for a home occupation shall be made to the planning and zoning division office on a form provided by the division. Inspection of the applicant's premises shall be made by the building inspector to determine compliance with these regulations before a certificate of occupancy shall be issued. 
(4)  Permitted home occupations. 
a.  Sales/manufacturing representative provided that only one (1) person residing at this location conducts such business and no retail or wholesale sales are conducted on the premises. 
b.  Artist, author, craftsman, musician, photographer, sculptor or similar profession. 
c.  Dressmaker, tailor or seamstress. 
d.  Beautician, barber, or other personal service provider. 
e.  Accountant, architect, doctor, lawyer, insurance agent, or similar profession provided that only one (1) person residing at this location conducts such business within the home. 
(h)  Live entertainment and/or after-hours entertainment venue. 
(1)  Live entertainment as an accessory use may only locate when allowed within the zoning district and only in conjunction with a bar, standard restaurant, or indoor amusement facility. 
(2)  Live entertainment as an accessory use and after-hours entertainment venues must submit a summary of the number and location of places of worship, educational facilities, libraries, parks or playgrounds, and residential districts within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed location. 
(3)  Live entertainment is subject to a closed doors and windows policy and compliance with the City of Monroe Noise Ordinance as enforced by the City of Monroe Police Department. 
(i)  Manufactured housing. 
(1)  General. 
a.  A manufactured home shall be used only as a single-family dwelling. 
b.  No manufactured housing unit shall be occupied for dwelling purposes unless it is connected to water, sanitary sewer, electrical and other facilities as may be necessary, prior to inspection and approval. 
c.  For manufactured housing not located in a manufactured home district or PUD, individual lots shall contain no more than one (1) manufactured home, and shall meet the minimum requirements of the underlying zoning district to which a conventional single-family residential dwelling on the same lot would be subjected. 
d.  Any manufactured home placed upon a residential lot shall be no more than twenty (20) years old. 
(2)  Manufactured housing, class A. 
a.  The manufactured home shall be new and shall have been manufactured within the previous twelve (12) month period. 
b.  The manufactured home shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24') in width. 
c.  The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation and enclosed with skirting at the perimeter to meet the following requirements: 
1.  Individual manufactured homes shall be skirted around the perimeter of the unit to conceal the underbody from view in a manner compatible with the appearance and construction of the manufactured home. 
2.  Skirting shall be vented for airflow and drainage, and be manufactured of certified fire-resistant material. 
3.  Skirting shall be installed in a manner to resist damage under normal weather conditions and shall be properly maintained. 
4.  All skirting shall be installed before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
d.  The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance that is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings. 
(3)  Manufactured housing, class B. 
a.  The manufactured home shall have been manufactured more than twelve (12) months ago. 
b.  The manufactured home shall be a minimum of twenty-four feet (24') in width. 
c.  The manufactured home shall be placed on a permanent foundation and enclosed with skirting at the perimeter to meet the following requirements: 
1.  Individual manufactured homes shall be skirted around the perimeter of the unit to conceal the underbody from view in a manner compatible with the appearance and construction of the manufactured home. 
2.  Skirting shall be vented for airflow and drainage, and be manufactured of certified fire-resistant material. 
3.  Skirting shall be installed in a manner to resist damage under normal weather conditions and shall be properly maintained. 
4.  All skirting shall be installed before the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
d.  The manufactured home shall have exterior siding and roofing which in color, material and appearance that is similar to the exterior siding and roofing material commonly used on residential dwellings within the community or which is comparable to the predominant materials used on surrounding dwellings. 
(j)  Pay-day loan agency/check cashing facility. 
(1)  A pay-day loan agency or check cashing facility, as defined in section 37-21 of this ordinance, is not permitted within one-thousand feet (1,000') of any other pay-day loan agency or check cashing facility. 
(2)  Drive-through facilities are prohibited. 
(k)  Used tire stores. 
(1)  By January 31st of every year, the certificate of occupancy (CO) shall be renewed for all retail used tire facilities. The renewal may be granted if the dealer has remained in compliance with all the conditional use (minor) requirements during the previous year. Standard CO fees shall apply for the yearly renewal. Failure of renewal of the CO or non-compliance during the previous year, are grounds for revocation or denial of the business's certificate of occupancy and occupational license. 
(2)  A schedule of regular pick-up of scrap tires shall be provided to the planning and zoning division office. Tire pick-up and disposal shall be by a licensed carrier and evidence of disposal at a properly licensed disposal site, such as a disposal receipt, shall be provided to the planning and zoning office prior to renewal of the certificate of occupancy. Scrap tires shall be disposed of at a minimum of every three (3) months unless otherwise approved by the planning and zoning office. 
(3)  Storage of no more than one hundred fifty (150) waste tires, at any one time, shall be stored inside the primary building (fully enclosed) or inside a fully enclosed accessory building (no higher than one (1) story and five hundred (500) square feet) will be allowed if the tires cannot fit inside the main building so that all tires are shielded from the elements at all times. Movable trailers or other similar vehicles shall be not allowed for use as permanent tire storage. Outdoor storage of any kind is prohibited. 
(4)  Storage of tires within the service bay area shall not be in a manner that prohibits the removal or installation of tires in the service bay area. 
(5)  Separate waste tires from any tires offered for sale by the business. 
(6)  Notwithstanding the prohibition contained in section 37-76(h)(1)d, the outdoor display of tires is limited to the building frontage only and no more than twenty (20) tires at any given time. Display tires shall not be placed in the right-of-way and shall be stored either in the main building or an accessory structure during closing hours. 
(7)  The removal and installation of tires shall not be conducted in parking lots or within the building frontage, as defined in this code. Removal and installation are required to take place in a service bay. This is also required of all auto repair facilities. 
(8)  Existing tire dealers shall comply with all the above requirements no later than April 23, 2019. 
(9)  Used tire dealers must prominently display the notification provided by the Louisiana Department of Environmental Quality in a public area of the business. 
(10)  The Monroe Fire Department must inspect any area used for the storing of tires in addition to whatever other inspections are required. A report should be furnished to the planning and zoning division office. 
(11)  Used tire dealers shall comply with all applicable State of Louisiana requirements. 
(12)  Violations: See section 37-131. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,840, 4-10-18; Ord. No. 11,883, 10-23-18) 
Secs. 37-93-37-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SIGN REGULATIONS 

Sec. 37-100. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish uniform, comprehensive sign standards governing the display, design, construction, installation and maintenance of signs, which are necessary to accomplish the following goals: 
(1)  To promote and protect the health, safety and welfare of the city by ensuring the compatibility of signs with surrounding architecture and land uses. 
(2)  To create a more attractive business and economic climate, and encourage revitalization by enhancing and protecting the orderly and effective display of signs. 
(3)  To discourage an excessive number of signs, and unsightly and inappropriate signs. 
(4)  To protect the public from hazardous conditions that result from the indiscriminate use and placement of signs, structurally unsafe signs, sign that obscure the vision of pedestrians or motorists, and sign that compete with necessary traffic signals and warning signs. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-101. - Definitions. 
    Definitions for different types of signs and related elements are found in article II (definitions and rules of interpretation) of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-102. - Sign regulations in historic districts. 
    Signs located or proposed to be located in historic districts are also subject to the historic district regulations and review by the City of Monroe Heritage Preservation Commission. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-103. - Sign permit required. 
(a)  Unless specifically permitted as exempt sign by this article, all signs shall require a sign permit. 
(b)  A certificate of occupancy only is required to erect a monument sign, unless lighted, and then an electrical permit is also required. Freestanding signs require certificate of occupancy in addition to the sign permit and electrical permit, if applicable. 
(c)  The following activities are exempt for sign permit requirements: 
(1)  Changing of advertising copy or message on an existing legally permitted or legal non-conforming changeable sign or similar approved sign. 
(2)  Painting, repainting, cleaning, changing permitted items of information, or other normal maintenance and repair of a sign. 
(3)  Construction signs of thirty-two (32) square feet or less. 
(4)  Directional/informational signs of five (5) square feet or less. 
(5)  Nameplates and identification signs of two (2) square feet or less. 
(6)  Political signs. 
(7)  Public signs or notices, or any sign relating to an emergency. 
(8)  Real estate signs of thirty-two (32) square feet or less that notify that the property or premises are for sale, lease, or rent, provided: 
a.  The signs are on the property or premises being advertised. 
b.  Only one (1) sign is placed for each street frontage. 
c.  All signs are removed within thirty (30) days of the sale, lease or rental of the property or premises. 
d.  All such signs are thirty-two (32) square feet or less and contain no commercial message other that the information indicating that the property is available for sale or lease. 
(9)  Window signs or displays. 
(10)  Incidental signs. 
(11)  Point of purchase display signs. 
(12)  Subdivision identification signs of thirty-two (32) square feet or less. 
(13)  Any grave marker, headstone, memorial statue, or other similar remembrances that is noncommercial in nature. 
(14)  Names and addresses on postal boxes. 
(15)  Residential address numbers. 
(16)  Names of newspapers and similar publications on their delivery boxes. 
(17)  The posting of privately owned land and/or buildings or structures against trespass, hunting, fishing, swimming or any other activity, and/or the warning of any person against any danger, hazard or condition pertaining to such land and/or buildings and structures. 
(18)  Cornerstones, memorial tablets, and similar markers made of masonry, bronze and other incombustible and durable material and used to indicate, without advertising matter, information relating to the development of the facility on which they are located such as those involved in planning, financing and construction of buildings. 
(19)  Historical signs and markers designating places of historical significance. 
(20)  City entry and park identification signs designating entry points to or parks located in the City of Monroe. 
(21)  Flags, pennants or insignia of any government, except when such flags are used in connection with a commercial promotion or as an advertising device. 
(22)  Works of fine art which in no way identify a product or business and which are not displayed in conjunction with a commercial enterprise, which enterprise may benefit or realize direct commercial gain from such display. 
(23)  Temporary decorations or displays clearly incidental and customary and commonly associated with national, local or religious holiday celebrations or special events. 
(24)  Traffic and other official signs of any public or governmental agency. 
(25)  Small outdoor signs directed to persons who have already entered the premises, such as filling station fuel pump signs or instructions on using an automatic car wash. To qualify for this exception, no lettering on the sign shall be greater than four inches (4") tall. 
(26)  Menu boards for drive-thru food establishments. 
(27)  Signs indicating special events, such as a fair, carnival, festival, grand opening, sale, or similar temporary activity. 
(28)  Reserved. 
(29)  Garage sale signs may be placed on public property two (2) days before the garage sale and removed the day after the sale. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person engaging in the business of erecting, altering, relocating, or constructing a sign without a valid sign permit may have his/her license either suspended or revoked by the building inspector in addition to any fines imposed by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,786, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 37-104. - Location restrictions. 
(a)  No signs, other than those placed by agencies of government or signs whose placement has been authorized by this article or by another designee of the city, may be erected on public property. Any sign placed on public property without authorization may be removed without notice. 
(b)  No signs may be placed on any private property without prior consent of the owner thereof and, where applicable, issuance of a sign permit. 
(c)  No sign mounted on the exterior of a building may cover any windows or doors. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-105. - Sign dimension computations. 
(a)  Computation of sign area. 
(1)  The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all lettering, background, emblem, logo, corporate banding, representation, or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight (8) lines drawn at right angles. (See figure 7.1: sign measurement area) 

Figure 7.1: SIGN MEASUREMENT AREA 
(2)  Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area. 
(3)  Double-faced signs with back-to-back sign faces shall be regarded as a single face sign if the distance between each sign face does not exceed two feet (2') at any point. 
(4)  Where a sign contains three-dimensional objects (e.g., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture, or statue-like objects), the sign area shall be measured as the maximum projection of the objects upon a single vertical plane. 
(b)  Measurement of sign height. Sign height is measured as follows: When measuring sign height, the height of the entire structure, including decorative elements, must be included. (see figure 7.2: sign height computation) 
(1)  For freestanding signs, height is calculated as the vertical distance measured from grade to the highest point of the sign. 
(2)  For signs attached to buildings, height is calculated as the vertical distance from the base of the building to which a sign is attached to the highest point of the sign. 
(3)  Sign clearance is calculated as the vertical distance from grade or the base of the building to which the sign is attached to the lowest point of the sign. (See figure 7.3: sign clearance) 

Figure 7.2: SIGN HEIGHT COMPUTATION 

Figure 7.3: SIGN CLEARANCE 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-106. - General construction standards. 
(a)  Compliance with city codes. All signs constructed, erected, modified, or altered shall comply with the applicable provisions and requirements of the City of Monroe Building Code. All electrical fixtures, devices, circuits, conduits, raceways or apparatus used to illuminate, move, or project any sign must be installed and maintained as required in the City of Monroe Electrical Code. 
(b)  Wind pressure and direct load requirements. All signs must be designed and constructed to withstand a wind pressure and receive dead loads as required by the City of Monroe Building and Electrical Codes. 
(c)  Sign structure and installation. Supports and braces must be designed as an integral part of the sign. Supports or braces must be hidden from public view to the extent possible. All signs attached to a building must be installed and maintained so that wall penetrations are water-tight and the structure does not exceed allowable stresses of supporting materials. 
(d)  Sign clearance. All signs proposed to overhang any public sidewalk and all freestanding signs shall have a clearance of at least ten feet (10') from the lowest point of the sign, including framework and embellishments, to the finished grade directly below the sign. 
(e)  Maintenance required. All signs shall be maintained in a safe, attractive, clean, and structurally sound condition. The premises surrounding all signs shall be kept free and clear of safety and health hazards, rubbish, high weeds, and grass. 
(f)  Illumination. 
(1)  All lighting must concentrate illumination upon the area of the sign to prevent glare upon the street and adjacent properties. All sign illumination must be designed, located, shielded, and directed to prevent both the casting of glare or direct light upon adjacent publicly dedicated roadways and surrounding properties and the distraction of operators of vehicles or pedestrians in the public right-of-way. 
(2)  All sign illumination must meet the requirements of section 37-75 (exterior lighting) of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-107. - Permanent signs. 
    The following permanent signs in all districts require a sign permit (freestanding and monument signs also require a certificate of occupancy) and are subject to the requirements of this article. 
(1)  Residential districts. The following regulations shall apply to all on-premises signs located in R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RMH, and B-1 zoning districts (see table 7.1 signage standards): 
a.  Signs are allowed as an accessory use to legal, large multi-family and non-residential uses only, including churches, hospitals, schools, and legal non-conforming uses. 
b.  Parking lot directional signs for multi-family. 
1.  A maximum of two (2) parking lot directional signs are permitted for the parking areas of multi-family residential uses (five (5) units+). 
2.  Parking lot directional signs are limited to a maximum height of five (5) feet and a maximum sign area of five (5) square feet. 
c.  Multi-family identification sign. 
1.  One (1) multi-family identification sign is permitted per multi-family use (5+ units) identifying the name of the development and address, wall-mounted or freestanding. 
2.  Multi-family identification signs are limited to twenty-four (24) square feet in area. Freestanding signs are limited to six (6) feet in height. Monument signs are preferred when a freestanding structure is used. 
d.  Residential subdivision identification sign. 
1.  One (1) residential subdivision identification sign is permitted per subdivision development of five (5) residential lots or more. 
2.  Residential subdivision identification signs are limited to thirty-two (32) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height. Residential subdivision identification signs must be located five (5) feet from any lot line within the dedicated street entrance. 
e.  The total size of on-premises signs at any given location shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. When more than one (1) establishment is located in the same building a sign in accordance with the above formula is permitted for each. 
(b)  Non-residential districts. The following regulations shall apply to all on-premises signs located in B-2, B-3, B-4, CBD, I-1, I-2, C, RF, or OS zoning districts (see table 7.1 signage standards): 
(1)  Number of signs. 
a.  Signs are allowed on each dedicated street right-of-way frontage on corner lots. Parking lots and private drives are not dedicated street rights-of-way. 
b.  More than one (1) wall sign may be erected provided the total square footage allowed is not exceeded, 
c.  Only one (1) freestanding sign (including monument signs) is allowed per dedicated street right-of-way frontage. 
(2)  Electronic message boards including digital signage. 
a.  One freestanding electronic message board to convey information by words, letters, or still images per lot or parcel in compliance with the zoning district regulations. 
b.  The electronic message board must be located with the primary freestanding sign and is included in the total sign square footage. 
c.  The maximum height, allowable sign surface, and all other requirements for freestanding signs shall govern electronic message boards as permitted by the underlying zoning district. 
d.  No animation, flashing, running or twinkle lights. 
(3)  Planned commercial center. 
a.  One (1) freestanding sign limited to an area of one (1) square foot per linear foot of lot frontage, is allowed per planned commercial center. 
b.  On corner lots, there may be one (1) such sign per street frontage. 
c.  The size of each sign shall not exceed three hundred (300) square feet in area. 
d.  Planned commercial centers shall have coordinated building signage that does not exceed the size allowed for their zoning classification. 
e.  There shall be no separate freestanding signs allowed for individual businesses located in a planned commercial/shopping center. 
Table 7.1: Signage Standards Sign 
Classification by 
Zoning District Maximum area 
in SF Min Setback 
in Feet 6 Max Height 
in Feet Total 
Allowed R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4, RMH, B-1 Freestanding 2 50 1 10 10 1 Monument sign 50 1 10 6 1 Attached 3 50 1 N/A N/A 1 CBD, RF, C Freestanding 4, 1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage 10 35 1 Monument sign 1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage 10 6 1 Attached 1.5 sf/linear foot of building 
frontage N/A N/A # of signs cannot exceed total sf 
allowed B-2, B-3, B-4, I-1 and I-2 Freestanding 4 1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage 10 35 1 Monument sign 1.5 sf/linear foot of street frontage 10 6 1 Attached 1.5 sf/linear foot of building 
frontage N/A N/A N/A Corridor Design Standards may apply: See Section 37-81 of this ordinance for
additional requirements
Louisville Corridor (Ouachita River to N 10th St.): Sign Setbacks to be determined by
the Planning and Zoning Division 1. The total area of all on-premises signs at any particular location shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet. 2. Nonresidential use, monument sign only. 3. Nonresidential use. 4. When facing land that is residentially zoned or used, limited to a monument sign only. 5. Freestanding and monument signs setbacks to be determined by the Planning and Zoning Division, if applicable. 6. Setback is measured from the leading edge of the sign.  
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,786, 8-8-17) 
Sec. 37-108. - Prohibited signs. 
    It is unlawful to erect or maintain the following signs in all zoning districts: 
(1)  Portable arrow signs. 
(2)  Portable signs, or any prohibited sign designed to be portable, shall not be altered to become permanent. 
(3)  Signs that are considered abandoned or unsafe. 
(4)  Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or government signs or signals. 
(5)  Signs that are erected or maintained upon trees or painted or drawn upon rocks or other features. 
(6)  Signs that contain certain words, statements or pictures which would be considered obscene or indecent by local community standards. 
(7)  Signs that do not comply with the restrictions applicable to the zoning district in which such signs are located. 
(8)  Signs, banners and streamers suspended over or above dedicated streets. 
(9)  Signs that contain or display animation, moving video/pictures or scrolling word advertising. 
(10)  Signs placed on public property or any public right-of-way, subject to the exceptions in subsection 37-103(b) excluding political signs. 
(11)  Signs placed in any location that would violate any state or federal regulation or law. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-109. - Temporary signs. 
(a)  General provisions for temporary signs. 
(1)  Any sign listed in section 37-108 (prohibited signs) is also prohibited as a temporary sign. 
(2)  Temporary signs shall not be located within any public right-of-way nor in any area that may constitute a safety hazard. 
(3)  Temporary signs must be related to on-premises services. Non-commercial messages are also permitted. Temporary off-premises signs are prohibited. 
(4)  No temporary sign may be illuminated. 
(5)  Only one (1) temporary sign is permitted per business on a single lot. 
(6)  All temporary signs must remain in good condition during the display period. Throughout the display period, corrective action must be taken immediately should there be any problems with the appearance, condition, or maintenance of the sign and/or support hardware. 
(b)  Permitted temporary signs and advertising devices. 
(1)  Construction signs greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. One temporary sign denoting the architect, engineer and/or general contractor placed on the premises where construction, repair, or renovation is proposed or is in progress may be allowed subject to the following: 
a.  Only one construction sign shall be permitted per site. 
b.  Construction sign permits shall expire one (1) year from the date of issuance or on the date that the first certificate of occupancy is issued for the project for which the permit was acquired, whichever occurs first. 
(2)  Real estate signs greater than thirty-two (32) square feet. Temporary signs greater than thirty-two (32) square feet advertising the sale, lease, or rental of non-residential property upon which the sign is located may be allowed for new construction or redevelopment subject to the following: 
a.  Only one real estate sign shall be permitted per site. 
b.  Commercial real estate signs shall be removed from the site upon sale of property. 
(3)  Temporary Promotional Signs. Temporary promotional signs on site in connection with the opening of a business, major remodeling under an active building permit, new owner of a business, closure of a business, sale, or special events may be permitted subject to the following: 
a.  Such signs shall be limited to three (3) events and an aggregate maximum of forty-five (45) days per calendar year. 
b.  Promotional signs that advertise an event shall not be erected more than thirty (30) days before the event and shall be removed within seven (7) days of the event's conclusion. 
c.  Banners, string pennants, and streamers are permitted; however, if the materials become tattered, torn, and/or a litter problem they must be replaced or removed. 
d.  Such signs shall have a maximum total sign area of thirty-two (32) square feet. 
e.  A new business or a business with a new location with no permanent sign may display a banner until their permanent signage is installed. 
(4)  A-frame signs. 
a.  A-frame signs are limited to six (6) square feet in area per sign face and four feet (4') in height. 
b.  The use of A-frame signs is limited to business hours only and must be stored indoors at all other times. 
c.  Only one (1) A-frame sign is permitted per business and a minimum twenty-foot (20') separation is required between all A-frame signs. 
d.  An A-frame sign must be placed within twenty feet (20') of the primary entrance of the business, and must not interfere with pedestrian traffic or violate standards of accessibility as required by the ADA or other accessibility codes. 
(5)  Point of service display signs. 
a.  Point of service display signs shall be located on or near the display or product dispenser. 
b.  Point of service display signs shall be located within the structure. 
c.  A point of service sign shall not be attached to any light/sign pole or pump island canopy, nor shall they be located in the parking lot or within the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-110. - Repair or removal of signs. 
(a)  Business closure. All business related signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the close of a business. It is the responsibility of the business owner for such removal. If the business owner does not remove the signs by the end of the thirty (30) days, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner. In the case of a building sign cabinet or freestanding sign cabinet that is to remain on the property, either the existing sign face(s) may be turned around or a blank face(s) shall replace the advertising face. 
(b)  Immediate removal. The code enforcement officer, building inspector or their designee, may cause a sign to be removed immediately and without notice and stored at the cost of the permit holder, or in the absence of a valid permit, at the cost of the possessor or owner of the sign at a cost of no less than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day), under any of the following conditions: 
(1)  The sign is in violation of this article; 
(2)  The sign presents an immediate threat of danger to the safety of the public; 
(3)  Any sign that is installed after the date this ordinance goes into effect without a permit being issued or without a certificate of insurance on file with the building inspector or both. 
(4)  If the code enforcement officer, building inspector or their designee, elects to cause the sign to be removed without notice, he or she shall thereafter give written notice to the permit holder, or to the possessor or owner of the sign, as applicable, stating with reasonable clarity the reason the sign has been removed. 
(c)  If sixty per cent (60%) or more of an illuminated sign is not working, it must be repaired immediately. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-111. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  On-premises signs legally existing prior to the adoption of this article and not conforming to these provisions will be allowed to remain (Nonconformity does not include UL requirements). Nonconforming signs shall be removed if any one of the following conditions occurs: 
(1)  The sign is relocated on the same or different premises, or replaced. 
(2)  The structure or size of the sign is altered in any way. 
(3)  The sign is damaged to an extent of one-half (1/2) of its current replacement value. Such sign shall not be rebuilt and shall be removed. (Replacement value shall be determined by the property owner obtaining the cost of the sign's replacement value from several sign companies). 
(4)  There is a change in use, ownership, or occupancy that requires issuance of a new certificate of occupancy. 
(b)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prevent normal maintenance and repairs or repainting of such signs or structures. 
(c)  For planned commercial centers, freestanding signage advertising more than one (1) tenant must be brought into compliance with this article if either a change in ownership for the entire center or if more than fifty (50%) per cent of tenants are discontinued or changed. Existing signage will be allowed to remain as long as allowed per existing lease agreements. New lease agreements shall reflect the requirements of this article once this article is adopted. 
(d)  Nonconforming temporary signs shall conform to all provisions of this article upon its adoption. These signs shall be removed within ten (10) days of official notification of nonconforming status by the governing authority. 
(e)  Exempt. Signs that are at least fifty (50) years old, are in good condition, are located within a designated historic district, and advertise an existing business, or a sign that is particularly unique in character, design, or history, or that is part of the historic character of a business or building shall be allowed to remain. These signs shall be included in the total square footage allowed the business. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-112. - Enforcement. 
    Section 37-121 of this ordinance shall cover all administration, penalties and violations regarding signs in the City of Monroe. However, the following provisions shall also apply to non-compliant signage. 
(1)  Administration. The requirements of this article shall be administered by the planning and zoning division and/or its designated representative. 
(2)  Inspection authority. All signs for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection or re-inspection by the building inspector or his/her designee and the electrical sign inspector, if applicable. 
(3)  Removal of non-compliant signs, notice of violation. 
a.  When a violation of this article exists, the code enforcement officer shall issue a citation to be delivered by certified mail or in person to the owner of the sign or the property owner. The citation shall state the nature of the violation, whether the sign must be repaired or removed, and the amount of time allowed in which to remedy the violation. (At the discretion of the code enforcement officer or designee, the time limit on a sign may be extended. The extension shall not exceed thirty (30) days.) The following provide the allotted time to bring signs into compliance: 
1.  For permanent signs, within thirty (30) days of receipt of citation. 
2.  For temporary signs, within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of citation. 
3.  For signs that are unsafe or otherwise constitute an immediate danger to public health and safety, within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of the citation. 
4.  The owner of the sign or the property owner may file an appeal with the board of adjustment. Such appeal shall be in writing, accompanied by the appropriate fee, and be filed within ten (10) days of receipt of the citation. 
b.  Any temporary sign, poster or banner found to be in violation of any section of this article may be removed by the code enforcement officer, building inspector or their designee. The cost of such removal shall be at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per sign and may be charged to the person or entity responsible for the activity described on the sign, poster or banner. 
(4)  Non-complying signs, failure to comply with notice. If no action is taken to bring the sign(s) into compliance in accordance with notice given according to subsection 37-112(3) above or within thirty (30) days after the final denial by the board of adjustment, then the city shall order the removal of the sign(s) and the cost attributable to the removal shall be paid by the owner of the sign or the property owner. The city may also file and have a lien placed upon real estate for the removal costs. 
(5)  Other violations. In all other cases, and in cases where the code enforcement officer elects not to use his or her authority to cause the sign to be removed without prior notice, if the permit holder, or the possessor or owner of the sign, as applicable, fails to remove, alter, or otherwise bring the sign into compliance with the provisions and standards of this article, and all applicable building standards of this article, and all applicable building and/or electrical codes, within ten (10) days after notice has been issued, citations for the violations shall be issued. Service of notice shall be delivered by certified mail, return receipt requested, or in person to the owner of the sign or the property owner. The code enforcement officer shall cause the sign to be removed and stored at the expense of the permittee, or possessor or owner of the signs. The cost of storing the sign or signs shall be at least twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per day. The sign shall be held by the code enforcement officer until such time as the expense of removing and storing the sign has been reimbursed to the code enforcement officer. License and permit violations shall be enforced by the building inspector. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 37-113-37-119. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - NON-CONFORMING USES, LOTS AND STRUCTURES 

Sec. 37-120. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section [article] is to regulate the continued existence of uses, lots, and structures lawfully established prior to the effective date of this ordinance or any amendment thereto which do not conform to the provisions of this ordinance. Further, it is the intent of this section to limit the continuation and expansion, and to encourage eventual replacement of nonconforming uses having potentially undesirable impacts on surrounding conforming uses. Nonconforming uses, structures and lots of record may continue in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Sec. 37-121. - Non-conforming use, lot and structure standards. 
(a)  Non-conforming uses. 
(1)  Ordinary repair and maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair of non-conforming uses may be performed. 
(2)  Exceptions for repairs by public order. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any building or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any city official charged with protecting the public safety, upon order of such official. Repairs and alterations that restore a building to the same condition that existed prior to damage or deterioration, altering the building only in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance in such a manner that does not extend or increase an existing non-conformity. 
(3)  Extensions and additions. Non-conforming uses shall not be extended or enlarged. This prohibition is to prevent the enlargement of non-conforming uses by external additions to the structure in which non-conforming uses are located. 
(4)  Change in use. A structure housing a non-conforming use may not be changed into any other use unless such use conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. However, a non-conforming use may be changed to another non-conforming use provided the change of use is less intense than the previous use, as determined by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee. 
(5)  Termination. 
a.  Abandonment or discontinuance. 
1.  Where a non-conforming use is discontinued or abandoned for one (1) year or more, then such use may not be reestablished or resumed and any subsequent use must conform to the provisions of this ordinance. 
2.  When the planning and zoning director or his/her designee has determined that the use has been discontinued, as per section 37-21 (definitions) of this ordinance, the burden of proof shall be on the property owner to prove that the use has not been discontinued or abandoned. 
(6)  Damage or destruction. If a structure housing a non-conforming use is damaged or destroyed by fifty per cent (50%) or more of the fair market value of the structure, then the structure shall not be restored unless its use thereafter conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. When such damage is fifty per cent (50%) or less of the fair market value of the structure as it existed immediately prior to such damage, such structure may be repaired and reconstructed and used for the same purposes it was before the damage or destruction, provided that such repair or reconstruction is commenced and substantially completed within twelve (12) months of the date of such damage or destruction. 
(b)  Non-conforming structures. 
(1)  Ordinary repair and maintenance. Normal maintenance and repair of nonconforming structures shall be performed. 
(2)  Relocation. A nonconforming structure, which is moved, shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located after such move. 
(3)  Termination due to damage or destruction. A nonconforming structure, which is damaged or destroyed to the extent of fifty per cent (50%) or more of the fair market value of said structure, shall not be restored unless it conforms to the provisions of this ordinance. 
(c)  Non-conforming lots of record. Notwithstanding any other provision of this ordinance, a non-conforming lot of record may be developed only if the proposed use is permitted within the zoning district and all development standards of the zoning district are met. 
(d)  Non-conforming accessory uses and structures. No non-conforming accessory use or structure shall continue after the principal structure or use shall have ceased or terminated unless such structure or use shall thereafter conform to the provisions of the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13) 
Secs. 37-122-37-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 37-130. - Procedures. 
(a)  Common review procedures. 
(1)  General. The following requirements are common to many of the following procedures, and apply to applications submitted under this ordinance. Additional details may be included in the specific procedure. 
(2)  Pre-application conference. 
a.  Optional. Before submitting an application for review, an applicant may schedule a pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval. A pre-application conference is optional, except for the procedures listed below. 
b.  Mandatory. Before submitting an application or site plan for the following types of review, an applicant must schedule a pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee to discuss the procedures, standards and regulations required for approval in accordance with this article and other applicable city codes. 
1.  Annexations. 
2.  Site plan review. 
3.  Conditional use permit. 
4.  Map amendment. 
5.  Planned unit development. 
6.  Text amendment. 
7.  Certificates of appropriateness in historic district. 
(3)  Application. 
a.  Initiation. 
Parties allowed to file an application are summarized below. More detailed information may be included with each specific procedure. 
Appeals. Appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved, or by any official or department of the city affected by any decision of the planning and zoning director, the planning commission or the board of adjustment. 
Zoning compliance. Interested parties. 
Administrative adjustment. Owner or agent. 
Variance. Owner or agent. 
Site plan review. Initiated when development or use changes meet the thresholds of [section 37-130(e)(1)] article IX.E.1. 
Major and minor conditional uses. Owner or agent, city planning commission, city council. 
Zoning map amendment. Owner or agent, planning and zoning staff, city planning commission, city council. 
PUD. Owner or agent, city planning commission, city council. 
Text amendment. Owner or agent, planning and zoning, city planning commission, city council. 
Certificate of appropriateness for historic districts. Owner or agent. 
Sign permit. Owner or agent. 
Fence permit. Owner or agent. 
b.  Application forms. Applications containing all requested information, and any additional information must be submitted on forms and in such numbers as required by this ordinance. All applications must be complete and sufficient for processing before they will be reviewed. 
c.  Fees. As per section 37-5 of this ordinance, no applications shall be reviewed, and no permit, certificate, or variance shall be issued unless or until such costs, charges, fees or expenses have been paid in full. When an application is submitted on behalf of the City of Monroe, no fees shall be required. 
d.  Complete applications. An application is complete when it contains all the information necessary to decide whether or not the development as proposed will comply with all of the requirements of this ordinance. Details for each application are included in the specific procedure section of this ordinance. The presumption is that all of the information required in the application forms is necessary to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance. However, it is recognized that each application is unique, and more or less information may be required according to the needs of the particular case. The applicant may rely on the determination of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee as to whether more or less information may be submitted. 
e.  Concurrent applications. Applications may be filed and reviewed concurrently, at the option of the applicant. However, any application that also requires a variance shall not be eligible for final approval until the variance has been granted. Further, applications submitted concurrently are subject to approval of all other related applications; denial or disapproval of any concurrently submitted application shall stop consideration of any related applications until the denied or disapproved application is resolved. 
f.  Modification of application. 
1.  Property owners may initiate a zoning application at any time by filing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee. Applications for zoning map and text amendments may also be filed by the City of Monroe planning commission, another agent of the City of Monroe, or any interested party. 
2.  An application may be modified at the applicant's request following the approval of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee before the request is advertised. Any modification after the request has been advertised shall require a new hearing. 
(4)  Appeals 
a.  When allowed. Appeals may be filed by any person aggrieved by any official or department of the City of Monroe to the board of adjustment. Appeals shall be made within thirty (30) days of the decision. 
b.  Application. 
1.  No pre-application conference is necessary. 
2.  All appeals shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director, and shall include a written statement citing the decision that is being appealed, and any reasons why the appeal should be granted. 
c.  Stay of proceedings. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed, unless the planning and zoning director certifies to the city council after the notice of appeal has been filed, that a stay would cause imminent peril of life or property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed except by restraining order that may be granted by the 4th Judicial District Court. 
TABLE 9.1: Public Notice Requirements Public Notice Requirements Planning 
Commission Board of 
Adjustment Heritage Preservation Commission Publish in official journal     - # of times 3 times Once Once  - # of days before Public Hearing 10 10 7 Letter to subject property owner    Letter to adjacent property owners     - # of days before Public Hearing 10 10 10 Posting of subject property     - # of days before Public Hearing 7 7 7  
 = Required 
(5)  Public notice and hearings. 
a.  Public notice required. Public notice requirements are summarized in table 9.1. 
b.  Notice of public hearing. All notices for public hearing (except posted notices) shall contain: 
1.  The date, time and place of the hearing; 
2.  The section of this ordinance under which the subject matter of the hearing will be considered; 
3.  The name of the applicant; 
4.  A brief description of the location of any land proposed for development and the subject matter to be considered at the hearing; 
5.  A statement that the application and supporting materials are available for public inspection and copying (a Freedom of Information Act Request will need to be submitted for copies) at the office of the City of Monroe planning and zoning director; 
6.  A brief description of the appeal process, which is available by right after public hearing before the planning commission or any further automatic review by the city council. 
c.  Written notice of public hearing. At least ten (10) days prior to a public hearing, a good faith attempt to notify the owner of record shall be made by sending an official notice by certified U.S. mail of the time, place and subject matter of the hearing. A good faith effort shall also be made to notify the adjacent property owner(s) of the subject property by regular U.S. mail at least ten (10) days prior to the public hearing (See table 9.1). 
d.  Posted notice of public hearing. Posted notice in bold type shall be posted for all zoning matters application requests other than text amendments for at least seven (7) consecutive days prior to a public hearing on signs not less than 18"24", prepared, furnished and placed by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee on street frontage of the effected property proposed for a change in zoning classification (See table 9.1). 
e.  Published notice of public hearing. Notice of the time and place of a public hearing shall be published in the official journal, if designated, or a newspaper of general circulation in the area as provided in table 9.1. 
(6)  Reconsideration. No land for which an application for zoning text or map change has been acted upon in a public hearing by the planning commission shall be considered again by the planning commission for the same classification for at least six (6) months from the date such application was acted upon. 
(b)  Zoning compliance verification. 
(1)  When required. 
a.  A zoning compliance verification is required for the following: 
1.  Starting a new business, changing location of an existing business, changing ownership of a business or changing the name of a business. 
2.  Electricity in a commercial structure. 
3.  New construction for residential, commercial, industrial or public/quasi-public structures. 
4.  Additions onto residential, commercial, industrial or public/quasi-public structures. 
5.  Placing accessory structures for residential use. 
6.  Enclosures on residential, commercial, industrial or public/quasi-public structures. 
7.  Erecting a monument or pole sign and billboards. 
8.  Swimming pools. 
b.  It shall be unlawful to begin moving, constructing, altering or repairing (except ordinary maintenance or repairs) any building or other structure on a site, including an accessory structure, until a zoning compliance verification has been issued. 
c.  No certificate of occupancy may be issued without properly issued zoning compliance verification, when applicable. The zoning compliance verification form is in lieu of the application for a certificate of occupancy that was previously required to submit. This is the first step in obtaining a certificate of occupancy. 
(2)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application conference is optional. 
b.  All zoning compliance verifications shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (See subsection 37-130(a) common review procedures). 
c.  Verifications shall be made prior to, or concurrent with the application for a building permit. 
(3)  Decision by planning and zoning director. 
a.  The planning and zoning director may refer the verification to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
b.  In deciding the zoning compliance verification request, the planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(b)(4). 
c.  The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may attach any condition to the request necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Monroe and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. 
(4)  Review criteria. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall consider the following criteria in the zoning compliance verification: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans including, but not limited to, neighborhood plans, corridor plans or storm water management plans. 
b.  The proposed development meets the requirements of this ordinance. 
c.  The proposed development will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood and the City of Monroe. 
(5)  Appeal. A final decision by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee on a zoning compliance verification may be appealed to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee's decision (see subsection 37-130(a)(4), appeals) as per LA.R.S. 33:4727 et seq. 
(6)  Expiration. A zoning compliance verification expires after six (6) months if a building permit application has not been filed. 
(c)  Administrative adjustment. 
(1)  When allowed. The administrative adjustment procedure allows the planning and zoning director or his/her designee to approve modest variations from the standards of this ordinance. Administrative adjustment is allowed for the following: 
a.  A reduction of any required setback or yard by up to fifteen per cent (15%). 
b.  An increase in the maximum building height of any building by five feet (5') or five per cent (5%), whichever is less. 
c.  An increase in lot coverage by no more than five per cent (5%). 
d.  Any other administrative adjustment authorized by a specific section of this ordinance. 
(2)  Reserved. 
(3)  Reserved. 
(4)  Review criteria. 
a.  The planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying a administrative adjustment: 
1.  The proposed development is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans. 
2.  The proposed development meets the requirements of this ordinance. 
3.  The proposed development will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood and the city. 
(5)  Appeal. A final decision by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee on an administrative adjustment may be appealed to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee's decision (see subsection 37-130(a)(4) appeals) as per LA.R.S. 33:4727 et seq. 
(6)  Expiration. An administrative adjustment shall not expire. 
(d)  Variance. 
(1)  When allowed. The board of adjustment shall have the authority to grant variances from the terms of this ordinance, subject to terms and conditions fixed by the board, where literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardship, if in granting such variance the general intent and purpose of this zoning ordinance will be preserved. 
(2)  Application. 
a.  No pre-application conference is necessary. 
b.  All applications for variance shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (see subsection 37-130(a) common review procedures). 
(3)  Review by planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may refer the application to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
(4)  Public hearing and decision by board of adjustment. 
a.  Following notice and a public hearing as required by subsection 37-130(a) of this ordinance, the board of adjustment shall allow, allow with conditions, or deny the proposed variance request, the board of adjustment shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(d)(5). 
b.  The board may attach any condition to the permit necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. 
(5)  Review criteria. The board may grant a variance only if it makes findings that the following conditions, insofar as applicable, have been satisfied: 
a.  Special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land, structure, or building involved and which are not applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same zoning district. 
b.  Literal interpretation of the provisions of this ordinance would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same district under the terms of this ordinance. 
c.  The special conditions and circumstances do not result from the actions of the applicant or any other person who may have or had interest in the property. 
d.  Granting the variance requested will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this ordinance to other lands, structures, or buildings in the same district or similarly situated. 
e.  The variance, if granted, will not alter the essential character of the locality. 
f.  Strict adherence to the regulation for the property would result in a demonstrable hardship upon the owner, as distinguished from mere inconvenience. 
g.  The purpose of the variance is not based exclusively upon a desire to serve the convenience or profit of the property owner or other interested party(s). 
h.  The proposed variance will not impair an adequate supply of light and air to adjacent property, or increase substantially the congestion in the public street, or increase the danger of fire, or endanger the public safety. 
(6)  Appeal. A final decision by the board of adjustment on a variance may be appealed to the 4th Judicial District Court within thirty (30) days of the decision (See section 37-130(a)(4) appeals). 
(7)  Expiration. A variance approved by the board of adjustment shall expire six (6) months from the date of approval if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning compliance verification form and any appropriate building permits. Applicants may file for one six-month extension of the variance approval, in writing, with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee subject to administrative approval. 
(e)  Site plan review. 
(1)  When required. Site plan review by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee and the city engineer or his/her designee is required for: 
a.  Construction of three (3) or more residential units on a platted lot of record. 
b.  Construction or expansion of five thousand (5,000) or more square feet of multi-family or mixed-use building type. 
c.  Commercial, industrial or institutional development. 
d.  Creation of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious surface (paving). 
e.  Construction of accessory structures in non-residential districts. 
f.  New parking lots providing twenty-five (25) or more spaces. 
g.  The construction, alteration or addition of any vehicle parking lot or structure. This includes all paving of previously unpaved surfaces, replacement of pavement, construction of curbing and installation of new landscaping and bicycle parking facilities (does not include maintenance). See section 37-80(a)(2), site plan review-requirements. 
(2)  No site plan review required. No site plan review is required for the following: 
a.  Construction or expansion of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of multi-family or mixed-use building type. 
b.  Creation of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of impervious surface (paving). 
c.  Construction of accessory structures in residential districts. 
(3)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application conference is mandatory for site plan review. 
b.  All applications for site plan review shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (See subsection 37-130(a), common review procedures). 
(4)  Review by planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may refer the site plan to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
(5)  Site plan decision by planning and zoning director. 
a.  In deciding to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed site plan, the planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria outlined in subsection 37-130(e)(6) and render a decision within sixty (60) days of the filing of a complete application for review, except where such time period is extended by the applicant. 
b.  The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may attach conditions required to make the development site comply with this and other city ordinances, or as necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Monroe and to minimize adverse impacts to adjacent properties. 
(6)  Review criteria. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying a site plan: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans; 
b.  The proposed development meets the requirements of this ordinance; 
c.  The proposed development will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood and the city. 
d.  The site plan demonstrates: 
1.  Compliance with any prior approvals; 
2.  Site design and development intensity appropriate for and tailored to the unique natural characteristics of the site; 
3.  Adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of access, pedestrian circulation, bicycle facilities, roadways, driveways, transit access (as appropriate), and off-street parking, stacking and loading spaces; 
4.  Connectivity to surrounding neighborhoods and the city as a whole, while minimizing cut-through traffic and speeds are reduced through the use of traffic calming methods in appropriate locations; 
5.  Adequate design of grades, paving, gutters, drainage and treatment of turf to handle storm water relative to the 100-year floodplain; and 
6.  Adequate access for disabled residents through the provision of special parking spaces, accessible routes between parking areas and buildings, passenger loading zones and access to other facilities. 
e.  Any adverse impacts on adjacent properties have been minimized or mitigated. 
(7)  Building permit. No building permit shall be issued for development requiring site plan until the site plan has been approved. 
(8)  Dedication and improvements. 
a.  For development of property requiring a site plan under this ordinance, the applicant must dedicate any additional right-of-way necessary to the width required by the City of Monroe for streets adjoining the property, install curbs and gutters and pave all streets adjoining the property, and install sidewalks and street trees based on the standards set forth by the Monroe city council in this and all other city codes and ordinances. 
b.  The applicant shall bear the costs of installation of any on-site or off-site improvements required by this ordinance, including provisions for storm water management, paving and utilities. 
(9)  Modification of approved site plan. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee is authorized to approve minor modifications to an approved site plan. The following modifications shall be considered minor: 
a.  Up to ten per cent (10%) increase or any decrease in gross floor area of a single building; 
b.  Up to a ten per cent (10%) reduction or any increase in the approved setbacks from exterior property lines; 
c.  Relocation of parking areas, internal streets or structures where such relocation occurs more than one hundred feet (100') from exterior property lines. 
(10)  Appeals and public hearings and decisions by planning and zoning director. A final decision by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee on a site plan review may be appealed to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee's decision (See section 37-130(a)(4), appeals) as per R.S. 33:4727 et seq. 
(11)  Expiration. A site plan expires after six (6) months where a building permit application has not been filed for all or part of said development. Applicants may file for one six (6) month extension of the site plan approval in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee subject to administrative approval. 
(f)  Major and minor conditional use permits. 
(1)  When required. A major or minor conditional use permit is required for any use or building type that requires particular considerations as to its proper location to adjacent, established or intended uses in a district, or to the planned growth of the community. More detailed information may be included with each specific section of this ordinance that establishes the uses requiring either a major or minor conditional use permit and conditions controlling the location and operation of such special uses. Any change to a major or minor conditional use involving major structural alterations, enlargements, intensifications of use, or similar change must be approved in the same manner as the original conditional use. 
(2)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee is necessary. 
b.  All applications for a major or minor conditional use permit shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (see subsection 37-130(a), common review procedures). The application shall include material necessary to demonstrate that the grant of a conditional use will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this ordinance, will not be injurious to the neighborhood or to adjoining properties, or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. Such material required may include but is not limited to the following, when applicable: 
1.  Site and development plans at an appropriate scale showing proposed placement of structures on the property; provisions for ingress and egress, off-street parking and off-street loading access, refuse and service areas, and required yards and open spaces. 
2.  Plans showing proposed locations for utilities and easements. 
3.  Plans for screening, buffering and landscaping. 
4.  Proposed signs and lighting, including type, dimensions and character. 
(3)  Review by planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may refer the application to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
(4)  Minor conditional use decision by planning commission. 
a.  Following notice and a public hearing as required by subsection 37-130(a) of this ordinance, the planning commission shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed conditional use permit within sixty (60) days of filing of a complete application, except where such time period is extended by the applicant. 
b.  In making this decision, the planning commission shall consider the recommendation of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(f)(6). 
c.  The commission may attach any condition to the permit necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. These conditions may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  Stipulate the exact location as a means of minimizing hazards to life, limb, property damage, erosion or traffic; 
2.  Increase the required lot size or yard dimension; 
3.  Limit the height, size or location of buildings, structures and facilities; 
4.  Control the location and number of vehicle access points; 
5.  Increase the number of required off-street parking spaces; 
6.  Limit the number, size, location or lighting of signs; 
7.  Require additional fencing, screening, landscaping or other facilities to protect adjacent or nearby property; 
8.  Designate sites for open space; 
9.  Provide ease of access to major roadways; or 
10.  Assure that the degree of compatibility to the surrounding land use shall be maintained with respect to the particular use on the particular site and in consideration of other existing and potential uses within the general area in which the use is proposed to be located. 
d.  Appeal. A final decision by the planning commission on a minor conditional use permit may be appealed to the city council within thirty (30) days of the planning commission's decision (See subsection 37-130(a)(4) appeals). 
(5)  Major conditional use decision by the planning commission and city council. 
a.  For major conditional use permit applications, following notice and a public hearing as required by subsection 37-130(a) of this ordinance, the planning commission shall follow the procedure and review criteria outlined in subsection 37-130(f)(4) of this ordinance to make a recommendation of approval, approval with conditions, or denial of the proposed major conditional use permit to the city council within sixty (60) days of filing of a complete application, except where such time period is extended by the applicant. 
b.  Following notice by the council clerk and a public hearing, the council shall accept, accept with conditions, or deny the planning commission's recommendation on the major conditional use permit within thirty (30) days of the planning commission's final action. 
c.  In making this recommendation, the council shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee and the planning commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(f)(6). 
d.  The city council may attach any condition to the permit necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the community and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, additional screening or buffering, limitations in scale or limitations to hours of operation. 
e.  Failure to act shall result in acceptance of the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(6)  Review criteria. The planning commission and the city council shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying a major or minor conditional use permit: 
a.  The proposed major or minor conditional use permit is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans. 
b.  The proposed development meets the requirements of this ordinance. 
c.  The proposed development will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood and the city. 
d.  The major or minor conditional use permit complies with any specific use standards or limitations in article VI (supplementary use standards) of this ordinance. 
e.  Any adverse impacts on adjacent properties attributable to the major or minor conditional use have been minimized or mitigated. 
(7)  Effect of denial. The final denial of a major or minor conditional use permit application shall ban the subsequent application for the same or similar use at the same location for a period of twelve (12) months. 
(8)  Appeal. A final decision by the city council on a major conditional use permit may be appealed to the 4th Judicial District Court within thirty (30) days of the city council's decision (see subsection 37-130(a)(4) appeals). 
(9)  Expiration. 
a.  Existing construction. In an existing structure, the conditional use permit shall expire after six (6) months if the use is abandoned or discontinued. 
b.  New construction. 
1.  A conditional use permit shall expire after six (6) months if a building permit application has not been filed. 
2.  Where a conditional use has been granted but no commencement of construction other than clearing and grubbing has been executed within six (6) months from date of such conditional use permit, the property shall revert to its original state prior to such conditional use. 
3.  Applicants may file for one six-month extension of the conditional use approval, in writing, with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee subject to administrative approval. 
c.  Buildings that are actively available for lease and occupancy, or are being remodeled pursuant to permit shall not have its use considered abandoned or discontinued for twelve (12) months. 
(10)  Revocation of conditional use permit. If any conditions of a conditional use permit or other requirements of this ordinance are violated, the City of Monroe may revoke the conditional use permit. 
(g)  Zoning map amendment. 
(1)  When allowed. The boundaries of zoning districts as shown on any zoning map may, from time to time, be amended or modified by the city council. 
(2)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee is required. 
b.  All applications for a map amendment shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (see subsection 37-130(a) common review procedures). 
(3)  Review by planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may refer the application to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
(4)  Public hearing and decision by planning commission. 
a.  Following notice and a public hearing as required by subsection 37-130(a) of this ordinance, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed map amendment within sixty (60) days of filing of a complete application, except where such time period is extended by the applicant. 
b.  In making this recommendation to the city council, the planning commission shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(g)(6). 
(5)  Public hearing and decision by the city council. 
a.  Following notice by the council clerk and a public hearing, the city council shall accept, accept with conditions, or deny the planning commission's recommendation on the map amendment within thirty (30) days of the planning commission's final action. 
b.  In making this recommendation, the city council shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee and the planning commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(g)(6). 
c.  Failure to act shall result in acceptance of the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(6)  Review criteria. The planning commission and the city council shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying a map amendment: 
a.  The proposed map amendment is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans. 
b.  The proposed map amendment is consistent with the adjacent zoning classifications and uses. 
c.  The proposed map amendment will reinforce the existing or planned character of the neighborhood and the city. 
d.  The site is appropriate for the development allowed in the proposed district. 
e.  There are substantial reasons why the property cannot be used according to existing zoning. 
f.  Public facilities and services including schools, roads, recreation facilities, wastewater treatment, water supply, storm water management, police and fire are adequate for the development allowed in the proposed district. 
g.  The map amendment will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming properties. 
(7)  Effect of denial. The denial of a map amendment application shall ban the subsequent application for the same or similar use at the same location for a period of twelve (12) months. 
(8)  Appeal. A final decision by the city council on a map amendment may be appealed to the 4th Judicial District Court within thirty (30) days of the city council's decision (see subsection 37-130(a)(4) appeals). 
(9)  Expiration. A map amendment shall not expire. 
(h)  Planned unit development (PUD). 
(1)  Components of a planned unit development. 
a.  Approval of a development plan by the planning commission and the city council; and 
b.  Approval of subsequent subdivision plats and site plans consistent with the development plan. 
(2)  Intent of planned unit development. A planned unit development (PUD) is intended to encourage innovations in development techniques so that the growing demands of the community may be met with greater flexibility and variety in type, use, design and layout of sites and buildings, and by the conservation and more efficient use of open spaces and other amenities generally enhancing quality of life. PUDs are not intended to circumvent traditional zoning requirements, but rather enhance existing zoning to promote a harmonious variety of uses, and/or provide an economy of shared services and facilities to foster the creation of attractive, healthful, efficient and stable environments for living, shopping or working. The regulations contained within PUDs are intended to have enough flexibility to produce each of the following: 
a.  Maximum housing choice in the types of living environments. 
b.  Open space and recreational areas directly related to the intended users, and if permitted as part of the project, more convenience in the location of accessory commercial uses and services; 
c.  A development pattern which preserves and utilizes natural topography, scenic vistas, trees and other vegetation, and prevents erosion and the disruption of natural drainage patterns; 
d.  A stable development in character with the land use density, transportation facilities, and community facilities objectives of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan; 
e.  A higher quality site design than would be possible through the strict application of other available zoning districts. 
(3)  Eligibility. The PUD district is designed to allow an applicant to submit a proposal for consideration, for any uses or mixture of uses that are consistent with the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan, and to allow the city to approve any proposal that it determines to be in the best interest of the public health, safety and welfare, along with any conditions or requirements or limitations thereon that the city deems advisable. The approval of a PUD request rests with the planning commission and the city council. However, no PUD request shall be eligible for approval unless the following minimum conditions are met: 
a.  The minimum area required for an application to develop a PUD is three (3) acres for purely residential developments and five (5) acres for mixed-use, commercial and industrial developments. 
b.  The tract of land for which the PUD is made shall be contiguous with sufficient width and depth to accommodate the proposed use. 
c.  All land included for the purpose of development within a PUD shall be owned by or be under the complete control of the applicant for such zoning designation. The applicant shall provide the city all of the necessary documents and information that may be required, as determined by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, to assure that the development project may be lawfully completed according to the plans sought to be approved. No application shall be considered until the applicant fully complies with the requirements of this section. 
(4)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee is required. 
b.  All applications for a PUD shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (see subsection 37-130(a) common review procedures). 
c.  The application shall include the following additional materials: 
1.  A narrative explaining and tabulating the land uses by net acre, number of dwelling units by housing type, residential density, open space acreage, square footage of non-residential uses per net acre, and the relationship of the proposed development to existing development in the area and other related development features. 
2.  A development plan schematically showing major streets, major utilities, land uses, access to existing streets, major open space and a conceptual drainage plan in relationship to the 100-year floodplain and known drainage basins and facilities, as appropriate. 
(5)  Review by planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may refer the application to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
(6)  Public hearing and decision by planning commission. 
a.  Following notice and a public hearing as required by subsection 37-130(a) of this ordinance, the planning commission shall recommend to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the PUD and development plan within sixty (60) days of filing of a complete application, except where such time period is extended by the applicant. 
b.  In making this recommendation, the planning commission shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(h)(8). 
(7)  Public hearing and decision by the city council. 
a.  Following notice by the council clerk and a public hearing the city council shall accept, accept with conditions, or deny the planning commission's recommendation on the PUD and development plan within sixty (60) days of the planning commission's final action. 
b.  In making this recommendation, the city council shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee and the planning commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(h)(8). 
c.  Failure to act shall result in acceptance of the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(8)  Review criteria. The planning commission and the city council shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying the PUD: 
a.  The proposed development is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans. 
b.  The proposed development is consistent with the standards and uses of the underlying and adjacent zoning districts. 
c.  The proposed PUD will reinforce or enhance the existing or planned character of the neighborhood and the city. 
d.  The site is appropriate for the development proposed in the development plan. 
e.  The proposed development demonstrates a higher quality of site design than is possible under other available zoning districts, and is not used solely to avoid the requirements of the base zoning district. 
f.  Public facilities and services including schools, roads, recreation facilities, wastewater treatment, water supply, storm water management, police and fire are adequate for the development allowed in the proposed concept plan. 
g.  The proposed development will not substantially or permanently injure the appropriate use of adjacent conforming properties. 
(9)  Revisions to PUD development plan. The applicant shall have ninety (90) days from the date of the city council decision when final action is taken to submit a revised PUD development plan to include any conditions of approval for the PUD development plan. Any such changes shall be reviewed for acceptance by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee within ten (10) days of the receipt and shall bear the signature of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee before the PUD development plan can be accepted as the approved plan. Upon written request from the applicant, one ninety (90) day extension may be granted to the applicant by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee for submittal of the revised PUD development plan. Failure by the applicant to submit a revised development plan within the time frame specified in this section shall deem the plan null and void. 
(10)  Modification of a concept plan. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee is authorized to approve minor modifications to an approved concept plan. The city council shall consider all modifications not listed as minor below, consistent with the original approval of the planned unit development. The following modifications shall be considered minor: 
a.  Up to ten per cent (10%) increase or any decrease in gross floor area of a single building; 
b.  Up to a ten per cent (10%) reduction or any increase in the approved setbacks from exterior property lines; 
c.  Relocation of parking areas, internal streets or structures where such relocation occurs more than one hundred feet (100') from exterior property lines. 
(11)  Effect of denial. The denial of a PUD shall ban the subsequent application for the same or similar use at the same location for a period of twelve (12) months. 
(12)  Appeal. A final decision by the city council on a PUD may be appealed to the 4th Judicial District Court within thirty (30) days of the city council's decision (see subsection 37-130(a)(4) appeals) 
(13)  Expiration. 
a.  A PUD expires after eighteen (18) months if no building permit has been filed. 
b.  If the property owner chooses not to construct the PUD, but rather to revert back to the requirements of the base zoning district less than eighteen (18) months after the PUD and development plan have been approved, the property owner shall be able to eliminate the PUD with a revocation of the original city council ordinance. 
(i)  Zoning text amendment. 
(1)  When allowed. The regulations of this ordinance may, from time to time, be amended supplemented, changed, modified or repealed, as determined by the city council. 
(2)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application conference with the planning and zoning director is optional. 
b.  All applications for a text amendment shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director (see subsection 37-130(a) common review procedures). 
(3)  Review by planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee may refer the application to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
(4)  Public hearing and decision by planning commission. 
a.  Following notice and a public hearing as required by subsection 37-130(a) of this ordinance, the planning commission shall recommend to approve or deny the proposed text amendment within sixty (60) days of filing of a complete application, except where such time period is extended by the applicant. 
b.  In making this recommendation, the planning commission shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(i)(6). 
(5)  Public hearing and decision by the city council. 
a.  Following notice by the council clerk and a public hearing, the city council shall accept or deny the planning commission's recommendation on the text amendment within thirty (30) days of the planning commission's final action. 
b.  In making this recommendation, the city council shall consider the recommendations of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee and the planning commission, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(i)(6). 
c.  Failure to act shall result in acceptance of the recommendation of the planning commission. 
(6)  Review criteria. The planning commission and the city council shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying a text amendment: 
a.  The proposed text amendment is consistent with the pertinent elements of the comprehensive plan and any other adopted plans; 
b.  The proposed text amendment is consistent with the remainder of this ordinance; 
c.  The extent to which the text amendment represents a new idea not considered in the existing code, or represents revisions necessitated by changing conditions over time, or whether or not the text amendment corrects an error in this ordinance; and 
d.  Whether or not the text amendment revises this ordinance to comply with state or federal statutes or case law. 
(7)  Appeal. A final decision by the city council on a text amendment may be appealed to the 4th Judicial District Court within thirty (30) days of the city council's decision (see subsection 37-130(a)(4) appeals). 
(8)  Expiration. A zoning text amendment shall not expire. 
(j)  Certificates of appropriateness for historic district. 
(1)  When required. A certificate of appropriateness is required before the commencement of any exterior changes in the historic district that involves the following: 
a.  Erection of any new building or other construction in a historic district; 
b.  Alteration or addition to any existing structure in a historic district, including, but not limited to fences, boundary walls, light fixtures, steps paving or other appurtenant fixtures; 
c.  Exterior repairs of any existing building situated within a historic district; 
d.  Relocation of any building into a historic district; 
e.  Movement, excavation or destruction of any earthworks of historical or archaeological importance; 
f.  Construction or refurbishment of any signage; 
g.  "Demolition by neglect" as regulated in subsections 24.5-46-24.5-58 of the City of Monroe Code of Ordinances. 
(2)  When not required. A certificate of appropriateness is not required in the following instances: 
a.  Ordinary maintenance or repairs to structures which do not involve a change of design, color, material, or the outward appearance of the structure; 
b.  Where a permit was issued prior to the establishment of the historic district within which the permitted structure or site is located; 
c.  When the city council has issued a ruling of economic hardship or has otherwise overruled the heritage preservation commission on appeal; 
d.  If ordered by final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
e.  Other actions clearly exempted in rules adopted by the heritage preservation commission. 
(3)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application hearing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee is necessary. 
b.  All applications for certificates of appropriateness shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (see subsection 37-130(a), common review procedures), in a form prescribed by the heritage preservation commission. Said application may contain the following depending on the applicant's request: 
1.  Site and development plans at an appropriate scale showing proposed placement of structures on the property and required yards and open spaces; 
2.  The proposed appearance, color, texture, or materials and to the architectural design of the exterior, including the front, sides, rear and roof elevations of such buildings; and 
3.  Alterations and/or additions of any building, out-building, accessory structure, party wall, courtyard, sidewalk, driveway, parking area, fence, sign or other dependency thereof. 
(4)  Public hearing and decision by heritage preservation commission. 
a.  Following notice and a public hearing as required by subsection 37-130(a) of this ordinance, the heritage preservation commission shall recommend to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed certificate of appropriateness within sixty (60) days of filing of a complete application, except where such time period is extended by the applicant. 
b.  In making this recommendation, the heritage preservation commission shall consider the recommendation of the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, the appropriate Monroe Design Review Guidelines, relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria specific to each historic district and available from the heritage preservation commission staff. 
c.  The commission may attach any condition to the certificate necessary to protect the character of the historic district and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. 
(5)  Building permits. No building permit which affects exterior changes to a structure in an historic district shall be issued prior to the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness by the heritage preservation commission. Even if a building permit is not otherwise required by the city ordinances for construction, alteration, demolition, or relocation of any resource, a certificate of appropriateness from the heritage preservation commission is required. 
(6)  Appeal. Any person or persons aggrieved by any decision, act or proceedings of the heritage preservation commission shall have the right to apply in writing to the city council within thirty (30) days for reversal or modification thereof; and the mayor, or presiding officer of the city council, shall have the right to stay all further action until the city council shall have an opportunity to rule thereon. 
(7)  Expiration. The certificate of appropriateness (COA) approved by the commission shall expire six (6) months from the date of approval if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning compliance verification and the appropriate building permits. This deadline may be extended upon a request to the commission before the six (6) months is up. 
(k)  Reserved. 
(l)  Fence permit. 
(1)  When required. A fence permit is required whenever a fence is erected or extended, in accordance with article VII of this ordinance. 
(2)  When not required. A fence permit is not required for ordinary maintenance or repairs to fences that do not involve a change of length, height, material, or appearance of the fence. 
(3)  Application. 
a.  A pre-application conference is optional. 
b.  All applications for fence permits shall be filed in writing with the planning and zoning director or his/her designee (see subsection 37-130(a) common review procedures). 
(4)  Decision by zoning administrator. 
a.  The zoning administrator or his/her designee may refer the application to other affected or interested agencies for review and comment. 
b.  In deciding to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the proposed fence permit, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall consider relevant comments of all interested parties and the review criteria in subsection 37-130(c)(4). 
c.  The zoning administrator or his/her designee may attach any condition to the permit necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City of Monroe and minimize adverse impacts on adjacent properties. 
(5)  Review criteria. In addition to considerations outlined in subsection 37-76(f)(5) of this ordinance, the zoning administrator or his/her designee shall consider the following criteria in approving or denying a fence permit: 
a.  The proposed fence is consistent with the pertinent elements of the City of Monroe Comprehensive Plan and any other adopted plans. 
b.  The proposed fence meets the requirements of this ordinance. 
c.  The proposed fence will enhance the existing or planned character of the area and the city. 
(6)  Appeal. A final decision by the planning and zoning director or his/her designee or the zoning administrator or his/her designee on a fence permit may be appealed to the board of adjustment within thirty (30) days of the decision (See subsection 37-130(a)(4) appeals). 
(7)  Expiration. A fence permit shall not expire. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,588, 7-28-15; Ord. No. 11,727, 9-27-16; Ord. No. 11,798, 9-12-17; Ord. No. 11,884, 10-23-18) 
Sec. 37-131. - Violations. 
(a)  Administration of enforcement. The provisions of these land use regulations shall be administered by the mayor, or his/her designee, as designated herein, who shall have the power to make inspections of buildings or premises necessary to carry out their administrative duties in the enforcement of these regulations. The mayor, or his/her designee may call upon the police to furnish the necessary personnel to carry out enforcement if necessary. 
(b)  Violations and enforcement proceedings. In case any structure is erected or structurally altered or maintained, or any structure or land is used or altered or is not maintained, in violation of these regulations, the planning and urban development director or his/her designee may institute any appropriate action or proceedings to prevent such unlawful construction or alteration or use or other violations, to restrain, to correct or to prevent any illegal act, conduct any business or maintain any use in or about such premises. Furthermore, any resident of the community who believes that a violation of any of the provisions of these regulations is occurring may file a written complaint with the mayor. Such complaint shall fully set forth the acts or omissions constituting the alleged violation and the site or sites at which such violation or violations are alleged to be occurring. The planning and zoning director or his/her designee shall record properly such complaint, promptly investigate the allegations underlying said complaint, and take action on such complaint and take action on such complaints as provided by these regulations. 
(c)  Responsibility for violations. Whenever the planning and zoning director or his/her designee, on the basis of a written complaint, has reason to believe that a violation of these regulations may exist, he or she may require any person owning the structure or land or operating a use thereon to provide, within thirty (30) days of notification or the next available City of Monroe Environmental Court date, information as may be necessary, in his judgment, to determine the existence or extent of any violation. 
(d)  Penalty. Any person violating any provision of these regulations shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and deemed a public nuisance and upon conviction shall be punished for each separate offense by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00) to twenty-five dollars ($25.00) but not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days. Each day any violation of any provision of these regulations shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 11,443, 11-12-13; Ord. No. 11,883, 10-23-18) 
APPENDIX A - PERSONNEL SYSTEM[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix A is derived from Ord. No. 7418, adopted July 27, 1982. The internal arrangement and numbering of the ordinance have been retained, as has the basic language. Any editorial emendations made for the purpose of clarity have been included in brackets. Where necessary, the editor has added catchlines for the convenience of the user. Because of the nature of Chapter 14, "Definitions," catchlines have been deemed unnecessary. Future amendments to the ordinance will be included in their proper places; and a history note, showing the derivation of the amendment, will be appended to the section. Lack of such a history note indicates the section is derived from Ord. No. 7418. 

CHAPTER 1. - PERSONNEL MERIT SYSTEM 

1.1. - Established. 
    A seven-member personnel merit system commission will be established in the following manner: 
(a)  The mayor will appoint three (3) members. 
(b)  The city council will appoint two (2) members. 
(c)  Local Union 2388, A.F.S.C.M.E. Union will elect one (1) member. 
(d)  A permanent employee of the city's classified service will be elected by the city's classified service employees who are not members of a union. 
1.2. - Terms. 
    The terms of the commission will be six (6) years. These terms will be staggered on a three-year basis. 
1.3. - Election of chairman. 
    The members of the commission shall meet and organize by electing one of its members as chairman at the first meeting of each year thereafter. 
1.4. - Meetings. 
    The commission shall meet at least monthly and shall announce each meeting to the general public at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting. All business meetings will be open to the public except as provided by the state's Open Meeting Law. 
1.5. - Rules, regulations, procedures. 
    The commission shall establish its own rules, regulations and procedures and not be bound by any other rules of order, evidence or procedure in its meetings, hearings, or investigations except such as may be established by applicable state or federal law. 
1.6. - Quorum. 
    A quorum shall be constituted when four (4) members are present for the transaction of business. 
1.7. - Rulings. 
    The concurrence of a majority of the authorized members will constitute a ruling upon any item before the commission. 
1.8. - Secretary. 
    The director of personnel will act as secretary to the commission, but will have no voting power. 
1.9. - Minutes. 
    Minutes of the proceedings shall be prepared and forwarded to the director of administration by the director of personnel on behalf of and subject to the approval of the commission. 
1.10. - Powers of the commission. 
    [The commission shall have the following powers:] 
(a)  To represent the public interest in the improvements of personnel administration in the city for all classified employees. 
(b)  To conduct investigations and hearings whenever it has reason to believe the provisions of the merit system or rules thereof are being violated by a person or persons of the city or its management; to hold public hearings to investigate charges of such violations having been filed within. 
(c)  To provide and establish, change or alter rules or regulations for the operations of the personnel of the city within the scope of the charter and this ordinance. 
(d)  To hear appeals from employees and others who claim their rights under these rules have been violated and are to rule in such cases. 
(e)  To enforce its rules, regulations, and orders in the courts of the state. 
1.11. - Amendments. 
    Amendments to these rules shall not be effective until after approved by the commission after a public hearing has been conducted and until the amendments have been adopted as an ordinance of the City of Monroe. 
CHAPTER 2. - DIRECTOR OF PERSONNEL 

2.1. - Duties of the director of personnel. 
    [The director of personnel shall have the following duties:] 
(a)  To serve as secretary to the commission and prepare and forward to the director of administration all minutes of the commission's meetings, rulings and findings. 
(b)  To serve as executive and administrative head of the division of personnel under the department of administration. 
(c)  To establish and maintain a roster of all classified and unclassified employees of the city; set forth for each employee the class title, the salary, any change in class title or pay and all other necessary personnel data. 
(d)  To formulate and prescribe procedures and to publish them in the form of an employee manual and maintain the update thereof. 
(e)  To promote and increase efficiency, responsiveness to the public and economy in the city classified service. 
(f)  To provide fair and equal opportunity for qualified persons to enter and progress in the city service in a manner based on merit and fitness as ascertained through fair and practical personnel management methods. 
(g)  To maintain recruitment, advancement, and tenure practices enhancing the attractiveness of the city career and encouraging each employee to give their best effort to the city and public. 
(h)  To develop and propose to the commission a uniform classification and pay plan and maintain it on a continuing basis by recommending amendments thereto. 
(i)  To provide high morale among city employees by fostering good working relationships and by providing uniform personnel policies, opportunities for advancement, and consideration of employee need and desires. 
(j)  To develop training, educational and safety programs. 
(k)  To make and publish annual reports as requested by the commission, mayor or city council. 
(l)  To make investigations into alleged violations of these rules. 
(m)  To establish mandatory uniform grievance procedures within the departments of the city. 
(n)  To perform any other acts and functions which he may consider necessary or desirable to carry out the purpose of administration. 
2.2. - Promotion of affirmative action. 
    The director shall perform all is duties in an effort to promote affirmative action. 
2.3. - Equal employment opportunity. 
    Affirmative action shall be taken by the director to ensure equal employment opportunity in the city's classified service. 
CHAPTER 3. - PERSONS GOVERNED BY THESE RULES 

3.1. - Classified and unclassified positions. 
(a)  All employees of the city shall be members of the classified service, except the following: 
(1)  All elected city officials. 
(2)  The mayor's secretary and any assistants to the mayor. 
(3)  Persons employed on a temporary or contractual basis. 
(4)  The city attorney and any assistant city attorneys. 
(5)  Heads of departments created by or under the home rule charter of the City of Monroe. 
(6)  Any employee appointed directly by the council. 
(7)  Employees governed under the State of Louisiana Fire and Police Civil Service. 
(b)  Upon the changing of the Charter, state law or court decision, the city may add additional positions to the unclassified service. 
(c)  The commission, upon submission of adequate justification by the mayor or city council and after considering the recommendations of the director of personnel, may recommend to the city council the addition of positions to the unclassified service or the revocation of any positions in the unclassified service which is not covered by the City Charter, state law or court decision. 
(d)  All temporary personnel services which are for a period under thirty (30) days unless approved by the Commission. 
CHAPTER 4. - EQUAL OPPORTUNITY POLICY 

4.1. - Established. 
    Affirmative action shall be taken to ensure equal employment opportunity in the city service. Discrimination against any person in recruitment, examination, appointment, training, promotion, discipline, or any other aspect of personnel administration because of political or religious opinions or affiliations, membership or nonmembership in employee organization, or because of race, color, creed, national origin, marital status or other nonmerit factors are prohibited. Discrimination on the basis of age, sex or physical disability is prohibited except where specific age, sex or physical requirement constitutes a bona fide occupational qualification necessary to proper and efficient administration. 
CHAPTER 5. - CLASSIFICATION PLAN 

5.1. - Preparation by director. 
    The director, after consultation with the departments concerned, shall cause to be prepared a classification plan and from time to time, amendments thereto for presentation to the commission for its approval following public hearings. This plan shall consist of job specifications, designated standard class titles, designed to provide for all classes in the classified service. 
5.2. - Submittal to mayor and council. 
    All approved plans and amendments thereof shall be submitted after approval of the commission through the director of administration to the mayor and then to the city council. 
5.3. - Approval by commission. 
    An original classification plan or amendments thereto shall become effective only after the approval of the commission and after adoption as an ordinance of the City of Monroe, provided funds are available and appropriated by the governing authorities for implementation of the plan. 
5.4. - Allocation of positions. 
    The director, as soon as practicable after adoption of a classification plan hereunder, after consultation with the departments concerned, shall allocate each position in the classified service to its appropriate class, and thereafter shall allocate each new position in such service to its appropriate class, and may reallocate position from class to class. In making such allocations, he shall provide uniform application of the classification plan to positions under different departments. 
5.5. - Appointment only to allocated positions. 
    No person may be appointed until the position is allocated by the director. 
5.6. - Approval of new classes. 
    If new classes are requested, the classification system will be viewed as changed and the approval must be in accordance with rule 2 and 3 of this chapter. 
5.7. - Right of appeal to director regarding allocation or reallocation. 
    An employee affected by allocation or reallocation of a position to a class shall have thirty (30) days to have his case reviewed by the director or by a representative of the director. The director's decision shall be final in these matters unless there is an allegation that his ruling has been discriminatory in which case, the employee may appeal the decision to the commission in accord with chapter 12. 
5.8. - Titles of classes. 
    The title of each class will be the official title of every position allocated to the class. The department may use any working title of a position he deems necessary with the approval of the director. 
5.9. - Employment only under class title. 
    No employee in the classified service shall be appointed, employed or paid under any title other than of the class to which the position [is] allocated or reallocated. 
5.10. - Force and effect of classes. 
(a)  The specification of classes will have the following parts: 
(1)  Definitions will be descriptive and not restrictive. 
(2)  List or example of duties and responsibilities: 
a.  General duties. 
b.  Specific tasks. 
c.  Responsibilities. 
d.  Qualifications requirements. 
e.  Relations to other similar classes. 
f.  Statement of necessary special qualifications. 
5.11. - Reallocations and title change. 
(a)  When an employee's position or class title is changed or reallocated, he is entitled to serve therein without change in status if he meets the requirements set forth for the class. 
CHAPTER 6. - UNIFORM MERIT PAY PLAN 

6.1. - Preparation. 
    The director, after consultation with departments and director of administration and affording such investigations and research as deemed desirable, shall cause to be prepared a uniform merit pay plan. The submission and approval of such plan will be in accordance with rules 5.1., 5.2, and 5.3. 
6.2. - Amendments. 
    Any amendments thereof shall be submitted and approved in accordance with rules 5.1., 5.2 and 5.3 and rule 6.1. 
6.3. - Rates of pay-Types. 
    The rates of pay in the uniform pay plan shall consist of the following: 
(a)  A minimum rate. 
(b)  A maximum rate. 
(c)  Such intermediate rates as may be adopted by the commission and approved by the mayor and city council. 
6.4. - Same-Determination. 
    Rates of pay upon employment shall be fixed at the entrance rate of the class to which the position is allocated except that: 
(a)  When economic or employment condition makes recruitment of eligibles at the minimum rate for the class difficult, the director may request special entrance rates for that class with the approval of the director of administration and commission. 
(b)  If a special entrance rate is approved, all employees in the class must be raised to the new entrance rate of the class. 
(c)  No employee can, because of the rule, exceed the maximum step of the pay plan for the class which his position is allocated. 
6.5. - Persons reentering service-Generally. 
    A person reentering city service within a period of three (3) years except for military service may be placed in the corresponding step in which he left as long as it does not exceed the maximum amount of pay which he was earning when he left. 
6.6. - Same-Upon returning from military service. 
    A person returning from military service shall be restored to duty in compliance with the Universal Military Training and Service Act. 
6.7. - Transfer, reassignment. 
    Pay upon transfer or reassignment will be the same as the position they are transferring from. 
6.8. - Promotion. 
    Pay upon promotion will be established at the next higher step in the range of the new class. 
6.9. - Demotion. 
    Pay upon demotion may be set at any lower step within the lower class but cannot exceed or be equal to the amount being paid before demotion. 
6.10. - Merit increase. 
    Each employee is eligible for, but not automatically entitled to, a merit increase after the first six (6) months of employment and each year thereafter until the maximum step is achieved. These increases are merit increases and in no way should be viewed as longevity or cost-of-living increase. 
6.11. - Maximum rate. 
    All increases herein authorized are subject to the requirement that no employee's pay shall exceed the maximum rate of pay established for the class of position the employee occupies. 
6.12. - Compensation of part-time employees. 
    Compensation of part-time employees will be set as a full-time [employee] except that all benefits including pay will be prorated to his percentage of time. 
6.13. - Change of pay plan. 
    When the pay plan is changed, the rate of pay will be established in accordance to the next higher step of the plan. 
6.14. - Individual increases. 
    A department head may, after presenting justifiable reasons in writing to the commission and with its approval, increase an employee's pay at any time to any step in the range for the class but not beyond the maximum for the class. The department head must have approval of the director of administration and mayor before submitting this request to the commission. 
6.15. - Certification and payment. 
    No payment for personal service shall be made by the director of administration without the certification of personnel action forms from the director of personnel. 
6.16. - Rates for reallocation. 
    Rates of pay for reallocation will be the same as promotion, demotion, reassignment, whichever is applicable. 
6.17. - Rules for overtime pay. 
    The director shall set the rules of payment for overtime, holidays, and other fringe benefits with the concurrence of the director of administration and present them for approval of the commission, the mayor and council. 
6.18. - Uniformity. 
    All compensation will be treated uniformly throughout the city departments. 
6.19. - Cost-of-living raises. 
    Cost-of-living raises will not become part of the pay plan and will be administered by the mayor and city council. 
CHAPTER 7. - CERTIFICATION AND APPOINTMENT 

7.1. - Filling of vacancies. 
    Vacancies in the classified service may be filled by original appointment, promotion, reassignment, demotion, transfer, reinstatement following an appeal, restoration to duty following military service or by noncompetitive reemployment. 
7.2. - New positions. 
    When the need for a new position exists, the department will request through the director of administration, who will certify the availability of funds, to the director for a list of eligibles to make such an appointment. 
7.3. - Anticipation of vacancies. 
    The department should anticipate as far in advance as practicable the vacancy to permit the director to prepare a list of eligibles for filling of the vacancy. 
7.4. - Certification of eligibles. 
    The director shall certify to the department the names of the eligibles from the appropriate list for the class in which the vacant position exists. 
7.5. - Selective certification. 
    Selective certification may be requested and approved by the director when: 
(a)  The department requests and adequately justifies that to perform certain duties of a class a person must possess particular qualifications. 
(b)  In specific instances, and pursuant to and in conformity with an order of the court, commission, or agency of competent jurisdiction, the director may make selective certification. 
7.6. - Certification only of available applicants. 
    The director shall make the determination of availability for appointment and certify only the available applicants to the department. 
7.7. - Recommendation. 
    The department [director] will recommend the person whom he wishes for appointment to the position. The director will appoint and certify the appointment to the director of administration. 
7.8. - Emergency appointments. 
(a)  All appoints [appointments] of less than thirty (30) days will be filled as a temporary appointment. 
(b)  The director may approve an emergency appointment to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days; however no employee may serve over one hundred eighty (180) [days] without being appointed in conformity of these rules. 
7.9. - Temporary positions, time span. 
    No position appointed over thirty (30) days will be classed as a temporary position and must have the approval of the commission. Temporary positions are for thirty (30) days or less. 
7.10. - Cancellation of employment. 
    The director may cancel the employment of any applicant or of any employee serving with other than permanent status following certification or employment if: 
(a)  His employment in the classified service would be prohibited by law. 
(b)  His conduct has been infamous or disgraceful. 
(c)  He lacks the qualifications for the class or position. 
(d)  He is physically unfit for the position. 
(e)  He is addicted to habitual use of drugs or intoxicating liquors. 
(f)  He has been adjudged guilty in court of a crime involving moral turpitude. 
(g)  He has been dismissed from public service for cause. 
(h)  He has made false statement concerning his qualifications or prior employment status or other material information which caused his certification to examination or employment. 
7.11. - Types of appointment. 
    In the classified service, there will be seven (7) types of appointments certified by the director: 
(a)  Emergency appointments: An appointment for thirty-one (31) days to one hundred eighty (180) days with the approval of the commission. No fringe benefits will be given for these types of position. 
(b)  Temporary position: An appointment for less than thirty (30) days. This position will be part of the classified service. However, if an appointment of any individual is for over thirty (30) days, it will become an emergency appointment and must come under the classified service. 
(c)  Probationary appointment: When a position is filled by original appointment, the employee serves a six-month period of probation. 
(d)  Provisional appointment: When a person is appointed from a list of eligibles of less than five (5) applicants. The director may rule this as a provisional appointment and in the event a list of eligibles are recorded within ninety (90) days, he may rule that the position must be competitive. If the director has not made such ruling within ninety (90) days the position will become classified as probationary and the employee will be treated as a probationary employee and be given credit of time served in this status. 
(e)  Permanent appointment: When an employee has served his six (6) months' probationary appointment, he becomes a permanent classified employee. 
(f)  Job appointment: This is an appointment with a period of appointment with beginning and ending date. This employee is entitled to fringe benefits and the appointment cannot extend over eighteen (18) months. An appointment must be made from a list of eligibles. 
(g)  Noncompetitive reemployment: When an employee is reappointed within three (3) years after he has left city service. The employee is reemployed at no greater rate than he earned before he left the classified service. The type appointment is also a probational appointment. 
7.12. - Rights of department-Director's approval required. 
    The department may, with the approval of the director: 
(a)  Reassign an employee to another position for which the employee is qualified as long as the position has the same entrance level. 
(b)  Demote an employee to another position for cause provided the employee is qualified. 
(c)  Detail to another position for a period not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days with pay, an employee who is qualified for the position to be detailed to. 
7.13. - Same-Report to director. 
    The department may, by reporting to the director: 
(a)  Change the duty station. 
(b)  Change the working hours. 
(c)  Transfer to the same class or to a comparable class with the same entrance rate that the employee is qualified. 
CHAPTER 8. - PROBATIONARY PERIOD 

8.1. - Appointments affected. 
    Probationary periods will be served for the following appointments: 
(a)  Probationary appointments. 
(b)  Noncompetitive reemployments. 
(c)  Provisional appointments which, after ninety (90) days, have been changed to probationary appointments. 
    The probationary period shall be an essential part of the employment process and shall be utilized for the most effective adjustment of a new employee and for the elimination of any probationary employee whose performance does not meet the requirements standard of work. 
8.2. - Exceptions. 
    A permanent employee who has been promoted, transferred, reassigned or demoted to another position shall not be required to serve another probationary period. 
8.3. - Removal of probationary employees. 
    A probationary employee may be removed by the department with written reason being provided to the director and the employee. 
8.4. - Probationary period for part-time employees. 
    A probationary period for a part-time employee will be six (6) months. 
8.5. - When permanent appointment begins. 
    A permanent appointment will begin at the end of a probationary appointment. 
8.6. - Extension. 
    The director may extend the probationary period up to twelve (12) months upon written request from the department giving reason for the request extension. No probationary period will be granted over twelve (12) months. 
CHAPTER 9. - PERFORMANCE APPRAISAL 

9.1. - Authorized. 
    Performance appraisals will be made on all employees who have been in a position for ninety (90) days during the period of January 1 through December 31. Each employee will receive his or her evaluation by February 1 of each year. 
9.2. - Procedure. 
    The performance appraisals will be made as follows: 
(a)  The supervisor will evaluate each employee under their supervision on the appropriate form provided by the director. 
(b)  The supervisor, the department head or his designee, and the employee will review the annual appraisal and sign, and the employee will be given a copy thereof. 
(c)  The department head will forward all appraisals to the director by February 1 of each year. 
9.3. - Final rating. 
    The final rating on all performance appraisals will be one of the five (5) following categories as provided for on the performance appraisal form provided by the director: 
(a)  Excellent. 
(b)  Good. 
(c)  Satisfactory. 
(d)  Fair. 
(e)  Unsatisfactory. 
9.4. - Appeal. 
    Appeal of an unsatisfactory evaluation will be as follows: 
(a)  An employee will appeal his evaluation to his department head within thirty (30) days from the date on which he signed and received a copy of said evaluation. This appeal will be in writing and give reason thereof why they feel the evaluation should be changed. 
(b)  The department head will review the evaluation and give his determination within ten (10) days of the receipt of the appeal to the employee. 
(c)  Upon the receipt of the answer, the employee has the right to appeal the decision of the department head to the mayor within ten (10) days of the receipt of the department head's decision. 
(d)  The mayor or his designee will review the appeal and have a hearing concerning the appeal and issue a written answer to the employee within fifteen (15) days of the hearing. 
(e)  Within thirty (30) days of the notification, an employee may appeal to the commission after the above appeals have been exhausted. 
9.5. - Effect of unsatisfactory evaluation. 
    The effect of an unsatisfactory evaluation is: 
(a)  The employee becomes ineligible for: 
(1)  Any promotion; or 
(2)  Any salary increase. 
(b)  The employee may be subject to further disciplinary actions including discharge. 
9.6. - Re-rating after unsatisfactory evaluation. 
    In the case of an employee receiving an unsatisfactory evaluation they must be re-rated by September 1 of that year. This also must be reported to the director. 
9.7. - Effect of lack of appraisal. 
    If a permanent employee does not have any official performance appraisal record in the director's office, they shall be considered as having a "satisfactory" rating. 
CHAPTER 10. - HOURS OF WORK AND FORMS OF LEAVE 

10.1. - Workweek established. 
    Each employee shall have a workweek established as forty (40) hours per week. 
10.2. - Longer workweek. 
    The city may specify a workweek exceeding forty (40) hours for employees in specific classes of position with the approval of the commission, for employees in specific departments. 
10.3. - Recording of hours. 
    The director shall record the number of hours and days which will constitute the regular workweek. 
10.4. - Part-time employees. 
    Part-time employees shall have the work established for part-time work and rules 1, 2 and 3 shall be used. 
10.5. - Intermittent employees. 
    When the services are not needed on a regular basis, the commission shall authorize intermittent workers, the director may appoint an employee to serve on an intermittent basis on an hourly, daily, weekly or monthly basis. 
10.6. - Overtime. 
    An employee in classified service may be required by the city to work overtime. Any time the department requires the employee to work overtime, they must perform the hours of work. 
10.7. - Types of leave. 
    All full-time employees shall earn sick and vacation (annual leave) by the following schedule: 
(a)  Vacation (annual leave). A full-time employee is guaranteed a paid vacation (annual leave) drawable in advance as per the following schedule: 
(1)  6 months-1 year: 5 days (working). 
(2)  1 year-5 years: 10 days (working). 
(3)  6 years-10 years: 15 days (working). 
(4)  11 years-20 years; 20 days (working). 
(5)  21 years and over: 25 days (working). 
No vacation (annual leave) may be taken by an employee until he/she has been in the service of the city continuously for a period of six (6) months. 
The employee can accrue up to one hundred twenty (120) days' vacation and will be paid for all accruals at retirement, separation or death. 
Holidays occurring during an employee's scheduled vacation shall not be charged to his/her vacation time in any case. 
(b)  Sick leave. 
Any employee contracting or incurring any non-service-connected sickness or disability, which renders such employee unable to perform the duties of his employment, shall receive sick leave with pay. 
Employees shall be eligible for sick leave after ninety (90) days service with the employer. 
Employees shall be allowed one (1) day sick leave for each month of service. Sick leave shall be earned by an employee for any month in which the employee is compensated for five (5) or more hours of work. 
Employees shall start to earn sick leave from their date of hire, and they shall accumulate sick leave as long as they are in the service of the employer. Sick leave may be accumulated up to a maximum of one hundred twenty (120) days. 
When an employee finds it necessary to be absent for any of the reasons specified herein, he/she shall cause the facts to be reported to his/her department head thirty (30) minutes prior to the regular time for reporting to work. 
An employee must keep his department head informed of his/her condition if the absence is of more than three (3) days' duration. An employee may be required to submit a medical certificate for any absence after the third day in any one usage. 
After an employee has banked twelve (12) unused sick days, he/she has the option to either continue accruing such time or receiving in cash in December on a 1 to 2 ratio, all time which he/she elects to cash in for accumulated sick leave all over twelve (12) days he/she must keep banked at all times. 
10.8. - Activities not earning sick or annual leave. 
    No employee shall earn annual or sick leave for: 
(a)  Overtime hours. 
(b)  For any hours of leave without pay. 
(c)  While he is on leave with or without pay, until such time as he returns to active work except where inability to return to work is caused by illness or disability. 
(d)  For any hours of on-call status. 
(e)  For hours of travel outside of his normal work hours. 
(f)  For any hours of a holiday or other non-work day. 
10.9. - Request for annual leave. 
    When an employee requests annual leave, it must be applied for in advance by the employee and may only be used with the approval of the department head or his designated representative. 
10.10. - Effect of non-work days on annual leave. 
    No annual leave shall be charged for a non-work day. 
10.11. - Reduction of annual leave. 
    No employee shall be required to reduce his annual leave below thirty (30) days, however, the employee may be required to reduce his annual leave to this amount by the department. 
10.12. - Payment of annual and sick leave upon separation. 
    Annual and sick leave shall be paid upon separation as follows: 
(a)  Employees shall be compensated in cash for any accumulated unused leave when they are permanently separated from employment as a result of voluntary resignation, discharge, retirement, or death. In the event of death, payment is to be made to the estate of the employee. 
(b)  The amount of payment of all unused leave is to be calculated at the employee's rate of pay in effect on the pay day immediately preceding the employee's separation. 
10.13. - Payment beyond last day of work disallowed. 
    No payment for annual leave may be used to continue the employee as a classified employee beyond the last day of work. 
10.14. - Grounds for sick leave. 
    Sick leave may be utilized by an employee for absence of duty for the following: 
(a)  Illness or injury. 
(b)  Medical, dental, or optical consultation or treatment. 
10.15. - Minimum charges of leave. 
    All charges of sick or annual leave will be for a minimum of one-half hour. 
10.16. - Physician's certification authorized. 
    The department may require the employee to file a certification from a registered physician or some other acceptable proof that the employee is unable to perform because of illness. 
10.17. - Advance leave prohibited. 
    Advance of sick or annual leave to an employee is prohibited. 
10.18. - Special leave. 
    Employees shall be given special leave for the following: 
(a)  Performing jury duty. 
(b)  Summoned to appear in court as long as they are not the plaintiff or defendant in an action separate from their city employment. 
(c)  The city determines that he is prevented from doing his duties because of an act of God. 
(d)  The city determines that because of local celebrations, it is impracticable to work. 
(e)  The employee is ordered to active training for the Army Reserve or National Guard. 
(f)  For special needs of certain relatives. 
(g)  Education leave if it is within the scope of employment and is limited to thirty (30) days per year. The city may give additional education leave to employees with the approval of the commission. 
10.19. - Leave without pay. 
    No leave without pay shall be approved for any employee over one (1) year without the approval of the commission. All leave without pay over thirty (30) days will be sent to the director in writing. 
10.20. - Termination authorized after sick leave exhausted. 
    When an employee has exhausted all sick leave, they may be terminated without prejudice if the department certifies that the position must be filled. No position will be doubly encumbered as a permanent position in the classified service. However, he shall retain his reemployment status upon release from a doctor to the director that he is available for reemployment. 
10.21. - Curtailment authorized. 
    The city may curtail any leave of absence it has granted provided that the city gives the employee fifteen (15) days to return to work. If the employee does not return to work on the requested day, he can be removed from the classified service. 
10.22. - Holidays. 
    All classified employees will have the following holiday schedule and will be paid in accordance with the amount of the working hours or workweek they are to perform: 
(a)  New Year's Day. 
(b)  Good Friday. 
(c)  Memorial Day. 
(d)  Independence Day. 
(e)  Labor Day. 
(f)  Veteran's Day. 
(g)  Thanksgiving Day. 
(h)  Christmas Day. 
(i)  Employee's Birthday. 
10.23. - Payment of overtime. 
    The city may pay overtime hours within this rule in compensatory time, on an hour for hour basis, provided that all time is used or paid for on a one and one-half (11/2) times basis within six (6) months of the time it is accumulated. 
CHAPTER 11. - DISCIPLINARY ACTIONS, SEPARATION AND LAYOFF 

11.1. - Authorized. 
    The city may take action to suspend, remove, demote, reduce in pay reassign or reprimand any classified employee for cause. 
11.2. - Suspensions. 
(a)  Any employee suspended without pay shall be notified on or before the effective date of the suspension. 
(b)  Any employee suspended shall be furnished detailed reason of the suspension in writing within ten (10) days of the effective date of the suspension. 
(c)  Any employee who has been suspended without pay may be paid for time lost if after investigation the commission decides that disciplinary action was not warranted. The director shall authorize the reimbursement with the approval of the director of administration. 
11.3. - Adverse actions for cause-Reasons; appeal. 
    [In] all adverse actions for cause, the department must furnish the employee in writing the following: 
(a)  Detailed reason must be furnished for the action on or before the action is taken. 
(b)  In the written notice the statement "you may appeal this action to the personnel merit commission within thirty (30) days" shall be placed on all adverse actions. 
(c)  All adverse actions must be sent to director within five (5) days of the action. 
11.4. - Same-Delivery. 
    All actions for cause shall be delivered to the employee by: 
(a)  Personal service to the employee on the job or at their residence; or 
(b)  Sent to the employee's last-known address on file in the personnel office, mailed certified mail, return receipt requested. 
11.5. - Layoff. 
    When the city determines that a reduction in the work force is necessary, the following procedures will be followed: 
(a)  The director of administration will notify the director of the intent of layoff and the number of personnel and department by class, to be laid off. 
(b)  The director will prepare a layoff list by department by laying off employees in seniority order by classification in the following order: 
(1)  Temporary employees. 
(2)  Job appointment employees. 
(3)  Probationary employees. 
(4)  Permanent employees. 
(c)  This layoff will be made in seniority order by class and will be city-wide and not limited to one (1) department. 
(d)  No permanent employee will be laid off while the city has other types of appointments which could be laid off within the city. 
(e)  If a permanent employee is laid off, his name will be placed in the first available position in the class in which he qualifies. 
(f)  When a layoff is in progress, an employee must be offered any available position for which he qualifies on a seniority basis; however, once offered a position and the position is declined, the employee, no matter what the status, will be laid off and placed on the preferred hire list. 
11.6. - Resignation-Letter required. 
    When an employee voluntarily resigns, he or she must give the personnel office a written letter of resignation. 
11.7. - Same-Withdrawal requirements. 
    Any employee who resigns may not receive or withdraw such resignation without mutual agreement between the employee and the department. 
CHAPTER 12. - APPEALS AND HEARINGS 

12.1. - Authorized. 
    Any action taken by the city or department thereof may be appealed to the commission through the grievance procedure by the following: 
(a)  Any person who feels that they have been discriminated against because of any adverse action from employment. 
(b)  Any employee, serving in permanent status who has had adverse action taken against them. 
(c)  Any person in the classified service that alleges that they have been deprived of any right, discriminated against, or adversely affected by the violation of any rule or provision of these rules. 
12.2. - Definition. 
    A grievance is hereby defined to mean a dispute concerning the meaning, interpretation, or application of any of the provisions of the personnel merit system which may not be covered by a current labor agreement and shall be settled in accord with the following grievance procedure hereinafter set forth; provided, however, that the discussion and settlement of the grievance shall in no way disrupt the city's work schedules. 
12.3. - Procedure. 
    The grievance procedure is as follows: 
Step No. 1:  A grievance shall be presented orally to the aggrieved employee's immediate supervisor within five (5) working days from the act or omission giving rise to the grievance. An earnest attempt will be made to arrive at a settlement thereof. Failing satisfactory adjustment within three (3) working days, the grievance may be submitted to the employee's department head by the aggrieved employee and/or a representative of his choice within five (5) working days. 
Step No. 2:  The grievance, when referred to the department head shall be in writing and shall state the specific reasons for the grievance and specify the pertinent details of the act or omission giving rise to said grievance. The department head or his designee shall conduct a hearing on the grievance within five (5) working days. If the department head or his designee fails to adjust the grievance in a satisfactory manner within five (5) working days after the hearing, the employee and/or his representative may appeal the grievance to the mayor within five (5) days. 
Step No. 3:  The mayor or his designee shall conduct a hearing on the grievance within ten (10) working days. If the mayor or his designee fails to adjust the grievance satisfactorily within five (5) working days, the employee and/or his representative may appeal the grievance to the personnel merit system commission. 
Step No. 4:  Appeal to personnel merit system commission. 
12.4. - Filing of appeals. 
    All appeals to the commission must: 
(a)  Be filed within thirty (30) days following the action taken by the mayor and be filed in the director's office. 
(b)  Be in writing. 
(c)  Be signed by the employee or appellant or by an attorney on his or her behalf. 
(d)  Have the name and mailing address of the appellant or employee. 
(e)  Contain a clear and concise statement of the actions and the basis for which the appeal is being made. 
(f)  If discrimination is alleged as a basis for appeal, show the specific facts supporting the discrimination and must be in detail. 
(g)  Give the date the action occurred and the date the employee or appellant learned of the action. 
(h)  Indicate the relief sought. 
12.5. - Time of appeals. 
    All appeals shall run for thirty (30) calendar days and will not be delayed for holidays or weekends or other types of leave given to an employee except when the thirtieth day falls on a city non-work day, the period will be extended to the next city work day. 
12.6. - Docketing of appeals. 
    The director will note the date of filing in his office and forward copies to the mayor, director of administration, and department head concerned. He will cause all appeals to be docketed for hearing by the commission within thirty (30) days from the date of filing with at least ten (10) days' advance notice of the hearing. 
12.7. - Dismissal of appeals. 
    The city may request any appeal not meeting the specification of this chapter or the rules to be summarily dismissed. 
12.8. - Hearings by commission. 
    All docketed appeals will be heard by the commission at a place assigned and both parties shall be present either voluntarily or through subpoenas. 
12.9. - Hearings to be public. 
    All hearings shall be public, and all parties have the right of counsel or representation of their choice. All hearings will be held in accord with chapter 1, paragraph 1.5. 
12.10. - Oath. 
    All testimony will be under oath. 
12.11. - Decisions-Status. 
    The decision rendered by the commission will be the official position of the commission. 
12.12. - Same-Appeal-Authorized. 
    The parties have the legal right to appeal this decision to the next court of jurisdiction within thirty (30) days of the decision of the commission. 
12.13. - Same-Same-Payment of cost. 
    All cost of such appeals will be borne by the individuals. 
12.14. - Issuance of written decision. 
    A written decision will be issued by the commission containing its findings of facts and conclusions. The decision shall be final on the day that it is filed with the director. If the commission orders a reinstatement, the city will reinstate on the day which is ordered. 
12.15. - Settlement. 
    The city and employee may reach an amicable settlement after an appeal is docketed. The city must report such settlement to the director. 
CHAPTER 13. - RECORDS AND REPORTS 

13.1. - Payroll and attendance records-Maintenance. 
    It shall be the duty of the director with the approval of the director of administration and mayor to design a system to facilitate the maintenance of adequate personnel records and to eliminate duplication of accounting and reporting to the fullest extent practicable. 
13.2. - Same-Certification. 
    All payroll and attendance records will be certified by the employee and the department head. 
13.3. - Personnel action. 
    All personnel action will be reported on the prescribed personnel action forms and these forms signed by the director shall constitute authorization under the classified system. 
13.4. - Leave records. 
    Leave records will be maintained by the director. 
13.5. - Audit of payroll and leave records authorized. 
    The director may, from time to time, audit any and all payroll and leave records of the city in the classified service. 
CHAPTER 14. - DEFINITIONS 
    The following words and phrases when uses in these rules shall have the following meanings: 
14.1. Abandonment of position means the desertion by a classified employee of his position. 14.2. Allocation means the determination of the class to which a position in the classified service shall be deemed to pertain. 14.3. Annual leave is leave with pay granted an employee for the purpose of rehabilitation, restoration and maintenance of work efficiency, or transaction of personal affairs. 14.4. Appointment means an offer to a qualified person of employment in a classified position and the acceptance of such offer. 14.5. Bona fide student means a person enrolled in an accredited high school, college or university in the state, or person enrolled in a state-operated vocational-technical school, in a sufficient number of courses and classes in such institution to be classified as a full-time regular student under the criteria used by the institution in which he is enrolled; enrolled in an institution of higher education as defined in section 461(b) of the Higher Education Act. A bona fide student shall not lose his status for vacation during an academic year or summer recess. 14.6. Class means one (1) or more positions in the classified service so nearly alike in essential characteristics as to warrant like treatment for all personnel purposes. 14.7. Classified position means any office or position in the classified service. 14.8. Classified service is defined as that body of employees performing personal services to and for the City of monroe except those rendering such services who are specifically exempt from the classified service by the City Charter and these rules. 14.9. Commission means the city of Monroe Personnel Merit Systems Commission. 14.10. Continuing position means an office or position of employment in the classified service which reasonably can be expected to continue for more than twelve (12) months. 14.11. Continuous city service means uninterrupted status of a classified employee of the city exclusive of interruption caused by authorized leave of absence, layoff of not more than one (1) year, military service consisting of active duty in the armed forces of the United States for not more than six (6) years of voluntary service or an indefinite period of involuntary service. 14.12. Demotion means a change of a permanent or probationary employee from a position of one class to a position of another class for which a lower minimum rate of pay is prescribed. 14.13. Preferred reemployment list means a list containing the names of former classified employees who have noncompetitive reemployment rights in a particular class or classes in a certain department. 14.14. Designated holiday means a holiday or part of a holiday an employee observes, in lieu of a regular holiday observed by the city, because the regular holiday or a portion thereof fell on the employee's regular day off. 14.15. Director means the director of the department of personnel. 14.16. Detail to special duty means the temporary assignment of an employee to perform the duties and responsibilities of a position other than the one to which he is regularly assigned, without prejudice to his rights in and to his regular position. 14.17. Discrimination means consideration of religious or political beliefs, sex, race, or any other nonmerit factors. 14.18. Eligible means any person who is currently on an eligible list for employment with the city. 14.19. Emergency appointment means a temporary appointment made necessary by an emergency work situation which will not exceed ninety (90) days. 14.20. Job appointment means a temporary appointment of an employee for work of a temporary nature or to substitute for another employee not to exceed six (6) months. 14.21. Layoff means the removal of an employee from a position because of lack of work, lack of funds, or for other causes other than disciplinary actions. 14.22. Leave of absence without pay is leave or time off from work granted by the city for which period the employee receives no pay. 14.23. Original appointment means initial appointment of a person to a classified position by provisional, probationary or job appointment. 14.24. Pay means salary, wages, fees, allowances and all other forms of valuable consideration, or the amount of any one (1) or more of them earned by or paid to any employee, for service rendered in any position, but does not include any allowance for expense authorized and incurred as incidence to employment. 14.25. Pay plan means all the rates of compensation prescribed by the commission and approved by the mayor and city council for classes of positions in the classified service. 14.26. Political activity means an effort to support or oppose the election of a candidate for political office in an election in the city. 14.27. Position means any employment in the classified service. 14.28. Probationary appointment means appointment to test the employee's ability to perform the job duties assigned. 14.29. Promotion means a change of a permanent employee in the classified service from a position of one class to a position of another class for which a higher minimum rate of pay is provided in the pay plan. 14.30. Promotional list means a list, established in conformity with these rules, of permanent employees who have demonstrated their fitness for a higher class position by successfully meeting the requirement of the commission for such higher class position and are eligible for promotion. 14.31. Public hearing means a hearing held after public notice of at least ten (10) days, at which any person may have a reasonable opportunity to be heard, in accordance with such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the commission. 14.32. Reallocation means a change in the allocation of a position from one class to another class where in the duties of the position have undergone a change. 14.33. Reassignment means the change of a probationary or permanent employee from a position in one class to another position in a different class, both classes of which have the same minimum rate of pay. 14.34. Reemployment means the noncompetitive appointment of a person based on permanent status attained in former employment in the classified service for a period of three (3) years. 14.35. Regular or permanent appointment means the status attained by a classified employee upon the successful completion of his probationary period. 14.36. Reinstatement means the restoration of a former classified employee to duty and pay status pursuant to an order issued by the commission or an appellate court. 14.37. Removal or dismissal means the termination of employment of an employee for cause. 14.38. Resignation means the voluntary termination, by an employee, of his employment in the classified service. 14.39. Seniority means an employee's length of continuous service with the city since his last date of hire. 14.40. Service rating means the individual rating of an employee, made in accordance with the uniform service rating system established by these rules. 14.41. Sick leave is leave with pay granted an employee who is suffering with a sickness or disability which prevents him from performing his usual duties and responsibilities or who requires dental or optical consultation or treatment. 14.42. Suspension means the enforced leave of absence without pay of an employee for disciplinary purposes, or during an investigation of alleged misconduct by the employee. 14.43. Title change means a change in the title of the class to which a position is allocated without change in the position's duty and responsibility content. 14.44. Transfer means the change of an employee from a position in one department to a position in another department without change in probational or permanent status and without a break in service of one (1) or more working days. 14.45. Uniform pay plan means a pay plan which is uniform in all respects within all departments of the city for position in the classified service.  
CHAPTER 15. - COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNIT RECOGNITION 

15.1 - Preamble. 
    In order to provide for the orderly certification and decertification of labor organizations seeking to enter into collective bargaining agreements with the City of Monroe and as required by Section 7-06 of the Charter of the City of Monroe, the following rules and procedures shall apply whenever there is no federal or state law providing such procedures which would be applicable to city employees. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.2. - Bargaining units. 
    Any group of employees of the City of Monroe may seek to establish units for the purpose of bargaining collectively with the City of Monroe in respect to rates of pay, wages, hours of employment, employee grievances, discipline and other conditions of employment. All employees within a unit shall have common economic and working condition interests. Each unit shall consist of not less than fifteen (15) employees of the City of Monroe. No unit shall be recognized without the written approval of a majority of the employees contained within the proposed bargaining unit. Only full time employees employed by the City of Monroe for more than ninety (90) days at the time of petitioning or voting shall be considered eligible to vote or petition. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.3. - Procedure to be recognized as a bargaining unit. 
    Should any group of employees, or any labor organization acting on their behalf, desire to be recognized as a bargaining unit, they shall submit a petition for recognition on a form to be promulgated by the department of administration, division of human resources of the city. Bargaining units, once recognized, may not be divided without the decertification of the union for the entire bargaining unit. The department of administration, division of human resources will review the petition and approve or disapprove the definition of the bargaining unit. Written reasons shall be given for disapproval. Should the petition not be approved, the employees may appeal, within thirty (30) days, to the city council and its decision on whether to approve or disapprove the proposed bargaining unit shall be final. Within thirty (30) days of approval of the bargaining unit definition, or contemporaneously with the request for recognition of a bargaining unit, the proposed representative of the unit or any employee within the bargaining unit shall submit a written request for an election signed by thirty (30) per cent of the employees of the proposed unit, on a form promulgated by the department of administration, division of human resources. Should the employees fail to submit the written request for election contemporaneously with the petition for formation of a bargaining unit or within thirty (30) days, the proposed bargaining unit shall not be recognized and no requests for recognition of a bargaining unit covering the employees shall be entertained for a period of twelve (12) months from the last day the written request for election could have been submitted. Any person signing in favor of an election may withdraw his request at any time prior to fifteen (15) days before any election to recognize a bargaining unit and its representative by personally notifying, in writing, the director of human resources who shall note the time and date of delivery to him on the written withdrawal. Should a person withdraw his request, his signature shall not be counted towards the number needed to hold the recognition election. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.4. - Elections. 
    After approval of the bargaining unit and submission of written consent of thirty (30) per cent of the employees of the unit, an election by secret ballot shall be conducted by the department of administration, division of human resources, or its designee, for the purpose of approving the creation of the bargaining unit and the recognition of a bargaining unit representative. All permanent employees employed by the city for a period of more than ninety (90) days prior to the election and assigned to work on the date of the election within the proposed unit shall have the right to vote. All ballots shall be opened in public at such place as designated by the department of administration, division of human resources which place shall be reasonably calculated to accommodate all interested parties and such representatives of the news media as may wish to attend. All ballots shall be counted by the department of administration, division of human resources, with the director of human resources determining the validity vel non of each ballot. Should any person desire to appeal the decision of the director of human resources as to the validity of a ballot, such appeal shall be taken to the city council of the City of Monroe within ten (10) days of the decision to either accept or reject the disputed ballot and the decision of the city council shall be final. A majority vote of all employees within the bargaining unit shall be necessary for the creation of a bargaining unit and/or recognition of the bargaining unit representative. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.5. - Confirmation of results. 
    The results of any election shall be confirmed in writing by the director of human resources to the city council. Upon confirmation of the results of the election, such confirmation shall be presented to the city council of the City of Monroe which body will recognize the bargaining representative if approved by a majority of the employees eligible to vote within the bargaining unit. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.6. - Decertification of representative. 
    Should any employee or group of employees, or any labor organization acting in their behalf, desire to decertify a representative for a bargaining unit, they shall submit a petition for decertification on a form to be promulgated by the department of administration, division of human resources of the city together with the written request of thirty (30) per cent of the employees of the bargaining unit eligible to vote in an election for decertification. The department of administration, division of human resources will review the petition and signatures and approve or disapprove the decertification petition of the bargaining unit. Written reasons shall be given for disapproval. Should the petition be disapproved, the employees may appeal within ten (10) days to the city council and its decision on whether to approve or disapprove the decertification petition shall be final. Within thirty (30) days of approval of the decertification petition a secret ballot election shall be conducted by the department of administration, division of human resources, or its designee, for the purpose of approving or disapproving the decertification of a collective bargaining unit representative. All permanent employees employed by the city for a period of more than ninety (90) days prior to the election and assigned to work within the bargaining unit shall have the right to vote. All ballots shall be opened in public at such place as designated by the department of administration, division of human resources as reasonably calculated to accommodate all interested parties and such representatives of the news media as may be interested. All ballots shall be counted by the department of administration, division of human resources, with the director of human resources determining the validity vel non of each ballot. Should any person within the bargaining unit desire to appeal the decision of the director of human resources, such appeal shall be taken to the city council of the City of Monroe within ten (10) days of the decision to either accept or reject the disputed ballot and the decision of the city council shall be final. A majority vote of all employees within the bargaining unit shall be necessary for the decertification of a bargaining unit representative. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.7. - Disputed ballots for certification and decertification elections. 
    All disputed ballots shall be placed in sealed envelopes, one for ballots allowed, one for ballots rejected, and delivered to the clerk of the city council. Such ballots shall remain in the sealed envelopes until such time as the city council may take up the appeal of the ballots, if any appeal is taken. At any appeal of disputed ballots, the director of human resources shall state the nature of the dispute concerning the ballots and the council shall act upon all ballots in accordance with its procedures. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.8. - Presentation of decertification results to council and effect of decertification on existing contracts. 
    Upon the vote of a majority of the employees within a bargaining unit to decertify a representative, the result of such election shall be transmitted to the city council fifteen (15) days after the election or fifteen (15) days after the council acts upon any disputed ballots, whichever comes last. Should a representative be decertified, any contract between that representative and the City of Monroe shall be deemed null and void as of the date of the election for decertification. No action of the council shall be necessary to formalize decertification or the lapse of any contract. Should the election result in less than a majority of eligible voters voting to decertify or a tie, no further action shall be necessary and the vote for decertification shall be deemed to have failed. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
15.9. - Limitation on elections. 
    Should a representative be certified or a bargaining unit not be recognized or a representative for a bargaining unit be decertified, no election concerning that bargaining unit, or any unit substantially the same as that bargaining unit, for certification or decertification shall be held until twelve (12) months have elapsed after certification, failure of recognition of a bargaining unit, or decertification. 
(Ord. No. 11,046, 3-23-10) 
APPENDIX B - POLICY AND PROCEDURE RELATIVE TO DRUGS AND ALCOHOL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Appendix B is derived from Ord. No. 9315, adopted July 28, 1992. The internal arrangement and numbering of the ordinance have been retained, as has the basic language. Any editorial emendations made for the purpose of clarity have been included in brackets. Future amendments to the ordinance will be included in their proper places; and a history note, showing the derivation of the amendment, will be appended to the section. Lack of such a history note indicates the section is derived from Ord. No. 9315. 

ARTICLE 1. - POLICY 

Sec. 1.1. - Purpose. 
    The City of Monroe, Louisiana (hereinafter referred to as "City") desires to maintain a safe, healthful and productive environment for all of its employees and the public which they serve. 
    The city recognizes that the use of alcoholic beverages and the use of unauthorized drugs by city employees in the work environment is a threat to the public welfare and to the safety of the individual employee, co-workers, and the public in general. 
    In order to protect the health, welfare and safety of the public, the individual employee and co-employees, and to heighten the efficiency and effectiveness of service to the public, the city will act to eliminate any substance abuse which increases the potential for accidents, absenteeism, substandard performance, poor employee morale and damage to the reputation of our community. It is the goal of this policy and procedure to eliminate substance abuse in the city work environment. 
Sec. 1.2. - Policy. 
    The policy of the City of Monroe is to promote and encourage a work environment for its employees which is free from substance abuse. To achieve that end the following rules are implemented: 
A.  The use, possession, concealment, transportation, manufacture, distribution, dispensation, promotion, sale, or purchase of any unauthorized controlled substance or any unauthorized alcohol by any city employee on city premises or while on city business is strictly prohibited and shall subject the employee to adverse disciplinary action. 
B.  No city employee shall be under the influence of or, if subject to testing, test positive for any unauthorized controlled substance or alcohol during the course of his or her employment. 
C.  The use of drugs or medication prescribed by a licensed physician for an individual employee shall be permitted in the work environment subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  The drug or medication must be in its original container, must be in the employee's name and have the doctor's name and prescription number on the label; 
(2)  The drug or medication may not be taken more often than is prescribed on the label; 
(3)  The prescription cannot be older than one (1) year; 
(4)  The employee whose name is on the prescription cannot allow the consumption of the drugs or a medication by any other person in the work place; 
(5)  If the employee taking the prescribed drug or medication is aware of any adverse side effects or if the container has such a warning, the employee must inform his or her supervisor prior to using such substances on the job. 
D.  In order to promote and enforce this policy, a comprehensive program of substance abuse testing of city employees and applicants for city employment shall be instituted in accordance with the rules and conditions set forth herein. 
E.  All employees shall be informed of this policy and the procedures set forth herein. 
Sec. 1.3. - Application. 
    This policy shall apply to all regular, part-time, casual or contract employees of the city. This policy shall also apply to all applicants for employment with the city. Compliance with the provisions of this policy and its procedures shall be a condition of employment. 
Sec. 1.4. - Terms. 
    For purposes of this policy and its procedures, the terms "city premises" shall mean and include all property, offices, facilities, land, platforms, buildings, structures, fixtures, installations, boats, automobiles, trucks, other vehicles and equipment, whether owned, leased, used or controlled by the city. 
    The term "work environment" shall mean and include all areas, locations, vehicles or equipment entered, encountered or utilized while in the course and scope of the employee's city duty. 
    The term "accident" refers to any occurrence which causes injury or fatality, produce physical damage to property or material, or interrupts and/or terminates scheduled work assignments. 
    The terms "test" and "screen" may be used interchangeably to describe the procedure utilized to determine the presence of prohibited substances. 
ARTICLE 2. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE TESTING 

Sec. 2.1. - Applicants for employment. 
    All individuals applying for any employment position with the city shall be informed that a preemployment substance abuse test shall be required as part of the application process. 
Sec. 2.2. - Employee testing-Category I. 
A.  Category I. Positions where the health, welfare and/or safety of the public, co-employees and the individual employee is at risk shall be deemed "safety sensitive" positions, including but not limited to the following: 
Firefighters; 
Police officers; 
Jailers; 
Nurses; 
Traffic signal maintenance; 
Draw-bridge operators; 
Positions that require or allow the carrying of a firearm; 
Operation of motorized vehicles, including automobiles, trucks, tractors, or other heavy equipment; 
Positions that require the handling or use of highly volatile or explosive materials; 
Positions that require or allow the operation of dangerous equipment; 
Positions that entail working in dangerous conditions; 
Positions that require the handling or use of chemical substances. 
B.  All applicants for Category I positions shall be required to satisfactorily pass a substance abuse screening prior to employment or promotion into any Category I position. 
C.  All employees who occupy Category I positions shall participate in routine substance abuse screening in accordance with the following: 
(1)  All employees in Category I positions shall be tested at least once every three (3) years; and, 
(2)  All employees in Category I positions shall be subject to random routine substance abuse testing according to the procedures prepared by the Department of Administration, with at least thirty-three and one-third (331/2) percent of the positions being tested each year. 
Sec. 2.3. - Employee testing-Category II. 
    Category II. Whenever an employee has an on-the-job accident or suffers an occupational on-the-job injury requiring immediate treatment by a doctor or absence from work, or causes an injury to a fellow employee or to the general public which requires treatment by a doctor or absence from work, or where the injury was due to the employee's failure to wear required personal protective equipment or where the property damage of said accident is estimated at greater than five hundred dollars ($500.00), said employee shall be required to participate in a substance abuse screening test. 
    For purposes of this section, the term injury shall not include minor injuries such as bee stings, bruises, muscle strains, minor cuts, scrapes, etc. 
Sec. 2.4. - Employee testing-Category III. 
A.  Category III. An employee shall be required to participate in a substance abuse screening test whenever there exists reasonable cause or suspicion to believe that the employee's fitness for duty is impaired by substance abuse based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  An observable work-related behavior or similar pattern of conduct that appears to be abnormal, erratic or otherwise not in conformance with acceptable city policy; 
(2)  An observable work-related behavior or similar pattern of conduct that indicates signs of impairment of normal sensory and/or motor body functions; 
(3)  Any articulable facts or evidence that indicate any possible substance abuse on the job; 
(4)  Any information or evidence that warrants, or emanates from, an authorized investigation of possible drug or alcohol related activity by a specific individual or group; 
(5)  Any pattern of behavior, conduct or activity that is alcohol and/or drug related that is violative of municipal, state or federal law. 
(6)  Any employee who tests positive during a drug screening required by any licensing or certification requirement. Provided however, if the drug screen required for the license or certification was conducted or paid for by the city said results shall be sent to the medical review offices for confirmation and the employee shall be subject to the provisions of Section 5.2 without the necessity of additional initial screening. 
B.  Such information shall be reviewed by the office of the city attorney and approved as to reasonable cause or suspicion prior to a testing order. 
Sec. 2.5. - Employee testing-Category IV. 
A.  Category IV. Whenever any employee voluntarily enrolls in and successfully completes a certified program of substance abuse counseling or rehabilitation, which is in conformance with standards normally accepted within the healthcare industry, as a condition of continued employment, said employee must agree in writing to remain alcohol and drug free, and to undergo unannounced, post-treatment substance abuse screening for a period of twenty-four (24) months from the date of re-entry into active work status with the city. 
B.  In order to claim the benefits of Section 2.5 A., an employee must notify his department head and enroll in the certified substance abuse counseling and/or rehabilitation program prior to being selected, chosen, ordered, or scheduled for a substance abuse screening. 
ARTICLE 3. - DRUG SCREENING PROCEDURE. 

Sec. 3.1. - Testing method. 
A.  Alcohol. 
(1)  Testing for alcohol shall be by those methods and recognized by the State of Louisiana for cases concerning driving while intoxicated. Such test may be conducted by: (1) the laboratory selected under Section 3.2, herein (2) the medical review officer selected under Section 3.6, herein; or by the Monroe Police Department. 
(2)  The cut-off limit for alcohol shall be .01% or more by weight based on grams of alcohol per one hundred (100) cubic centimeters of blood. 
B.  Drugs. 
(1)  Testing for prohibited drugs shall be by immunoassay screen, with confirmation of positive tests by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) techniques. 
(2)  All drug testing procedures shall conform to applicable state and federal regulations and laws. The cut-off limits for drug screening shall be in accordance with NIDA guidelines, except that the initial testing for marijuana shall be fifty (50) nanograms. 
(3)  Drug testing shall be for any or all unauthorized controlled substances but shall include the following classes of drugs: marijuana, opiods, cocaine, amphetamines, and phencyclidine. 
C.  All testing procedures shall conform to applicable state and federal regulations and laws. 
Sec. 3.2. - Certified laboratories for drug testing. 
    The mayor shall determine the appropriate laboratory to perform the substance abuse screening test subject to the following criteria: 
(a)  The laboratory shall be certified by the National Institute on Drug Abuse (NIDA) or by the college of American Pathologists for forensic urine drug testing (CAP-FUDT); 
(b)  The laboratory uses NIDA guidelines for the collection, storage and transportation of the samples; 
(c)  The laboratory follows the strict guidelines of Louisiana R.S. 49:1001, et seq (Public Employees Drug Testing Act), including but not limited to the collection, storage, chain of custody procedures, review of results and reports of results; 
(d)  The laboratory guarantees a minimum confidence level of ninety-five (95) percent, by which is meant no false positive results and less than five (5) percent false negative results; 
(e)  The laboratory maintains strict confidentiality of all sample results so that at no time will the laboratory release results from any substance abuse test to anyone except as authorized herein. 
Sec. 3.3. - Collection procedure for urine drug specimens. 
A.  All collections of urine specimens for drug testing shall be collected, stored, and transported in compliance with NIDA guidelines or pursuant to statutory or regulatory authority granted under Louisiana R.S. 23:1081 et seq., 23:1601 et seq. and/or 49:1001 et seq. 
B.  (1) All collection of urine specimens shall be collected with regard to the privacy of the individual. 
(2)  Direct observation of the individual during collection of the urine specimen will be required under any of the following conditions: 
(a)  There is reason to believe that the individual may alter or substitute the specimen to be provided. 
(b)  The individual has provided a urine specimen that falls outside of the acceptable temperature range as listed in the NIDA guidelines. 
(c)  The last urine specimen provided by the individual was verified by the medical review officer as being adulterated based upon determinations of the laboratory. 
(d)  The collection site person observes conduct indicating an attempt to substitute or adulterate the sample. 
(e)  The individual has previously been determined to have urine specimen positive for one or more of the drugs the testing of which is regulated by this Chapter [Appendix], and is being tested for purposes of follow-up testing or after return to service. 
(f)  The type of drug testing is post-accident or reasonable suspicion/cause. 
(3)  A designated representative of the city shall review and concur in advance with any decision by a collection site person to obtain a specimen under direct observation. All direct observation shall be conducted by a same gender collection site person. 
C.  Every collection site person shall be responsible for sanitary collection of urine specimens while maintaining privacy, security, and the chain of custody. Every collection site person shall be responsible for the proper disposal of biohazardous waste and dispose of all biohazardous waste in accordance with proper safety procedures. 
D.  The collection site person shall collect split samples, according to the following: 
(1)  The donor shall urinate into a collection container, which the collection site person, in the presence of the donor, after the initial examination, pours into two (2) specimen bottles. Both specimen bottles shall be properly sealed and labeled in the presence of the donor. 
(2)  The first bottle is to be used for the city mandated test and at a minimum shall contain the quantity specified by the NIDA guidelines. If there is no additional urine available for the second specimen bottle, the first specimen shall nevertheless be processed for testing. 
(3)  Up to sixty (60) ml of the remainder of the urine shall be poured in the second specimen bottle. 
(4)  All requirements of this Chapter [Appendix] shall be followed with respect to both samples, including the requirement that a copy of the chain of custody form accompany each bottle processed under split sample procedures. 
(5)  The first sample of the split sample collection shall be tested by the laboratory selected under the provisions of Section 3.2 above, in compliance with the NIDA guidelines for initial and confirmatory testing in compliance with the regulations of this Chapter [Appendix], Louisiana R.S. 23:1081 et seq., 23:1601 et seq., and 49:1001 et seq. 
(6)  The second sample shall be stored for future use or used for testing for drugs not listed in the regulations of this Chapter [Appendix]. Any specimen collected under split sample procedures must be stored in a secured, refrigerated environment and an appropriate entry made in the chain of custody form. 
(7)  If the test of the first bottle is confirmed as positive, and a split sample is collected, the employee may request that the medical review officer direct that the second bottle be tested, at the employee's own expense, in a NIDA-certified or CAP-FUNDT-certified laboratory for the presence of the drugs(s) for which a positive result was obtained in the test of the first bottle. The result of this test is transmitted to the medical review officer who shall honor such a request if made within seventy-two (72) hours of the employee's having actual notice that he or she tested positive. 
(8)  Action taken by the city as the result of a positive drug test such as removal from performing a safety-sensitive function (Category I) shall not be stayed pending the result of the second test. 
(9)  If the result of the second test is negative, the medical review officer shall cancel the positive results of the first test and the employee shall be restored to his or her previous position. 
E.  All samples collected for drug testing shall be packaged, sealed, labeled, and transported with the proper chain of custody procedures for analysis to an NIDA-certified or CAP-FUNDT-certified laboratory in strict accordance with the NIDA guidelines. 
F.  The collection site person shall provide a written form and the opportunity for the individual to provide notification of any information which he or she considers relevant to the test, including identification of currently or recently used prescription or nonprescription drugs, or other relevant medical information. A copy of such information shall be attached to each chain of custody form. 
Sec. 3.4. - Appointments for pre-employment drug screening. 
A.  All applicants for employment with the city shall be advised that the city requires pre-employment substance abuse screening test prior to receiving an application form. Upon the completion of and the return of the application form to the personnel office, the personnel office shall make an appointment with the laboratory for the applicant to submit a urine specimen for the drug screening test and shall make an appointment for the alcohol test, prior to processing said application for an employment position. 
B.  The applicant shall submit picture identification to the laboratory to verify his or her identity at the time the specimen is collected. 
C.  Any applicant who attempts to evade the screening process shall not be considered for employment by the city for a period of twelve (12) months. 
Sec. 3.5. - Appointments for employee drug screening. 
A.  Each department head shall be responsible for arranging and transporting employees under his supervision to and from: (1) The site for alcohol testing, and (2) The laboratory for collection of urine specimens. In the event of a category II test, in which the employee is unable to be transported to the laboratory within a reasonable time due to injuries received, the department head shall make arrangements to have personnel from the laboratory come to the employee to take the specimen. 
B.  The identity of the employee participating in the screening procedure shall be verified by picture identification. If circumstances make such identification too onerous or impractical, the employee's identity may be confirmed by the department head or his designated representative. 
C.  Any employee who attempts to evade the drug screening process shall be dismissed from employment with the city and shall not be considered for future employment by the city for a period of twelve (12) months. 
ARTICLE 4. - REVIEW OF TEST RESULTS 

Sec. 4.1. - Medical review officer. 
    The mayor shall select a medical review officer, who shall be a licensed physician responsible for receiving laboratory results generated by the drug testing procedure who has knowledge of substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to interpret and evaluate an individual's positive test result together with his medical history and any other relevant biomedical information. 
Sec. 4.2. - Review of drug testing results. 
A.  All positive results from drug testing, except pre-employment testing, shall be reported directly to the medical review officer as provided in this Chapter [Appendix]. 
B.  Positive results on pre-employment drug testing may be reviewed by the medical review officer. If the city chooses not to confirm a positive test result of a pre-employment drug screen test, the city shall notify the applicant of the positive result and shall offer the applicant the opportunity to pay for a confirmation of the test and a review of that confirmation by the medical review officer. Negative results need not be reviewed by the medical review officer and shall be reported to the appropriate representative of the city. 
C.  The medical review officer shall review all confirmed positive drug testing results of employees and report such results to the city in compliance with NIDA guidelines or pursuant to the authority granted under Louisiana R.S. 23:1081 et seq. and 23:1601 et seq. Negative results need not be reviewed by the medical review officer and shall be reported to the appropriate representative of the city. 
D.  Adulterated specimens shall be reported as such to the medical review officer with clarification as to the specific nature or the adulteration. The medical review officer shall contact the individual who submitted the specimen as outlined in the NIDA guidelines before making a final decision to verify a positive report of an adulteration. 
(Ord. No. 9402, 9-14-93) 
Sec. 4.3. - Rights of the employee. 
    Any employee, confirmed positive, upon his written request, shall have the right of access within seven (7) working days to records relating to his drug tests and any records relating to the results of any relevant certification, review, or suspension/revocation-of-certification proceedings. 
ARTICLE 5. - EFFECT OF POSITIVE RESULTS 

Sec. 5.1. - Applicants for employment. 
    Any applicant for employment who tests positive for alcohol or other unauthorized substances under the above procedures shall not be employed by the city and shall not be considered for employment for a period of twelve (12) months. 
Sec. 5.2. - Employees. 
A.  Any employee who tests positive for alcohol or other unauthorized substance under the above procedures shall be dismissed from city employment and shall not be considered for future employment for a period of at least twelve (12) months and only then after satisfying the requirements of Section 2.5 A. 
B.  Any employee who uses, possesses, conceals, transports, manufactures, distributes, dispenses, solicits, sells or purchases any unauthorized alcohol or other unauthorized substance on city premises or while on city time shall be dismissed from his or her employment with the city and shall not be considered for future employment by the city for a period of twelve (12) months. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1958 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1958 Code as updated through 1-24-78, which are included herein. Sections of the 1958 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
Section Section 
this Code 1-1 1-1 1-2 1-2 1-3 1-3 1-4 1-6 1-5 1-12 1-7 1-7 1-10 1-8 1-11 2-15 2-41 2-16 2-42 2-17 2-43 2-18 2-44 2-19 2-45 2-24 26-26 2-25 26-27 2-26 26-28 2-27 26-27 2-28 26-16 2-28.1 26-29 2-32 2-101 2-33, 2-34 2-102 2-35 2-103 2-36 2-104 2-37-2-39 2-1 3-1 7-21 3-2 7-22 3-3 7-23 3-4 7-24 3-5 7-25 3-6 7-26 3-7 7-27 3-8 7-28 3-10 7-29 3-11 7-30 3-11.1 7-31 3-11.2 7-32 3-11.3 7-33 3-11.4 7-48 3-11.5 7-54 3-15 7-50 3-16 7-51 3-17 7-47 3-17.1 7-49 3-17.3 7-71 3-17.4 7-72 3-17.5 7-73 3-17.6 7-74 3-17.7 7-52 3-17.8 7-75 3-18 7-91 3-18.1 7-92 3-18.2 7-93 3-19 7-94 3-20 7-95 3-21 7-96 3-22 7-97 3-23 7-98 3-24 7-99 3-25 7-100 3-26 7-101 3-27 7-102 3-28 7-103 3-29 7-104 3-30 7-105 3-31 7-53 3-41 7-53 4-1-4-7 4-1-4-7 4-7.1 4-8 4-8-4-10 4-9-4-11 4-10.1 4-12 4-11-4-28 4-13-4-30 4A-1 5-1 4A-2(a) 5-33 4A-3 5-34 4A-4 5-35 4A-6 5-36 4A-7(b) 5-40 4A-7(c) 5-4 4A-7(d) 5-5 4A-8, 4A-9 5-6 4A-10 5-37-5-39 4A-11 5-3 4A-12 5-7 4A-13 5-11 4A-14 5-49 4A-15 5-50 4A-16 5-51 4A-17(a) 5-52 4A-17(b) 5-53 4A-18 5-26 4A-19 5-10 4A-19(a) 5-48 4A-20 5-9 4A-21 5-2 4A-22 5-8 4A-23 5-12 5-1 6-1 5-2 6-2 5-3 12-129 5-4 6-3 5-6 6-4 5-7, 5-8 6-5 5-12 6-21 5-13 6-22 5-14 6-23 5-15 6-24 5-16 6-25 5-17 6-26 5-20 6-41 5-20.1, 5-22 6-42 5-23 6-43 5-24 6-27 5-26 6-28 5-27, 5-28 6-29 5-29 6-30 5A-1 8-21 5A-2 8-22 5A-3 8-23 5A-4 8-24 5A-5 8-25 5A-6 8-26 5A-7 8-27 5A-8 8-1 6-3(b) 9-23 6-6 9-24 6-7 9-21 6-8 9-22 6-10 9-1 6-20 19-16 7-1 10-1 7-3 10-6 7-4 10-2 7-5 10-3 7-7 10-4 7-8, 7-9 10-5 7-11 10-7 7-12 10-8 7-13 10-9 9-1 11-1 9-2 11-2 9-3 11-3 10-1 12-225 10-2 12-204 10-3 12-63 12-64 10-4 12-65 10-4.1 12-52 10-5 12-61 10-6 12-61 12-62 10-8 12-227 10-14 12-116 10-16 12-87 10-17 12-86 10-18 12-89 10-18.1 12-88 10-20 12-201 10-22 12-202 10-23 12-203 10-25 12-125 10-26 12-126 10-27 12-153 10-28 12-182 10-33 20-1 10-34-10-39 12-123 10-40 12-223 10-40.1 12-221(e) 10-43 12-66 10-47 12-229 10-49 12-228 10-51 12-121 10-53 12-100 10-55 12-181 10-55.1, 10-55.2 12-156 10-57 12-155 10-58 12-122 12-128 10-58.1 12-96 10-58.2 12-98 10-59 12-90 10-61 12-101 12-2(a) 14-1 12-2(b) 14-2 14-3 12-2(c) 14-3 12-2(f) 14-8 12-5(a) 14-22 12-5(b) 14-6 14-23 12-5(c) 14-25 12-5(d) 14-26 12-5(e) 14-126 12-5(f) 14-27 12-6 14-28 12-7 14-4 14-21 14-24 12-8(a) 14-41 14-42 14-43 12-8(b) 14-42 12-8(c) 14-42 14-44 12-8(d) 14-44 12-8(f) 14-46 12-8(h) 14-29 12-8(i) 14-45 12-9(a) 14-137 12-9(b) 14-136 14-138 14-140 12-9(b)(2) 14-122 12-9(c) 14-139 14-140 14-141 12-9(d) 14-141 12-9(g) 14-143 12-9(i) 14-123 12-9(j) 12-124 12-9(k) 14-5 12-9(l) 14-125 12-9(m) 14-126 12-11 14-56 12-12(a)-(c) 14-57 12-12(e) 14-65 12-12(f) 14-78 12-12(g) 14-58 12-12(h) 14-56 12-12(i) 14-61 14-63 12-12(j) 14-62 12-13 14-59 12-14 14-64 12-15 14-7 12-16 14-60 12-19 14-76 14-93 12-19(4) 14-77 14-121 12-19(5) 14-79 12-19(6) 14-80 12-19(7) 14-81 12-19(8) 14-82 12-19(9) 14-83 12-19(10) 14-84 12-19(11) 14-85 12-19(12) 14-86 12-19(14) 14-87 12-19(15) 14-88 12-19(16) 14-89 12-19(17) 14-90 12-19(18) 14-91 12-19(19) 14-92 12-19(21) 14-94 12-19(22) 14-95 12-19(23) 14-96 12-19(24) 14-97 12-19(25) 14-98 12-19(26) 14-99 12-19(27) 14-100 12-19(28) 14-101 12-19(29) 14-102 12-19(30) 14-103 12-19(31) 14-104 12-19(32) 14-105 12-19(33) 14-106 13-1 15-16 13-2 15-17 13-3 15-21 13-4 15-19 13-5 15-23 13-6 15-18 13-7 15-20 13-8 15-22 13-13 15-1 13-14, 13-15 15-3 14-1 16-16 14-1.1 16-17 14-1.2 16-18 14-1.3 16-20 14-1.3(b) 16-19 14-1.4 16-21 14-1.5 16-22 14-5(a) 21-1 14-5(b) 21-2 14-5(c) 21-3 14-5(d) 21-4 14-5(e) 21-5 14-5(f) 21-6 14-5(g) 21-7 14-5(h) 21-8 14-5(i) 21-9 14-5(j) 21-10 14-5(k) 21-11 14-5(l) 21-12 14-5(m) 21-13 14-5(n) 21-15 14-6 24-16 14-7 24-17 14-8 24-17 24-18 15-1 18-1 18-1 22-1 18-2 22-16-22-30 19-2-19-4 23-1 19-5 23-2 19-6 23-3 20-15 28-1 20-16 28-2 21-2 29-4 21-3 29-3 21-4 29-1 21-7 29-5 21-7.1 29-6 21-8 29-2 21-10 29-7 21A-1 20-41 21A-2 20-42 21A-3 20-43 21A-5 20-44 21A-6 20-45 21A-7 20-46 21A-8 20-47 21A-9 20-48 21A-10 20-49 21A-11 20-50 21A-12 20-51 21A-13 20-52 21A-14 20-53 21A-15 20-54 21A-16 20-55 21A-17 20-56 21A-18 20-57 21A-19 20-58 21A-20 20-59 21A-21 20-60 21A-22 20-61 21A-23 20-62 21A-24 20-63 21A-25 20-64 21A-26 20-65 21A-31 20-76 21A-32 20-77 21A-33 20-78 21A-34 20-79 21A-35 20-80 21A-36 20-81 21A-41 20-91 21A-42 20-92 21A-43 20-93 21A-46 20-101 21A-47 20-102 21A-48 20-103 21A-49 20-104 21A-50 20-105 21A-51 20-106 21A-52 20-107 21A-53 20-108 21A-54 20-109 21A-55 20-110 21A-61 20-121 21A-62 20-122 21A-63 20-123 21A-68 20-131 21A-69 20-132 21A-70 20-133 21A-71 20-134 21A-72 20-135 21A-73 20-136 21A-76 20-146 21A-77 20-147 21A-78 20-148 21A-79 20-149 21A-80 20-150 21A-81 20-151 21A-82 20-152 21A-83 20-153 21A-91 20-161 21A-94 20-171 21A-95 20-172 21A-96 20-173 21A-97 20-174 21A-98 20-175 21A-99 20-176 21A-100 20-177 21A-101 20-178 21A-102 20-179 21A-103 20-180 21A-104 20-181 21A-105 20-182 21A-106 20-183 21A-107 20-184 21A-108 20-185 21A-109 20-186 21A-110 20-187 21A-111 20-188 21A-112 20-189 21A-113 20-190 21A-114 20-191 21A-115 20-192 21A-116 20-193 21A-117 20-194 21A-121 20-206 21A-122 20-207 21A-123 20-208 21A-124 20-209 21A-125 20-210 21A-130 20-221 21A-131 20-222 21A-132 20-223 21A-133 20-224 21A-136 20-236 21A-137 20-237 21A-138 20-238 21A-139 20-239 21A-140 20-240 21A-141 20-241 21A-142 20-242 21A-143 20-243 21A-144 20-244 21A-146 20-245 21A-147 20-246 21A-151 20-261 21A-152 20-262 21A-153 20-263 22-1 30-2 22-2 24-1 22-3 24-1 22-4(a), (b) 30-6 22-4(c) 30-6 30-8 22-4(f) 36-19 22-4.1(a) 30-31 22-4.1(b) 30-21 22-4.1(c) 30-32 30-33 22-4.1(e) 30-32 22-4.1(f) 30-22 22-4.1(g) 30-23 22-5 15-2 22-5(f) 30-9 22-5(g), (h) 30-6 22-6-26-9 30-7 22-12 27-1 22-13 27-6 22-14 27-2 22-15 27-35 22-15(a) 27-31 27-32 27-36 22-15(b) 27-32 22-15(c), (d) 27-33 22-15(e) 27-32 22-15(f) 27-34 22-16 27-61 22-17 27-78 22-17(b) 27-79 22-17(e)-(g) 27-80 22-17(f) 27-81 22-18 27-65 22-19 27-67 22-20 27-82 22-21 27-76 22-77 22-22 27-66 22-23 27-63 22-24 27-64 22-25 27-68 22-26 27-44 22-27 27-44 27-62 22-28 27-5 22-29 30-5 36-20 22-29(a) 27-45 22-29(c) 27-55 22-29(d) 30-3 22-29(f) 36-18 22-29(h) 36-21 22-29(i) 36-17 22-29(j), (k) 36-22 22-30 27-57 22-30(b) 27-54 22-30(e) 27-56 22-31(a) 36-17 22-31(b) 36-16 22-32 31-21 22-33 30-1 22-34 27-3 27-4 22-35 17-2 22-39 17-3 22-40 17-4 22-41 17-5 22-42 17-1 23-1 3-1 23-5 12-151 23-11, 23-12 34-1 23-13 34-2 23-14 34-3 23-15 26-42 23-16 26-41 23-20 31-1 23-21 31-2 23-22, 23-23 31-21 23-24 31-22 23-25 31-23 23-26 31-24 23-27 31-4 23-28 31-3 23-29 31-5 23-31(a) 32-106 23-31(b) 32-107 23-31(c) 32-108 23-31(d) 32-109 23-32 32-110 23-33 32-111 23-34 32-112 24-3 33-2 24-5.2 33-9 24-6, 24-6.1 12-222 24-7 33-10 24-15 12-222 24-16 33-32 24-16.1 33-11 24-22 33-33 24-29 33-34 24-30 33-31 24-32 33-7 24-37 33-8 24-41, 24-42 33-12 24-45 31-61 24-45.1 31-62 24-45.2 31-74 31-84 24-45.3 31-75 24-45.4 31-76 24-45.5 31-77 24-45.6 31-83 24-45.8 31-80 24-45.9 31-79 31-66 24-45.10 31-81 24-45.11 31-64 24-45.11(a) 31-63 24-45.11(c) 31-65 24-45.12 31-82 24-45.13 33-35 24-46 33-7 24-51 33-14 24-51.1 33-16 24-51.2 33-17 24-51.3 33-15 24-52 33-18 24-53 33-19 24-57 33-46 24-58, 24-59 33-47 24-60.1 33-48 24-60.2 33-49 24-66 33-13 24-67 21-14 24-71 33-66 24-72 33-67 24-73 33-68 24-74 33-69 24-75 33-74 24-75(a) 33-71 24-76 33-73 24-77 33-72 33-76 33-77 24-79 33-70 24-80 33-78 24-81 33-79 24-84 33-3 24-84.1 33-5 25-2 35-31 25-3 35-32 25-5 35-33 25-6 35-34 25-7 35-35 25-8 35-36 25-8.1 35-37 25-8.2 35-38 25-9 35-39 25-10 35-18 25-11 35-51 25-11.1 35-52 25-12 35-53 25-13 35-54 25-14 35-55 25-15 35-55-35-57 25-16 35-58 25-17 35-59 25-18 35-101 25-19(b) 35-71 25-19(c) 35-72 25-20 35-73 25-20.1 35-89 25-20.2 35-86 35-88 25-20.3 35-90 25-21 35-87 25-22 35-108 25-22(a), (b) 35-104 25-22(c) 35-106 25-22(d) 35-105 25-22(f) 35-107 25-22(h) 35-103 25-25 35-102 25-26 35-110 25-27 35-109 25-29 35-74 25-30 35-17 25-31 35-19 25-46 35-126 25-47 35-127 25-57 35-141 25-58 35-142 25-59 35-143 26-4 25-1 26-5 25-2 26-6 24-1 26-20 25-16 26-21 25-17 26-22 25-18 26-23 25-19 26-24 25-3 26-25 25-20 26-26 25-21 27-1 37-1 27-2 37-3 27-3 37-4 27-4 37-5 27-10 37-171 27-20 37-2 27-30(1) 37-71 27-30(2) 37-72 27-30(3) 37-73 27-30(4) 37-74 27-31(1) 37-86 27-31(2) 37-87 27-31(3) 37-88 27-31(4) 37-89 27-32(1) 37-96 27-32(2) 37-97 27-32(3) 37-98 27-32(4) 37-99 27-32(5) 37-100 27-33(1) 37-111 27-33(2) 37-112 27-34 37-121 27-40 37-136 27-41 37-137 27-42 37-138 27-43 37-139 27-44 37-140 27-50 37-151 27-51 37-153 27-52 37-154 27-53 37-155 27-57.5 37-152 27-60 37-166 27-61 37-167 27-71 37-172 27-72 37-173 27-80(1), (2) 37-21 27-80(2)-(4) 37-22 27-80(5) 37-174 27-80(6) 37-9 27-81(2) 37-23 37-24 27-81(3) 37-23 27-81(4) 37-27 27-82 37-28 27-82(1) 37-41 27-82(2) 37-42 27-82(3) 37-43 27-82(4) 37-44 27-82(6) 37-25 37-26 37-45 37-46 27-90 37-56 27-91 37-57 27-100 37-6 27-101 37-7 27-102 37-8  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1958 Code as updated through 1-24-78, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1958 Code, a table of which immediately precedes this table. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
Date Section Section 
this Code 3047 11-24-53 Art. III, rule 54 33-13 6-20-60 32-58 I(A) 32-1 I(B) 32-2 I(C) 32-4 I(D) 32-5 II 32-3 III(A) 32-41 III(B) 32-42 III(C) 32-43 32-44 IV(A) 32-56 IV(B) 32-57 V(A) 32-71 V(B) 32-72 V(C) 32-73 V(D) 32-74 V(E) 32-75 VI(A) 32-91 VI(B) 32-92 VI(C) 32-93 VI(D) 32-94 VII(A) 32-126 VII(B) 32-127 VII(C) 32-128 VIII(A) 32-21 VIII(B) 32-22 VIII(C) 32-23 VIII(D) 32-7 VIII(E) 32-8 VIII(F) 32-24 IX 32-25 X 32-6 32-26 7010 3-14-78 7-47 7-48 7-49 7-50 7-51 7-53 7-71 7-72 7-91 7-92 7-93 12-202 7038 12-12-78 28-1 7039 12-12-78 3 28-2 7043 2-27-79 1 12-222 7049 3-13-79 12-101 7050 3-13-79 12-116 7055 4-24-79 3-2 7057 3-27-79 7-51 7071 7-10-79 10-5 10-6 7072 7-10-79 35-86 35-88 7079 8-14-79 1-7 12.5-16-12.5-22 7087 9-11-79 12-153 7088 9-11-79 7-54 7090 9-25-79 15-3 7094 10-23-79 12-98 7095 10-23-79 10-5 10-6 7103 11-27-79 12-97 7105 11-27-79 12-222 7115 12-11-79 12-118 7118 12-11-79 1 20-21 20-22 20-23 20-24 20-25 20-26 20-27 7119 12-11-79 Art. 1,  B 13-21 Art. 1,  C 13-22 Art. 1,  D 13-23 Art. 2 13-24 Art. 3,  A 13-25 Art. 3,  B 13-27 Art. 3,  C 13-42 Art. 3,  D 13-26 Art. 3,  E, F 13-28 Art. 3,  G 13-29 Art. 4,  A, B 13-41 Art. 4,  C 13-42 Art. 4,  D 13-44 Art. 4,  E 13-43 Art. 5,  A 13-56 Art. 5,  B 13-57 Art. 5,  C 13-58 Art. 5,  D 13-59 7121 12-26-79 12-39 12-51 12-69 12-87 12-124 12-127 12-155 12-183 12-224 7128 2-12-80 15-16 7130 2-26-80 28-1 7132 2-26-80 33-2 7169 9-23-80 16-1 7170 9-23-80 29-6 29-7 7179 10-14-80 28-1 7181 10-14-80 33-8 7204 11-11-80 33-3 33-5 7205 11-11-80 12-4 7206 11-11-80 12-156 7216 11-24-80 33-48 33-49 7231 1-13-80 37-86(b)(3) 37-121(b)(2) 7232 1-13-80 37-2 37-137(f) 37-139(h) 7246 2-24-81 37-24(1)-(7) 7251 3-10-81 16-17 16-19(8) 7252 3-10-81 9-24(a), (c)-(g) 14-60(a)(1)-(5), (7) 17-3(b) 27-55 7254 3-10-81 37-25(d) 37-139(i) 7264 3-24-81 32-126(b) 7266 4-14-81 33-80 7267 4-14-81 4-1(11)-(19) 4-2 4-2.1 4-3 4-6 4-9 4-10 4-13 4-14 4-19.1 4-19.2 4-24 4-26(10) 7272 4-28-81 15-16 7278 5-12-81 21-2 7293 6-23-81 25-3 7295 6-23-81 4-1(11)-(19) 4-2 4-2.1 4-3 4-6 4-9 4-10 4-13 4-14 4-19.1 4-19.2 4-24 4-26(10) 7302 7-28-81 4-11(a)(6) 7310 8-25-81 37-100(b)(3) 7313 9-8-81 1 37-2 2 37-71 3A-C 37-86(b)(1)-(3) D 37-86(b)(2) E 37-86(e)(3) 4 37-86.5 5A-C 37-87(b)(1)-(3) D, E 37-87(b)(2), (3) F 37-87(e)(3) G 37-87(note) 6 37-87.5 7A-C 37-88(b)(1)-(3) D 37-88(b)(3) E 37-88(e)(3) 8 37-88.5 9A-C 37-96(b)(1) D 37-96(b)(3) E 37-96(e)(3) 10A 37-97(b)(1) B 37-97(b)(3) C 37-97(b)(2) D, E 37-97(e)(2), (3) 11A-C 37-98(b)(1) D 37-98(b)(3) E 37-98(e)(2), (3) 12A 37-99 13A 37-100(e)(3) 14 37-101 15A 37-111(b)(1) B 37-111(e)(3) 16A 37-112(e)(3) 17B 37-121(b)(2) 18 37-122 19-21 37-139(d)-(f) 22 37-139(h)(3), (6) 23 37-139(i)(3) 24A 37-151(b)(1), (2) 25A 37-153(c)(1)b 26 37-154(b)(1), (2) 27A 37-166(a) B 37-166(e) C 37-166(g)(3), (4) 28A 37-56(b)(1)a, b 29A 37-57(d) 7316 9-22-81 4-16(b) 7317 10-13-81 35-144 7318 10-13-81 35-143 7322 10-13-81 Art. I,  1-4 2-115-2-118 5, 6 2-119 7, 8 2-120 2-121 II-XVIII 2-122-2-138 7330 11-24-81 Intro  2-149 I-VII 2-150-2-156 7335 12-8-81 37-86(b)(3) 7336 12-8-81 Ch. 22(note) 22-1 7344 12-22-81 5-1-5-30 7347 1-19-82 3 2-118(c) 4       Rpld 2-118(d) 5 2-118(e) 6       Rpld 2-118(f) 7 2-118(h) 8 2-127(a) 9 2-136(d) 7361 2-23-82 1-14 3-16-3-29 7362 2-23-82 11.5-1 7368 3-23-82 32-24 37-24 7369 4-13-82 6-22-6-24 7379 4-27-82 36-23 7384 5-11-82 37-22(a) 7385 5-11-82 2-76 7396 5-25-82 25-32 7397 5-25-82 25-43 7405 6-8-82       Rpld 27-82 7406 6-8-82 37-98(b)(3) 7409 6-22-82 4-1(13) 7411 7-13-82 Adopting Ordinance, p. ix 7412 7-13-82 14-138 7413 7-13-82 33-50 7414 7-13-82 4-26(2) 4-31 4-32 7416 7-27-82 4-1(19) 7417 7-27-82 11.5-2 7418 7-27-82 App. A 7431 8-16-82 37-99(b)(1)-(3) 7439 9-14-82 33-31 7440 9-28-82 37-97(b)(1), (3) 7449 10-26-82 33-4, 33-9-33-10.1, 33-19, 33-21, 33-36-33-45, 33-91-33-102       Rnbd 33-50 as 33-48 7450 10-26-82 12-1, 12-61-12-64, 12-66-12-72, 12-86.1, 12-90, 12-95, 12-101-12-103, 12-117.1, 12-131, 12-181.1, 12-182.1, 12-182.2, 12-183.1, 12-229 7455 11-9-82 20-2, 20-26, 20-173 7462 11-24-82 4-10 7463 11-24-82 4-11(a)(B), (f) 7464 11-24-82 12-100 7479 1-11-83 33-14 7486 2-8-83 1 20-40 1.01-1.24 20-41-20-65 2.01-2.06 20-76-20-81 3.01-3.03 20-91-20-93 4.01-4.10 20-101-21-110 5.01-5.03 20-121-20-123 6.01-6.06 20-131-20-136 7.01-7.08 20-146-20-153 8.01 20-161 9.01-9.24 20-171-20-194 10.01-10.05 20-206-20-210 11.01-11.04 20-221-20-224 12.01-12.10 20-236-20-245 12.12 20-246 13.01-13.03 20-261-20-263 14.01 20-271 7509 4-26-83 20-173 7513 4-26-83 30-10-30-20 7530 5-24-83 24-17 7552 7-12-83 9-25 7553 7-12-83 33-45.1 7568 7-26-83 19-17 7577 8-23-83 30-40-30-54 7578 8-23-83 30-17, 30-20 7596 9-27-83 37-(b)(1)a, 37-71 37-102 37-166(a) 7597 9-27-83 37-21(c) 7599 9-27-83 36-1-36-6 7604 10-11-83 37-2, 37-139(f)(2) 7611 11-8-83 37-2 7623 12-13-83 37-102(b)(1)-(3) 7626 12-27-83 7-1 7631 12-27-83 a 13-24 b 13-25 c 13-27 d 13-29 e 13-42(f) f 13-56(a), (a)(7), (b) g 13-58(1), (2)a h 13-60 7647 2-28-84 33-10 7653 3-13-84 4-26 7654 3-13-84 4-27 7659 3-27-84 37-166(e) 7664 4-10-84 9-21 7678 5-8-84 25.5-21-25.5-30 7683 5-8-84 14-76(b) 7687 5-22-84 36-24 7691 6-12-84 21.5-26-21.5-28 7713-A 8-28-84 7-50, 7-51 7725 9-11-84 25-54, 25-55 7731 9-25-84 16-18, 16-19(8)-(10) 7774 2-26-85 37-2 7787 4-9-85 8-26, 8-27 7789 4-22-85 32-75(b) 7790 6-20-85 37-121(b)(1) 7801 5-28-85 25.5-20 1, 2 25.5-21, 25.5-22 7830 8-27-85 32-58(b)(12) 7839 10-8-85 33-73 7850 11-12-85 33-10 7851 11-12-85 4-6, 4-13 7877 2-11-86 3-46-3-65 7878 2-11-86 37-88.5(b)(2) 37-97(b)(1), (3) 37-98(b)(1), (3) 37-99(b)(1) 37-100(b)(3) 37-101(b)(1), (3) 37-111(b)(1) 37-112(b)(1) 37-121(b)(2) 7881 2-11-86 10.5-1-10.5-22 7883 2-25-86 3-23, 3-26(b) 7893 3-25-86 33-2 7894 3-25-86 33-9 7900 4-8-86 4-33 7913 5-27-86 37-24 7914 5-27-86 32-24 7918 6-10-86 5-1(b), 5-6, 5-9, 5-10 7932 7-8-86 Ch. I,  1-3 2-116-2-118 4 2-115 5, 6 2-119 7, 8 2-120, 2-121 Ch. II-XIX 2-122-2-139 7936 8-12-86 37-101(b)(1) 7940 8-12-86 3-49, 3-50 7943 8-26-86 35-1-35-3, 35-101-35-110, 35-121-35-125, 35-141-35-144, 35-171-35-181, 35-201-35-210, 35-251-35-260, 35-271-35-275, 35-301-35-304, 35-336-35-346, 35-361-35-370, 35-401-35-404, 7944 8-26-86 15-16 7947 8-26-86 14-6(a)(7) 7950 9-23-86 10-6.1 7959 10-28-86 35-301(d), (2), (5) 35-305 7960 10-28-86 35-207 7976-A 2-24-87 25-61 7985 3-10-87 13-21-13-29, 13-41-13-44 13-56-13-60 7992 4-28-87 1A, B 20-311, 20-312 1B(1) 20-313 1C 20-314 2-9 20-315-20-322 7993 4-28-87 34-1-34-6, 34-16-34-22 7994 4-28-87 4-1(20), 4-26(14)-(16), 4-34-4-37 8005 5-26-87 1-3 20-21-20-23 7-15 20-24-20-32 8008 5-26-87 1, 2 20-291, 20-292 6-13 20-293-20-300 8020 6-23-87 37-99(b)(1) 8036 8-25-87 37-100(b)(1) 8037 8-25-87 37-166(g)(7) 8066 10-27-87 37-139(h) 8082 1-12-88 37-122(b)(1) 8097 5-10-88 4-1(21), (22), 4-12.1, 4-13(i), (j), 4-19, 4-20, 4-26(10) 9003 7-12-88 1 18.5-21 2-4 18.5-23-18.5-25 5 18.5-27 6 18.5-22 7-10 18.5-1-18.5-4 11 18.5-6 12 18.5-5 13 18.5-7 14 18.5-10 15, 16 18.5-8, 18.5-9 17 18.5-26 9016 7-12-88 36-23(a)(1), (2) 9017 5-12-88 16-20, 16-21 9031 11-9-88 4-24(b) 9041 12-27-88 37-2 9047 2-28-89 25-61(a) 9048 2-28-89 3-20 9052 3-28-89 33-37(b), (c) 9060 4-11-89 33-10(c) 9061 4-25-89 25-62 9068 5-9-89       Rpld 14-42 9069 5-9-89 15-16, 15-17 9070 5-23-89 20-110 9085 8-22-89 9-26 9090 9-12-89 1-3 2-116-2-118 4 2-115 5, 6 2-119 7, 8 2-120, 2-121 II-XIX 2-122-2-139 9100 10-10-89 34-31-34-44 9110 12-12-89 25.4-1-25.4-22 25.4-31-25.4-42 9111 12-12-89 18.5-1-18.5-10, 18.5-26-18.5-32 9113 12-26-89 37-100(b)(1) 9144 6-25-90       Added 25-71 25-72 9148 8-14-90 37-2 37-86(b)(3) 37-86.5(b)(3) 37-87(b)(3) 
37-87.5(b)(3) 
37-88(b)(3) 
37-88.5(b)(3) 
37-96(b)(3) 
37-97(b)(3) 
37-98(b)(3) 
37-98.5(b)(3) 
37-101(b)(3) 
37-102(b)(3) 
37-136(f) 
37-166(e) 9156  8-28-90 37-101(b)(1) 
37-101(b)(3) 9159  9-11-90 33-48 9169 10- 9-90       Added 3-70-3-74 9174 10-23-90       Added 3.5-1-3.5-6 9183 11-27-90 11.5-1 9184 11-27-90 11.5-2 9189 12-20-90 12-230 9196  1-22-91 12-230 9199  2-12-91 37-139(h) 9205  3-12-91 25-56 9227  5-28-91 37-100(b)(3) 9228  5-28-91 4-1(21) 
4-12.1(a)(1) 9238  7-23-91 37-97(b)(3) 9245  9-10-91       Added 9.5-1-9.5-13 9256 11-26-91 9-21 9257 11-26-91 17-1 9258 11-26-91 27-6 9263 12-23-91 37-2 9285  4-28-92 25-62 9296  5-26-92 1-4 30-40 5 30-42(c)(2) 6 30-44(a)-(c) 7-11 30-45 12-19 30-46 20 30-47(b) 21 20-49(a) 22 30-51 9298  5-26-92 15-16(a)(2) 9299  5-26-92 33-10(b)(2), (c), (2) 9306  7-14-92 37-98(b)(3) 9307  7-14-92 37-99(b)(3) 
37-100(b)(3) 
37-102(b)(3) 9308  7-14-92 37-101(b)(3) 9312  7-14-92 7-27 9315  7-28-92       Added App. B,  1.1-5.2 9320  7-14-92 12-230 9332 10-13-92 30-40-30-54 9340 11-24-92 4-13 9347 12-18-92 5-2, 5-8(a), (b) 
5-26 9368  3-23-93 37-166(e) 9375  4-27-93 30-42(i)       Rpld 30-42(n) 9381  6- 8-93       Added 11.5-3-11.5-5 9396  8-10-93 37-139(i)(1) 9399  8-24-93       Added 30.5-1, 30.5-2 9402  9-14-93 App. B,  3.5, 
4.2A., B., 5.2B. 9403  9-14-93       Added 12-90.1 9404  9-14-93       Added 12-157 9405  9-14-93       Added 12-115 9406  9-14-93       Added 12-117.2 9407  9-14-93       Added 12-114 9409  9-28-93 20-46, 20-63, 
20-123, 20-146, 
20-176, 20-208, 
20-239, 20-244       Added 20-91(31) 9423  2- 8-94       Rpld 13-21-13-29, 13-41-13-44, 13-56-13-60       Added 13-21-13-31, 13-41-13-44, 13-56-13-61 9434  4-12-94       Added 25-73-25-85 9435  4-12-94 25-62 9439  4-26-94       Rpld 23-1-23-3       Added 23-1-23-11 9450  6-28-94 14-76 9471 10-11-94 25-62 9476 11- 8-94 32-5 9494 12-27-94 11-2 9500  1-24-95 15-16(a)(2) 9501  1-24-95 17-1 9502  1-24-95 9-21 9511  4-25-95 23-1-23-11 9512  5- 9-95 11.5-1 9531  8- 8-95 4-1, 4-11(a)(1) 4-26, 4-27(a), 4-31(a)-(c), 4-32, 4-34 4-35       Rpld 4-36, 4-37 9564  1- 9-96 25-63 9578  3-26-96 14-76(b) 9590  4-23-96 4-19-4-19.2 9591  4-23-96 25-62 9599  5-28-96 25-90-25-94 9646 11-12-96 30.5-1, 30.5-11-30.5-14 9685  4- 8-97       Added 22-1-22-5, 22-16-22-19, 22-31-22-34, 22-45, 22-46, 22-58-22-69 9696  5-27-97       Added 12-224.1 9710  7-22-97 22-16 9713  7-22-97       Added 12-231 9720  8-26-97       Added 12-132 9739 10-14-97       Added 19.5-1-19.5-12 9772  2-24-98 26-63 9792  4-14-98       Added 32.5-1-32.5-3, 32.5-15-32.5-17, 32.5-25, 32.5-26 9796  4-28-97 24-17 9797  4-28-98 15-16(b)(2) 9803  5-12-98 17-1 9807  5-26-98 9-21 9822  7-28-98 16-20 9830  8-11-98       Added 16-20(c) 9831  8-11-98 36-24, 36-25 9852 10-13-98       Added 9-24.1 9895  3-23-99 30-7 9900  4-13-99       Added 30-7.1 9906  4-13-99 32-24, 37-24 9912  4-27-99 25-62 9982  8-10-99 23-2, 23-11 9991  9-14-99       Added 12-230.1, 12-230.2 10,020  3-28-00 37-97(b)(3), 37-98(b)(1) 10,021  3-28-00 35-301(1) 10,040  5-15-00 37-111(b)(1), 37-121(b)(1) 10,059  7-25-00 35-253 10,065  8- 8-00 18.5-1-18.5-10, 18.5-26-18.5-32 10,073  9-26-00       Added 4-19(d) 10,096  1- 9-01 26-62(a)(6), (b)(5) 10,111  3-13-01 37-100(b)(2) 10,145 8-14-01 37-2 37-97(b)(3) 37-98(b)(3) 37-99(b)(3) 37-101(b)(3) 37-102(b)(3) 37-111(b)(2) 37-112(b)(2) 37-121(b)(3) 37-122(b)(3)       Added 37-136(h) 37-166(e) 10,165 11-13-01 12-202 10,194  3-26-02 25-62 10,197  4- 9-02 9-24, 14-60, 
17-3, 27-55 10,212  5-14-02 37-122(a), (b) 10,215  5-28-02 37-139(h)(5) 10,219  5-28-02 18.5-1-18.5-10, 
18.5-26-18.5-32 10,267 11-26-02       Added 37-98.1 37-56(b)(1)a. 37-139(i)(1), (3) 10,288  2-11-03 18.5-2(f) 10,321  6-10-03 3-46-3-65 10,322  6-10-03 37-97(b)(2), (3) 37-98(b)(1)-(3) 37-98.1(b)(2), (3) 37-99(b)(1), (2) 37-100(b)(2), (3) 37-101(b)(2), (3) 37-102(b)(2) 37-111(b)(1), (2) 37-112(b)(1), (2) 37-122(b)(2), (3) 10,335  8-12-03 32-23 10,345  9- 9-03 37-2 37-139(f)(2), (5) 10,357 10-14-03 18.5-1-18.5-10, 18.5-26-18.5-32 10,378  2-24-04 37-97(b)(1), 37-101(b)(1), 37-111(b)(1), 37-112(b)(1), 37-121(b)(2) 10,379  2-24-04 37-2 37-96(b)(3) 10,394  4-27-04 37-166(e) 10,397  5-11-04 1-11 10,398  5-11-04       Added 12-73 10,399  5-11-04 12-90 10,400  5-25-04       Added 11.5-2(b)(4) 10,401  5-25-04 25-61(a) 10,402  5-25-04 33-10 10,403  5-25-04 33-10.1 10,407  6- 8-04 16-20, 16-21 10,408  6- 8-04       Added 6-44-6-57 10,409  6- 8-04       Added 24-19, 24-20, 24-25-24-28 10,410  6- 8-04       Added Ch. 24.5 10,426  8-24-04 37-100(b)(2) 10,437  9-28-04 37-2, 37-97(b)(2), 37-98(b)(2), 37-98.1(b)(2), 37-100(b)(2), 37-101(b)(2), 37-102(b)(2), 37-166(e) 10,442 10-26-04       Dltd 33-46-33-49, 
33-66-33-80       Added 33-46-33-89, 
33-90-33-90.7 10,443 10-26-04       Rpld 33-20 10,457 12-28-04 37-2, 37-88(b)(2), 
37-88.5(b)(2), 37-96(b)(2), 
37-97(b)(2), 37-98(b)(2), 
37-98.1(b)(2), 37-101(b)(2), 
37-102(b)(2), 37-122(b)(2) 10,469 3-22-05 37-24 10,470 3-22-05 9-24(a), (c)-(h) 14-60 17-3 27-55 10,474 4-12-05 25-62 10,476 4-12-05 11.5-2(b)(4) 10,477 4-12-05 25-61(a)(1) 10,481 4-26-05       Added 36-23(a)(4) 10,482 4-26-05       Added 9-24.2 10,490 5-24-05 25-62(2) 10,491 5-24-05 3-47 10,492 5-24-05 37-2 10,494 5-24-05       Added 25-64 10,504 6-28-05 37-139(h)(8) 10,511 7-12-05 33-81-33-83 10,512 7-12-05 24-20 10,520 8-9-05 33-90.3, 33-90.4 10,540 10-25-05       Added 37-136(g), (h) 10,541 10-25-05       Added 37-29 10,556 1-24-06 9-21(a)(2), (3) 10,557 1-24-06 9-21(a)(4) 10,558 1-24-06 14-76(b) 10,559 1-24-06       Added 27-7 10,560 1-24-06 9-21(a)(5) 10,561 1-24-06 9-21(a)(6) 10,567 2-14-06       Dltd 37-166(f) 10,574 3-28-06 33-65, 33-73, 
33-77-33-79, 
33-81, 33-82, 
33-83, 
33-85, 33-86, 
33-86.1-33-86.3, 
33-87-33-90, 
33-90.1-33-90.7       Added 33-79.1, 33-81.1 10,577 3-28-06       Added 36-26, 36-27 10,584 4-25-06 37-2, 
37-86(b)(2), (3), 
37-86.5(b)(2), (3), 37-87(b)(2), (3), 
37-87.5(b)(2), (3), 37-88(b)(2), (3), 
37-88.5(b)(2), 
37-89(b)(1), (2), 
37-96(b)(2), 
37-98.1(b)(2) 10,585 4-25-06       Dltd 21-1-21-15       Added 21-1-21-41 10,592 5-23-06 4-24(b) 10,599 6-13-06       Added 36-20.1 10,600 6-13-06 36-20 10,603 6-27-06 37-86(b)(2), 
37-89(b)(1), (2) 10,607 7-11-06 25-64 10,611 7-8-06       Added 33-52.1 10,612 8-8-06 33-54.1, 33-54.2, 
33-74, 33-82, 
33-83, 33-90.4 10,619 9-12-06 25.4-31 10,620 9-12-06 25.4-34 10,622 9-12-06 25-63 10,624 9-26-06       Added 1.5-1-1.5-10 10,625 9-26-06 37-2 37-86(b)(2) 37-86.5(b)(2) 37-87(b)(2) 37-88(b)(2) 37-96(b)(2) 37-166(e) 10,642 11-28-06 37-86(b)(2)       Added 37-137(i) 10,644 11-28-06       Rpld 5-1-5-30 10,645 11-28-06 Art. I, 
1-8       Added 5-1-5-9 Art. II, 1-9       Added 5-21-5-29 Art. III, 1-4       Added 5-51-5-54 Art. IV, 1-3       Added 5-71-5-73 10,647 12-12-06 4-19(d) 10,650 12-26-06       Rpld 30.5-1, 30.5-11-30.5-14       Added 30.5-1-30.5-4, 30.5-10, 30.5-11, 30.5-15-30.5-25, 30.5-30-30.5-33 10,651 12-26-06 36-23 10,664 2-13-07 37-98(b)(1) 37-100(b)(1) 37-101(b)(1) 10,665 2-13-07       Added 37-136(i) 10,689 4-24-07 4-19 10,690 4-10-07 9-21 10,691 4-10-07 9-21 10,692 4-10-07 9-21 10,693 4-10-07 9-21 10,699 4-24-07 36-16 10,701 4-24-07       Rpld 26-41, 26-42       Added 26-41-26-50 10,702 4-24-07 36-21 10,711 6-12-07 10.5-1 10.5-16       Added 10.5-23 10,714 6-26-07 37-166(e) 10,740  9-11-07       Dltd 3-47(3) 10,756 10-23-07 32-93(h) 10,734  8-28-07       Rpld 33-15(c)-(e)       Added 33-15(c), (d) 10,738  9-11-07       Added 37-136(j) 10,739  9-11-07       Added 37-75 10,762 11-27-07 25-64 10,775  2-12-08 37-2 10,776  2-12-08       Dltd 37-151-37-155       Added 37-151-37-155 10,777  2-12-08       Added 37-141 10,778  2-12-08       Dltd 32-6 10,781  2-26-08       Added 37-142 10,782  2-26-08       Added 37-76 10,783  2-26-08       Added 32-6 10,792  3-25-08 10.5-23(h) 10,796  4- 8-08       Added 4-24(f) 10,808  5-27-08       Added 37-152(c)(6), (7)       Rnbrd 37-155       as 37-156       Added 37-155 10,814  6-24-08 16-17 16-18 16-19(5) 16-19(7), (8)       Added 16-19(11)       Added 16-20(e) 16-21 16-22(a) 10,817  6-24-08       Added 37-139(f)(6) 10,849 10-14-08 3-47       Added 3-58(1)(r), (s)       Added 3-58(3) 3-63(4)       Added 3-63(5) 10,850 10-14-08 37-2       Dltd 37-25(c), (d) 37-97(2), (3) 37-98(1), (3) 37-98.1(3) 37-99(1), (2) 37-102(1), (3)       Dltd 37-139(h)-(j)       Added 37-175-37-189 10,854 10-28-08       Added 37-136(e)(5)-(8) 10,855 10-28-08 37-86(b)(2) 37-86.5(b)(2) 37-87(b)(2) 37-87.5(b)(2) 37-88(b)(2) 37-88.5(b)(2) 37-96(b)(2) 37-98.1(b)(2) 10,873 12-23-08       Added 37-190-37-196 37-98(b)(1) 37-99(b)(1) 37-98.1(b)(1)       Dltd 37-136(j) 10,874 12-23-08       Added 29.5-1, 29.5-2       Added 29.5-3-29.5-22 10,875 12-23-08 4-19.1 10,881  1-27-09 37-2       Added 37-144 10,882  1-27-09 1-8       Added 9.5-31-9.5-38 10,891  3-10-09 7-53 10,919  4-28-09       Dltd 26-16       Dltd 26-26-26-29       Added 26-26-26-28 10,920  4-28-09 19.5-3 19.5-5 30-31 32-3 32-5(a) 37-2 10,928  5-28-09 37-2 37-88(b)(2) 37-88.5(b)(2) 37-96(b)(2) 37-98.1(b)(2) 10,953  8-25-09 25.4-31 10,961  9- 8-09       Added 1.5-11 10,967  9-22-09 37-178(f) 37-179 10,989 11-10-09 37-2 37-98(b)(2) 37-98.1(b)(2)       Added 37-136(j) 11,028  2-23-10 14-76(b) 11,042  3- 9-10 25-64 11,046  3-23-10       Added App. A,  15.1-15.9 11,069  5-25-10 3-53 3-55, Table 1 3-58(2) 11,073  6- 8-10 36-22(a)(1), (2) 36-22(b)(1), (2) 11,074  6- 8-10 36-24 11,075  6- 8-10       Added 36-28 11,076  6- 8-10 30-7 30-7.1(5) 11,087  7-13-10 37-98(b)(3) 11,089  7-13-10 37-2 37-139(f)(5) 11,103  8-10-10 37-2       Added 37-103 37-166(a) 11,122  9-28-10 36-23(a)(1) 11,123  9-28-10 30-7(a)(1) 11,125  9-28-10       Added 11.5-1(7) 11,161  3- 8-11 15-16(1), (2) 11,162  3- 8-11 26-44(e) 11,163  3- 8-11       Rpld 30-1-30-20 30-21-30-23 30-31-30-33 30-40-30-54       Added 30-1-30-20 30-21-30-23 30-31-30-33 30-40-30-54 11,176  4-26-11 37-103(b)(1) 11,177  4-26-11       Added 12-129.1 11,195  7-12-11 37-111 11,204  7-26-11       Added 30-60-30-79 11,230 10-11-11       Added 7-55 11,234 10-25-11       Added 7-48(b) 11,254 12-27-11 30-40.1(f) 30-44(a) 11,268  2-14-12 30-61 30-67, 30-68 30-71 11,300  6-26-12 29.5-4(d) 29.5-7(a)(2) 29.5-10(f) 29.5-3(a)(2) 37-193 11,301  6-26-12 37-193 11,306  7-24-12 30-40.1(a), (d)(1) 11,310  7-24-12 25-64 11,323  8-28-12 25-64 11,339 11-13-12 11.5-1 11,343 11-27-12 36-26(a) 11,349 11-27-12 30-7(a), (b) 11,363  2-12-13 30-7 11,369  3-26-13 25-64 11,409  8-27-13       Added 12-232-12-237 11,410  8-27-13       Rpld 6-1-6-5, 6-21-6-30, 6-41-6-57       Added 6-1-6-5, 6-21-6-37, 6-46-6-59 11,421  9-24-13       Rpld 30.5-1-30.5-4 30.5-10, 30.5-11 30.5-15-30.5-25 30.5-30-30.5-33       Added 30.5-1-30.5-20 11,440 11-12-13 37-122(b)(1) 11,443 11-12-13       Rpld 32-1-32-8 32-21-32-26 32-41-32-44 32-56-32-58 32-71-32-75 32-91-32-94 32-106-32-128       Added 32-1-32-7 32-20, 32-21 32-30-32-44 32-60, 32-61 32-70-32-73 32-90-32-99 32-110-32-112       Rpld 37-1-37-9 37-21-37-29 37-41-37-46 37-56, 37-57 37-71-37-76 37-86-37-89 37-96-37-103 37-111, 37-112 37-121, 37-122 37-136-37-142 37-144 37-151-37-156 37-166, 37-167 37-171-37-196       Added 37-1-37-7 37-20, 37-21 37-30-37-39 37-60-37-63 37-71-37-82 37-90-37-92 37-100-37-113 37-120, 37-121 37-130, 37-131 11,449 12-23-13 30.5-7(1), (3) 11,459  2-25-14       Rpld 3-16-3-29 3-70-3-75 11,494  8-26-14 27-7 11,469  4-22-14 25-64 11,508  9- 9-14       Added 36-29-36-42 11,519 10-28-14 37-37 11,520 10-28-14       Added 25.5-40-25.5-47 11,549  3-10-15 37-21 37-37 11,550  3-24-15 18.5-2(f) 11,564  4-28-15 37-39 11,567  4-28-15       Added 36-23.1 11,580  5-26-15 3-65(2)(a) 11,584  6-23-15 37-21 37-37, 37-38 11,588  7-28-15 37-130 11,589  7-28-15 32-32 11,590  7-28-15 37-21 37-76(f)(5)       Added 37-76(f)(7) 11,607  8-25-15 15-16 11,610  9- 8-15 9-24, 9-24.1 14-60 17-3 27-55 11,611  9- 8-15 37-5 11,617 10-27-15 25-63 11,619 11-10-15 22-4 11,638 12- 8-15 13-26       Rpld 13-61       Added 13-61       Added 13-62 11,641  1-12-16 32-45       Added 37-21       Added 37-64 11,642  1-12-16 37-37 11,644  1-26-16 37-37 11,700  7-26-16 7-48(b) 11,702  8- 9-16 3-47(4) 11,703  8- 9-16 37-39 11,704  8- 9-16 37-21, 37-38 11,708  8-23-16 25-61 11,727  9-27-16 37-13(a)(3) 11,732  9-27-16       Rpld Ch. 24,  24-1, 24-16-24-20, 24-25-24-28       Added Ch. 24,  24-1-24-14 11,733  9-27-16       Rpld Ch. 24.5,  24.5-1-24.5-5, 24.5-8-24.5-14, 24.5-31-24.5-38, 24.5-46-24.5-58, 24.5-66, 24.5-71-24.5-80, 24.5-86-24.5-89       Added Ch. 24,  24.5-1-24.5-9, 24.5-11-24.5-14, 24.5-31-24.5-34, 24.5-36, 24.5-38, 24.5-46-24.5-58, 24.5-66, 24.5-71-24.5-76, 24.5-78-24.5-81, 24.5-86-24.5-90 11,737 10-25-16       Added 24-7(d) 11,746 12-27-16       Added 25.5-41(l) 11,757  2-28-17 37-21, 37-37, 37-38       Added 37-76(k) 11,758  2-28-17 37-21, 37-37 11,763  4-11-17 5-21-5-24       Added 5-25       Rnbd 5-25-5-29       as 5-26-5-30 11,784  7-25-17       Added Ch. 35, Art. VII, 35-405-35-422 11,786  8- 8-17 37-103, 37-107 11,798  9-12-17 37-130(a)-(c), (e), (h)       Rpld 37-130(k) 11,799  9-12-17 18.5-1(1) 11,800  9-26-17 7-48(c) 11,805  9-26-17 37-37 11,807 10-24-17 25-64 11,810 11-28-17 37-21 37-76(f) 11,816 12-27-17 37-39 11,828  2-27-18 37-31, 37-37 11,829  2-27-18 37-39 11,835  3-19-18 1-10       Added Ch. 32.5, Art. IV, 32.5-41-32.5-50 11,837  3-27-18 30-7 11,838  3-27-18 36-23 11,840  4-10-18 37-92(f)(3) 11,848  4-24-18 37-37 11,853  5- 8-18 9-24, 9-25 11,854  5- 8-18 14-60 11,855  5- 8-18 27-35 11,860  6-12-18 37-76(f) 11,876  9-25-18 12-114 11,883 10-23-18 37-21 37-37 37-38 37-131 11,884 10-23-18 37-130 11,897 11-27-18 Art. IV,  1       Rpld Ch. 5, 5-1-5-9, 5-21-5-30, 5-51-5-54, 5-71-5-73 Arts. I-IV       Added Ch. 5, 5-1-5-9, 5-21-5-30, 5-51-5-54, 5-71 11,906  1-22-19 I-VIII 36-23.1 11,916  2-12-19 25-64 11,925  3-26-19 37-37 11,927  4- 9-19 12-181  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to state law. 
R.S. Section  
this Code 2:1 Ch. 7 7-21 2:381 et seq. Ch. 7, Art. IV 2:385(A), 2:385(B) 7-99 2:387, 2:388 7-103, 7-104 3:2531 6-5 3:3602(5), (6) 12-232 tit. 4, chs. 4, 5 30.5-10 9:4821(1) 24.5-90 13:2575 et seq. 24-7 13:2575 24-10 13:2576 24-10 14:102.1 12-232 12-234 12-237 14:102.2 12-233 12-237 14:102.2(C) 12-237 14:102.5 12-236 12-237 4:701 et seq. Ch. 10.5 10.5-23 12-124 4:703 10.5-23 4:706 Ch. 10.5 4:708 10.5-23 4:726 10.5-23 8:101 Ch. 10 9:4821(1) 24-20 13:1368 et seq. 18-1 13:1952 Ch. 11 14:2 12-1 14:2(13) 12-73 14:3 12-2 14:6 12-3 14:7-14:12 12-16 12-17 12-18 12-19 12-20 12-21 14:14 12-31 14:14.2 12-157 14:15-14:19 12-32 12-33 12-34 12-35 12-36 14:21 12-37 12-38 14:22 12-37 12-38 14:24 12-39 14:26 12-51 12-52 14:27 12-51 12-52 14:32.1 33-10 14:33 12-61 14:33 12-67 14:34 12-67 14:34.2 12-62 14:35 12-61 12-62 14:35.3 12-73 14:36 12-63 14:37 12-65 14:38 12-63 14:39 12-69 14:39.1 33-10 14:39.2 33-10 14:40 12-70 14:40.1 12-71 14:41-43.5 29.5-2 14:46 12-72 14:52 12-86.1 14:56 12-86 14:59 12-87 14:63 12-90 14:63.3 12-93 12-94 14:63.4 12-93 12-94 14:66 12-102 14:67 12-95 14:67.3 12-96 14:67.6 12-97 14:68 12-98 14:68.1 12-99 14:69 12-100 14:71 12-101 14:72 12-103 14:80-81.2 29.5-2 14:81 12-117.1 14:82 12-120 14:82-86 29.5-2 14:83 12-121 14:85 12-122 14:89 12-131 14:90 10.5-21 12-123 14:90.2 12-124 14:91-14:91.4 12-127 14:91.6 12-132 14:91.7 12-132 14:91.8 12-132 14:92 12-117 12-117.2 14:93 12-116 14:93.10(2)(a)(iii) 4-35 14:93.12 4-31 4-34 4-35 14:93.13 4-34 4-35 14:95 12-201 14:97 12-151 14:98 33-10 14:98.1 33-10.1 14:99 12-222 33-40 14:100 12-223 33-41 14:100.1 12-152 14:101 12-130 14:102 12-129 14:103 12-153 14:104 12-125 14:104-6.1 29.5-2 14:105 12-126 14:106 12-118 37-21 14:106A 37-21 14:108 12-181 12-181.1 14:110 12-182 14:110(C) 12-182.1 14:111 12-182.2 14:112 12-224 14:123 12-183.1 14:125 12-183 14:126 12-183 14:206 12-184 14:230 29.5-2 14:281-284 29.5-2 14:284 12-128 14:285 12-155 14:324 12-225 14:327 12-154 15-1 14:329.1 et seq. 12-156 14:329.1-14:329.8 12-156 14:329.5 12-185 14:401 12-186 15:81 11-3 15:436.2 12-233 ch. 18 2-41 2-43 tit. 22, ch. 1 20-291 tit. 22,  1076 20-291 22:833 Ch. 20, Art. IV 22:1076 20-291 23:1081 et seq. App. B,  3.3 App. B,  4.2 23:1601 et seq. App. B,  3.3 App. B,  4.2 25:731 et seq. Ch. 18.5 37-2 25:736 et seq. Ch. 18.5, Art. II 25:738 18.5-2 18.5-3 25:739 18.5-6 18.5-7 25:740 18.5-6 18.5-7 25:741 18.5-7 tit. 26 12-127 Ch. 4 26:2 4-1 26:71 4-13 26:75 4-6 26:78 4-10 26:80 4-11 26:81 4-14 4-24 26:85 4-10 26:90 4-26 26:241 4-1 26:271 4-13 26:275 4-6 26:278 4-10 26:280 4-11 26:281 4-14 4-24 26:283 4-10 26:286 4-26 26:345 4-16 26:492 4-17 26:493 et seq. 4-18 26:581 4-1 26:641 4-1 26:711 4-1 30:2074 37-21 30:2151 et seq. Ch. 16 30:2171 et seq. 37-21 30:2521 et seq. Ch. 16 tit. 32 20-91 33-9 tit. 32, ch. 1 33-2 32:41(A)(1) Ch. 33, Art. III 32:41(A)(3) Ch. 33, Art. IV 33-35 32:41(A)(6) 33-8 32:41(A)(7) Ch. 8, Art. II 32:41(A)(8) 33-33 32:41(C) 33-2 32:51 33-9 32:52 33-9 32:56 33-4 32:61 et seq. 33-45.1 32:71 et seq. 33-43 32:79 33-36 32:81 33-44 32:123 33-19 32:125 33-42 32:141 et seq. Ch. 33, Art. III 32:143 33-64 32:144 33-61 32:146 33-70 32:232 33-37 32:234 33-39 32:237 33-7 32:379 et seq. 33-13 32:398.1 33-75 32:473.1 et seq. Ch. 24.5, Art. VI 33-16 32:771 et seq. 25.4-31 32:851 et seq. 33-9 33:1 et seq. Ch. 33 33:41 Ch. 33 33:101 et seq. Ch. 26 Ch. 26, Art. I 32-21 37-2 37-21 33:101-33:120.1 32-3 33:102-33:119 26-26 33:103 26-27 33:106 26-28 33:111 et seq. Ch. 32 33:1236 1.5-3 33:1361 1-1 33:1362 1-1 33:1363 1-1 33:1368 et seq. 9-21 14-76 15-16 17-1 19-16 27-6 33:1941 et seq. Ch. 28 33:2476(B) 2-76 33:2621 et seq. Ch. 20 33:2746 20-2 33:2845 29.5-2 33:2892.1-2892.9 1.5-1 33:2892.3 1.5-5 33:3675.1 et seq. Ch. 31 33:4558 Ch. 25 33:4721 et seq. Ch. 37 33:4727 37-2 33:4727 et seq. 37-21 37-130 33:4762(D) 24.5-57 33:4770.1 24.5-1 33:4770.6 24.5-47 33:4770.7 24.5-47 24.5-48 24.5-49 24.5-50 33:4770.8 24.5-48 24.5-49 24.5-50 33:4770.9 24.5-48 24.5-49 24.5-50 33:4770.10 24.5-57 33:4770.11 24-19 33:4770.11 24.5-89 33:4770.11 et seq. Ch. 24 Ch. 24.5 33:4770.12 24-20 33:4770.12 24.5-90 33:4771 et seq. Ch. 9 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. III Ch. 17 17-1 Ch. 27 33:4782 Ch. 14, Art. IV 33:4785 et seq. 4-7 4-27 33:4791 Ch. 5 33:4791.1 5-3 5-51 33:4832 Ch. 25.5 33:4861.1 et seq. 10.5-5 10.5-6 10.5-7 10.5-14 10.5-15 33:4861.2 10.5-4 33:4861.15 10.5-21 33:4876 Ch. 24.5, Art. VI 33-16 33:5062 24-17 24-18 24.5-87 33:5063 24-17 24-18 24.5-88 34:851.1 et seq. Ch. 25 34:851.27 Ch. 25 37:682 12-90 24.5-51 37:1361 et seq. Ch. 27, Art. III 36-30 37:1367(G) 36-31 37:1377 27-2 37:1491 25.4-22 37:1782 25.4-1 37:1790 25.4-10 37:1793 25.4-20 37:1794 25.4-16 25.4-17 37:1795 25.4-16 25.4-17 37:1796 25.4-5 37:1797 25.4-7 25.4-8 37:1798 25.4-7 25.4-8 37:1800 25.4-9 37:1802 25.4-11 37:1803 25.4-14 37:1805 25.4-21 37:1861 25.4-31 37:1861 et seq. Ch. 25.4, Art. II 37:1864 25.4-34 37:1864.1 25.4-35 25.4-36 37:1864.2 25.4-35 25.4-36 37:1865 25.4-37 25.4-38 25.4-39 25.4-40 37:1866 25.4-37 25.4-38 25.4-39 25.4-40 37:1867 25.4-37 25.4-38 25.4-39 25.4-40 37:1868 25.4-37 25.4-38 25.4-39 25.4-40 37:1869.1 25.4-31 38:2211 et seq. 2-155 38:2212 2-154 2-155 38:2233 Ch. 2, Art. V 2-149 40:11 18-1 40:961 4-26 40:961 et seq. 12-115 29.5-2 40:964 33-10 40:978 12-115 40:1021 et seq. 12-114 40:1231 et seq. 5-54 40:1235.1 5-54 40:1275 et seq. 6-30 40:1300.51 et seq. Ch. 30.5 40:1561 et seq. Ch. 15 40:1730.21 et seq. Ch. 9 Ch. 14 Ch. 14, Art. III Ch. 17 17-1 Ch. 27 40:1742 33-74 45:200.1 et seq. Ch. 35 45:200.1 et seq. 35-405 45:200.2 35-1 45:200.3 Ch. 35, Art. V, Div. 1 45:200.4 35-257 45:200.5 35-257 45:200.6 35-257 45:200.7 35-257 45:200.9 35-259 45:201 Ch. 35, Art. VII 45:201.1, et seq. 35-405 35-412 45:1361 et seq. Ch. 9.5 45:1363 9.5-35 45:1363(8) 9.5-33 45:1364 9.5-36 45:1364(B)(4) 9.5-36 45:1367 9.5-34 45:1369 9.5-36 46:305.17 20-91 46:305.21 20-91 46:371-46:373 20-91 46:2583(A)(2) 33-74 tit. 47,  341-363 20-22 47:301 Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 1 47:304 20-80 47:337.1 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III 47:337.3 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 2 Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 3 47:337.9 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 2 Ch. 20, Art. III, Div. 3 47:341 20-21 47:341 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. II 47:349 20-25 20-26 20-27 47:350 20-25 20-26 20-27 47:351 20-25 20-26 20-27 47:353 20-30 47:451 et seq. 20-106 47:462 20-77 47:490.4 7-48 47:490.31 7-48 47:1601 20-292 47:1602 20-292 47:4791.1 Ch. 5 49:950 et seq. Ch. 24 24-6 49:1001 et seq. App. B,  3.2, App. B,  3.3 51:31 et seq. Ch. 20, Art. V 51:2603 12.5-17 12.5-18 51:2604 12.5-17 12.5-18 51:2606 12.5-19 12.5-20 12.5-21 12.5-22 51:2607 12.5-19 12.5-20 12.5-21 12.5-22 51:2608 12.5-19 12.5-20 12.5-21 12.5-22 51:2609 12.5-19 12.5-20 12.5-21 12.5-22 1584 14-86 tit. 45, ch. 10-A 9.5-32 9.5-33  
