BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
0
GENERAL BYLAWS
OF THE
TOWN OF ACTON
TOWN OF ACTON, MASSACHUSETTS
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
1
BYLAWS
of the
TOWN of ACTON
CHAPTER A Town Meeting
CHAPTER B Town Agencies and Officers
CHAPTER C Bylaws
CHAPTER D Administrative Provisions
CHAPTER E General Public Regulations
CHAPTER F Environmental Regulations (Wetlands Protection)
CHAPTER G Earth Removal Bylaw
CHAPTER H Disposal Bylaw (rescinded 4/6/92 ARTICLE 12)
CHAPTER I Hazardous Waste Bylaw
CHAPTER J Scenic Road Bylaw
CHAPTER K Personnel Bylaw
CHAPTER L Handicapped Bylaw
CHAPTER M Zoning Bylaw (In separate book)
CHAPTER N Procedure for the Demolition of Historically or
Architecturally Significant Buildings
CHAPTER O Revocation or Suspension of Local Licenses
CHAPTER P Local Historic District Bylaw
CHAPTER Q Financial Condition Reports
CHAPTER R Ground Water Cleanup Standards
CHAPTER S Community Preservation
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
2
BYLAWS
of the
TOWN of ACTON
CHAPTER T “Carry-In” Intoxicating Beverages Bylaw
CHAPTER U Discharge to Municipal Storm Drain System
CHAPTER V Stretch Energy Code
CHAPTER W Civil Fingerprinting for Licensing Applicants
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control
CHAPTER Y Department Revolving Funds
CHAPTER Z Marijuana Establishments
CHAPTER AA Right to Farm
CHAPTER AB Plastic Bag Reduction
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
3
BYLAWS
of the
TOWN of ACTON
CHAPTER A: MEETING PROCEDURES (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 1)
A1. Date of Election (Amended 11/14/89)
A2. Date of Meeting (Amended 11/14/89)
A3. Distribution of Warrants
A4. Posting of Warrant
A5. Counts by Moderator (Voted 4/2/01- Article 43)
A6. Reconsideration of Vote
A7. Method of Voting (Voted 10/05/16 – Article 2)
A8. Temporary Moderator (Voted 10/05/16 – Article 1)
CHAPTER B: TOWN AGENCIES & OFFICERS (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 2)
B1. Structure of the Finance Committee (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 5)
B2. Restriction on Fin-Com. Members (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 5)
B3. Duties of the Finance Committee (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 5)
B4. Procedures of the Finance Committee (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 5)
B5. Appointment of the Chief of Police (Voted 4/6/98 - Article 5)
B6. Power of the Chief of Police (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 6)
B7. Duties of the Police Department (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 6)
B8. Authority of the Police Department (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 6)
B9. Appointment of the Fire Chief (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 7)
B10. Duties of the Fire Department (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 7)
B11. Duties of the Board of Health (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 8)
B12. Reporting by the Board of Health (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 8)
B13. Dumping contrary to Board of Health (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 8)
rules and regulations
B14. Hogs under the jurisdiction of the (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 8)
Board of Health
B15. Structure of the Public Ceremonies (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 9)
and Celebrations Committee
B16. Terms of Public Ceremonies and (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 9)
Celebrations Committee members
B17. Authority of the Public Ceremonies (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 9)
and Celebrations Committee
B18. Duties of the Public Ceremonies (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 9)
and Celebrations Committee
B19. Appointment of Sub-committees by the (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 9)
Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
B20. Members’ compensation of the Public (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 9)
Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
B21. Council on Aging (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 10)
(Amended 4/4/11 – Article 35)
B22. Title Payment Plans (Voted 4/6/09 - Article 41)
B23. Commission on Disabilities (Voted 4/6/09 – Article 48)
(Amended 4/2/12 – Article 38)
B24. Appointment of the Tree Warden (Voted 4/2/18 – Article 32)
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
4
CHAPTER C: BYLAWS; GENERAL PROVISIONS (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 18)
C1. Repeal of Bylaws
C2. Date of Effectiveness
C3. Fine for Violation
CHAPTER D: ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 17)
D1. Safekeeping of Records (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 17)
D2. Inspector of Gas Piping and (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 17)
Gas Appliances
D3. Receipt of Fees (Voted 4/14/76 - Article 14)
D4. thru D8. Perpetual Care Bylaw (Voted 11/28/77 - Article 3)
D9. Fees of the Town Clerk (Rescinded 4/7/99 - Article 40)
D10. Sewer Assessment Bylaw (Amended 11/15/99 - Article1)
(Amended 10/5/98 - Article2)
(Voted 4/11/88) - Article 3)
(Amended 4/3/06 - Article 32)
D11. Automatic Amusement Devices (Rescinded 4/7/99 - Article 40)
D12. Sealing Fees (Rescinded 4/7/99 - Article 40)
D13. Public Bidding (Amended 4/4/89 - Article 37)
(Rescinded 4/2/01 - Article 22)
D14. Disposal of Personal Property (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 4)
D15. Fee For Permitting of Ice Cream Vendors (Voted 6/3/13 - Article 6)
CHAPTER E: GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS
E1. Street numbering (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 11)
E2. thru E3. Discharge of Firearms (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 12)
E4. Abandoned Wells (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 13)
E5. Excavation (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 14)
E6. thru E9. Unregistered Motor Vehicles (Amended 4/4/89 - Article 35)
E10. Registration of Ownership of a (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 19)
Building used for Multi Family occupancy
E11. Fire Lanes (Amended 4/22/89 - Article 31)
E12. thru E21. Solicitors and (Voted 4/23/79 - Article 15)
Canvassers Licensing
E22. thru E25. Dog Licenses/Animal Control (Voted 4/4/94 – Article 59)
(Amended 4/10/97 – Article 29)
(Amended 4/7/03 - Article 21)
(Amended 4/1/13 - Article 39)
(Amended 4/2/18 - Article 31)
E26. Animal Control Officer Enforcement Authority (Voted 12/4/17 – Article 8)
E26. thru E33. Use of Tobacco Products (Voted 4/26/93 - Article 20)
(Deleted 4/3/06 - Article 34)
E28. thru E34. Tobacco use (Amended 4/2/01 - Article 22)
E30. Subsection B Smoking Restrictions (Voted 4/6/98 - Article 10)
E31 Workplace smoking (Voted 4/2/01 - Article 22)
(*REPLACES ACTON CLEAN INDOOR AIR BYLAW*)
E35. Peeping or Spying (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 19)
E36. Graffiti and Rubbish (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 19)
E37. Injurious debris (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 19)
E38. Street/Sidewalk Obstruction (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 19)
E39. Public Way Obstruction/Destruction (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 19)
(Amended 4/1/19 - Article 28)
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
5
CHAPTER E: GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS continued
E40. Discharge of water on Town ways (Voted 3/10/69 - Article 19)
E41. Alcoholic beverage on Town Common (Voted 6/18/73 - Article 4)
E42. Alcohol in Public (Voted 4/24/79 - Article 24)
(Amended 4/3/00 - Article 34)
E43. Night Hour Bylaw (Amended 11/28/88 - Article 1)
E44. Fire and Police Alarms (Voted 4/4/89 - Article 37)
E45. Non-Criminal Disposition (Voted 4/4/89 - Article 37)
(Amended 4/26/93 - Article 29)
(Voted 4/4/89 - Article 37))
(Amended 4/8/96 - Article 45)
(Amended 4/4/05 - Article 24)
(Amended 4/3/06 – Art 34 & 35)
(Amended 4/7/08 - Article 36)
(Amended 4/6/09 - Article 39)
(Amended 4/5/10 - Article 31)
(Amended 4/4/11 - Article 34)
(Amended 4/2/12 - Article 40)
(Amended 4/1/13 - Article 39)
(Amended 4/6/15 - Article 28)
E46. thru E56. Sale of Tobacco Products (Voted 4/12/93 - Article 21)
(Amended 4/3/00 - Article 35)
(Deleted 4/3/06 - Article 34
E57. Motorized Craft on Ice House Pond (Voted 4/5/04 - Article 38)
E58. Police Detail (Voted 4/6/15 - Article 28)
CHAPTER F: WETLAND PROTECTION (Voted 4/6/81 - Article 34)
(Voted 4/4/89 - Article 35)
(Amended 4/2/96 - Article 44)
(Amended 4/2/01 - Article 39)
(Amended 4/7/03 - Article 34)
CHAPTER G: EARTH REMOVAL BYLAW (Amended 9/12/55 - Article 15)
CHAPTER H: DISPOSAL BYLAW (Rescinded 4/6/92 - Article 12)
CHAPTER I: HAZARDOUS MATERIALS (Amended 4/1/91 - Article 16)
CONTROL BYLAW (Amended 4/3/06 - Article 36)
CHAPTER J: SCENIC ROAD BYLAW (Voted 5/29/74 - Article 55)
CHAPTER K: PERSONNEL BYLAW (Voted 4/2/85 - Article 4)
CHAPTER L: HANDICAPPED PARKING BYLAW (Voted 4/22/85 - Article 28)
(Amended 4-4-11 – Article 33
CHAPTER M: ZONING BYLAW
* IN SEPARATE BOOK AT PLANNING BOARD*
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
6
CHAPTER N: PROCEDURE FOR THE DEMOLITION OF HISTORICALLY OR
ARCHITECTURALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
(Voted 4/11/87 - Article 45)
(Amended 4/6/09 - Article 28)
(Amended 4/1/19 - Article 27)
CHAPTER O: REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION OF (Voted 4/11/87 - Article 43)
LOCAL LICENSES
CHAPTER P: LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT BYLAW (Voted 11/28/90 - Article 4)
(Amended 4/1/02 - Article 31)
(Amended 4/7/03 - Article 35)
CHAPTER Q: FINANCIAL CONDITION REPORTS (Voted 4/4/95 - Article 2 & 3)
CHAPTER R: GROUND WATER CLEANUP (Voted 4/10/97 - Article 40)
STANDARDS BYLAW
CHAPTER S: COMMUNITY PRESERVATION (Voted 4/2/02 - Article 33)
(Amended 4/2/07 - Article 34)
(Amended 4/6/09 - Article 28)
(Amended 4/1/13 - Article 29)
CHAPTER T: “CARRY-IN” INTOXICATING BEVERAGES BYLAW
(Voted 4/4/05 - Article 23)
(Amended 4/3/06 - Article33)
CHAPTER U: “DISCHARGE TO MUNICIPAL STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
(Voted 4/5/10 - Article 30)
CHAPTER V: STRETCH ENERGY CODE
(Voted 4/5/10 - Article 29)
CHAPTER W: CIVIL FINGERPRINTING FOR MUNICIPAL LICENSING
APPLICANTS
(Voted 4/7/14 - Article 29)
CHAPTER X: STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (Voted 11/10/15 - Article 9)
AND EROSION & SEDIMENT CONTROL (Amended 4/1/19 - Article 39)
CHAPTER Y: DEPARTMENT REVOLVING FUNDS (Voted 12/4/17 - Article 7)
CHAPTER Z: MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS (Voted 12/3/18 - Article 1)
CHAPTER AA: RIGHT TO FARM (Voted 4/1/19 - Article 26)
CHAPTER AB: PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION (Voted 4/1/19 - Article 32)
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
7
C H A P T E R A
TOWN MEETING
A1. Date of Town Election
The Annual Town Meeting for the election of Town Officers shall be held on the
Tuesday immediately preceding the first Monday of April in each year. The terms of
elected Officers shall be as stated in the Town Charter. The term of each such Officer
shall commence upon the final adjournment of the Annual Town Meeting at which
he/she is elected and shall extend until the final adjournment of the Annual Town
Meeting which his/her successor is elected.
A2. Date of Town Meeting
All business of the Annual Town Meeting, except the election of such Officers and the
determination of such matters as by law are required to be determined at such meeting,
shall be considered at an adjournment thereof, which adjournment shall be held on the
first Monday in April, following the Town Election at such hours and at such place as
decided by the Board of Selectmen.
A3. Distribution of Warrant
The Selectmen after drawing a warrant for a town meeting shall immediately transmit a
copy of such warrant to each member of the Finance Committee.
A4. Posting of Warrant
At least fourteen days before the day appointed for a town meeting, the Board of
Selectmen shall cause an attested copy of the warrant therefor to be posted by the
Constable of the Town, in not less than six (6) public places in the Town designated by
the Selectmen.
A5. Vote counts by Moderator
If a two-thirds, four-fifths or nine-tenths vote of a town meeting is required by statute, the
count shall be taken, and the vote shall be recorded in the records by the clerk;
provided, however, if a two-thirds vote of a town meeting is required by statute, the
Town has authorized the Moderator not to require a count and the clerk shall record the
vote as passed by a two thirds margin; and provided, further, that if the vote is
unanimous, a count need not be taken, and the clerk shall record the vote as
unanimous.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
8
CHAPTER A TOWN MEETING CONTINUED
A6. Reconsideration of Vote
a. Any voter shall be permitted to move reconsideration of a vote taken at town
meeting, subject to the limitation or exceptions set forth in succeeding subsections
of this bylaw.
b. A motion to reconsider any vote taken at the meeting shall require a 2/3 vote if
made at the same session at which the vote to be reconsidered is taken. If made at
any adjourned session of the meeting, a ¾ vote shall be required and notice of the
intention to move such reconsideration shall be given in writing to the Town Clerk at
least eight (8) hours before the opening of such adjourned session and formal
notification bearing the seal of the Town shall be posted by a Constable at the
locations designated by the Selectmen for posting the warrant at least six (6) hours
before the opening of such adjourned session.
c. This bylaw does not limit the number of times that reconsideration of a vote may be
moved except that at a single session such reconsideration may be moved only
once.
d. A motion to reconsider a vote is debatable if a motion originating the vote was
debatable.
e. The foregoing provisions shall not, however, prevent the Board of Selectmen from
moving reconsideration at any time when in their unanimous judgment
reconsideration is in the best interests of the Town.
A7. Method of Voting; Determination by Moderator
a. Unless otherwise required by law, bylaw, regional agreement, or similar binding
obligation, the Moderator shall determine the method of voting on each article at
town meeting, which method may vary from article to article, and which method
may include a voice vote, a vote by show of hands or the equivalent, a standing
vote, a ballot vote, a vote by electronic technology furnished by the Town for the
use of Town Meeting Members (where available), or a vote by other means as
authorized by the Moderator and approved by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the town
meeting members present and voting.
b. If the vote is unanimous, or if the quantum of the vote required by law is discernible
by the Moderator based on the voting method utilized under Section A7(a), the
Moderator shall declare the result of the vote and the clerk shall record the result of
the vote in the records of the town meeting.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
9
CHAPTER A TOWN MEETING CONTINUED
A7. Method of Voting; Determination by Moderator - continued
c. If the Moderator cannot discern the result of the vote based on the voting method
utilized under Section A7(a), or if a count is required under Section A5 where a
four-fifths or nine-tenths vote of a town meeting is required by statute, or if a vote
declared under Section A7(b) of these bylaws is immediately questioned by seven
or more voters, the Moderator shall cause the vote to be counted either by tellers
or by such electronic technology, whereupon the Moderator shall declare the result
of the vote and the clerk shall record the result of the vote in the records of the
town meeting.
d. Pursuant to Article 114 of the Massachusetts Constitution and to the
Massachusetts Equal Rights Law, G.L. c. 93, §103, reasonable accommodation
shall be made to ensure that equal voting rights of otherwise qualified handicapped
individuals present and voting at town meeting are ensured regardless of the
method of voting used.
A8. Temporary Moderator
Town meeting shall elect a temporary moderator to act in the absence of the town
moderator elected as stated in Section 2-1 of the Town Charter. For purposes of
Section 3-2 of the Town Charter and M.G.L. c. 39, § 14, absence shall mean that the
town moderator is unable to attend the town meeting, recuses himself or herself from
conducting the proceedings and vote on any article or articles at a town meeting, or is
otherwise unable to perform the duties of town moderator for all or part of a town
meeting.. The temporary moderator shall serve in such position only for those portions
of any town meeting for which the town moderator is absent. The term of the
temporary moderator shall be one year from election or until a different temporary
moderator is elected by town meeting, whichever occurs sooner.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
10
C H A P T E R B
TOWN AGENCIES & OFFICERS
B1. Structure of the Finance Committee
There shall be a Finance Committee consisting of nine (9) voters of the Town. The
committee shall be appointed by the Moderator in the following manner: three (3)
members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year; three (3) members shall be
appointed for a term of two (2) years; and three (3) members shall be appointed for a
term of three (3) years. Thereafter, each appointment shall be for a term of three (3)
years.
B2. Restriction on Finance Committee Members
No member of the Finance Committee shall serve on any other standing committee
having to do with the expenditure of town funds.
B3. Duties of the Finance Committee
The Finance Committee shall consider any and all municipal questions for the purpose
of making reports and recommendations. Without restricting the general intent of the
foregoing, the Finance Committee shall include in its duties the review of and
recommendations concerning the budget for the annual meeting, the review of and
recommendations concerning any other matter of a financial nature arising at the annual
meeting or at any special meeting, and the preparation of long range fiscal plans for the
Town.
B4. Procedure of the Finance Committee
Before making recommendations concerning the budget for the annual meeting, as
prescribed in Section 3 of this Article, the Finance Committee shall hold one (1) or more
hearings with the Board of Selectmen.
B5. Appointment of the Police Chief
The Town Manager shall appoint a Chief of Police and shall have the general
supervision over the Police Department.
B6. Power of the Police Chief
The Chief of Police shall be head of the Police Department. Subject to the supervision
and direction of the Town Manager, the Chief of Police shall have control of the
department, its officers and members, and special police officers when in the service of
the department.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
11
CHAPTER B TOWN AGENCIES & OFFICERS CONTINUED
B7. Duties of the Police Department
The Police Department shall be governed by the rules and regulations and perform
such duties as are prescribed by the Town Manager or by the bylaws of the town.
B8. Authority of the Police Department
The Police Department shall be subject to all the rules and regulations and perform all
duties which are now or hereafter prescribed by law, by the bylaws of the Town, by the
Town Manager, or the rules and regulations of the Police Department. Any member of
the department may be removed or suspended or otherwise disciplined by the Town
Manager, as provided by law.
B9. Appointment of the Fire Chief
The Town Manager shall appoint a Chief of the Fire Department, who may be removed
for cause. The Chief of the Fire Department shall be head of the fire department.
Subject to the supervision and direction of the Town Manager, the Chief of the Fire
Department shall have control of the department, its officers and members, and any
other personnel when in the service of the department. (This is a standing appointment).
B10. Duties of the Fire Department
The Fire Department shall be governed by the rules and regulations of the Board of
Selectmen and perform such duties as are prescribed by the Town Manager and by the
bylaws of the Town. Any member of the department may be removed or suspended or
otherwise disciplined by the Town Manager, as provided by law.
B11. Duties of the Board of Health
The Board of Health shall make and publish from time to time such regulations as it
deems necessary for public health and safety, and shall cause them to be printed in
form for public distribution.
B12. Reporting by the Board of Health
The Board of Health shall annually make a report to be printed in the annual town
report, showing in detail statistics of the health and sanitary condition of the Town with
recommendations for its improvement, together with a full and comprehensive
statement of its work during the previous year. Such report shall also contain a detailed
statement of the amount expended by the Board during the year.
B13. Dumping contrary to Board of Health Rules and Regulations
No person unless having the authority so to do shall dump or deposit any ashes,
rubbish, refuse, offal, or decayed animal or vegetable matter on any public or private
land, contrary to the rules and regulations of the Board of Health.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
12
CHAPTER B TOWN AGENCIES & OFFICERS CONTINUED
B14. Hogs under the jurisdiction of the Board of Health
All persons keeping hogs within the limits of the Town shall be subject to all rules and
regulations of the Board of Health.
B15. Structure of the Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
There shall be a Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee of nine (9) members
to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and whose powers, duties and
responsibilities are as hereinafter provided.
B16. Terms of Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee members
The terms of the committee members shall be for three (3) years. The terms of three
(3) members shall expire each year.
B17. Authority of the Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
The committee shall have complete charge under the direction of the Town Manager of
all Public Ceremonies and Celebrations held in the Town and in which the Town
participates unless the Town shall by vote of any regular or special town meeting
provide otherwise.
B18. Duties of the Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
Immediately following the appointment of the members of this committee, they shall
organize and elect a chairman and clerk. The clerk of said committee shall there upon
notify the Town Manager of the aforesaid action. Said committee may reorganize its
officers at any time and the clerk shall notify the Town Manager accordingly. The
concurrence of a majority of the committee shall be necessary to make any act of the
committee effective.
B19. Sub-committees of the Public Ceremonies and Celebrations Committee
The committee, with the approval of the Town Manager, shall have the authority to
appoint sub-committees for special events.
B20. Members compensation of the Public Ceremonies and Celebrations
Committee
The members of the committee shall serve without compensation.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
13
CHAPTER B TOWN AGENCIES & OFFICERS CONTINUED
B21. Council on Aging
There shall be a Council on Aging for the purpose of coordinating or carrying out
programs designed to meet the problems of the aging in coordination with programs of
the Department of Elder Affairs established under General Laws, Chapter 19A, Section
1, et seq., or any successor or related department or legislation affecting the affairs of
the elderly. Without limitation, the mission of the Council on Aging is to help mobilize
human, physical, and financial resources available to plan, develop, and implement
innovative programs to insure the dignity and independence of elderly persons,
including the planning, development, and implementation of home care programs for the
elderly in the Town, and to advocate for elderly persons in an effort to maximize their
independence and quality of life through the implementation of services to meet their
health, economic, social, and cultural needs. Subject to the approval of the Board of
Selectmen, the Council on Aging may promulgate administrative procedures governing
its affairs.
B22. Tax Title Payment Plans
The Treasurer shall have the authority to enter into written installment payment
agreements with persons entitled to redeem parcels in tax title on such terms and
conditions as the Treasurer may determine in the Treasurer’s reasonable discretion and
in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 60, Section 62A. This bylaw
shall apply to all taxpayers with parcels in tax title in the Town of Acton. All installment
payment agreements shall comply with the following minimum requirements:
1. The installment payment agreement shall have a maximum term of five (5) years;
2. The installment payment agreement may include a waiver of up to 50% of the
interest that has accrued in the tax title account, but only if the taxpayer complies
with the terms of the agreement (no taxes or collection costs may be waived); and
3. The installment payment agreement must state the amount of the payment due
from the taxpayer at the time of execution of the agreement, which must be at least
25% of the amount needed to redeem the parcel at the inception of the agreement.
B23. Commission on Disabilities
23.1 This Commission on Disabilities shall consist of five (5) members and two (2)
associate members, appointed by the Board of Selectmen, each serving a
three (3) year term, pursuant to Charter § 4-2.
23.2 A quorum of the Commission on Disabilities shall consist of three (3) members
or associate members, if designated by the Chair in the case of absence,
inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any regular member, or in
the event of a vacancy on the Commission.
23.3 The Commission on Disabilities shall act by a majority vote of its members or
associate members, designated as described herein, present or otherwise
entitled to vote under the Open Meeting Law, provided however, that if only a
quorum of three (3) members or associate members is present, the vote must
be unanimous to carry.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
14
CHAPTER B TOWN AGENCIES & OFFICERS CONTINUED
B24 Appointment of the Tree Warden
The Town Manager shall appoint a Tree Warden to carry out the duties as described in
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 87 and shall have general supervision over the
Tree Warden.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
15
C H A P T E R C
BYLAWS: GENERAL PROVISIONS
C1. Repeal of Bylaws
These bylaws may be repealed or amended at any annual town meeting, or at any other
town meeting specially called for the purpose, provided an article or articles for such
purpose has been inserted in the warrant for such meeting.
C2. Date of Effectiveness
These Bylaws shall go into effect upon their acceptance by the Town and the fulfillment
of all legal requirements for their effectiveness.
C3. Fine for Violation
Except as otherwise provided specifically in any article of these Bylaws, any person
violating any of these Bylaws shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars
($50.00) for each offense.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
16
C H A P T E R D
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
D1. Safekeeping of Records
All bonds, contracts, and written agreements pertaining to the several departments shall
be placed for safe keeping in the custody of the Town Clerk, except as otherwise
provided by law.
D2. Inspector of Gas Piping and Gas Appliances
The Town Manager shall in each year appoint an inspector of gas piping and gas
appliances in buildings, whose duty shall be the enforcement of the rules and
regulations adopted by the Board established by General Laws, Chapter 25, Section
12H.
D3. Receipt of Fees
All fees received by any Town officer or employee in his official capacity shall be paid
into the Town Treasury.
D4. through D8. Perpetual Care Bylaw
D4 The Town will accept from any person a sum of money, not less than $100.00, the
income therefrom to be used for the annual care and maintenance of such lot or lots in
a public cemetery of the Town as the person shall designate, and for the care,
maintenance and improvement of the cemetery in which such lot or lots are located.
Such deposit shall be a perpetual fund and will be pooled with other deposits of a
similar nature that are received to comprise the Acton Cemetery Perpetual Care Fund.
D5 The Town Treasurer shall receive all sums of money paid in accordance with the
preceding section and shall give a proper receipt of the Town therefor. He shall keep
the Cemetery Commissioners regularly informed as to the cemetery lots for which
perpetual care funds have been established. He shall annually, at such time as the
Cemetery Commissioners request, pay over to said Commissioners all income earned
on such sums. Such income shall be judiciously and economically expended by the
Cemetery Commissioners, first, for the care and maintenance of the lot or lots, including
the monuments and markers thereon, designated by the donor and second, for the
care, maintenance and improvement of the cemetery in which such lot or lots are
located.
D6 Said Cemetery Commissioners shall faithfully apply all amounts received by
them in accordance with the provisions of this bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
17
CHAPTER D ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS CONTINUED
D4. through D8. Perpetual Care Bylaw - continued
D7 The following form of receipt shall be given in behalf of the Town by its Treasurer
to persons depositing money under the provisions of this bylaw.
"The Town of Acton" acknowledges receipt of $___________ from (A.B.) as a
perpetual fund, the income of which is to be used for the maintenance and repair
of the following lots in the cemeteries and for the maintenance, care and
improvement of the cemetery in which such lots are located. (Insert description
of lots.) This money is received and shall be applied in accordance with a bylaw
of the Town adopted November 28, 1977.
D8 This bylaw shall apply to all sums deposited with the Town for the perpetual care
of new cemetery lots after its adoption. The provisions of the bylaw adopted March 25,
1901, as amended, shall continue to apply to all sums previously deposited with the
Town under its provisions.
D9. Fees of the Town Clerk (Rescinded 4/7/99 - Article 40)
D10. Sewer Assessment Bylaw
D10 Sewer System
1. Allocation of Cost of Sewer System. The entire cost of laying out, constructing
and operating a system for the collection, treatment and disposal of sewage for all
or any part of the Town shall be borne by the land benefited by such system, in
accordance with the following provisions , except that costs incurred in connection
with the planning and construction of the sewer collection and treatment facility for
Middle Fort Pond Brook Sewer District, for archeological studies, paving of roads,
engineering peer reviews, police details, traffic studies, and land acquisition,
amounting in total to $1,336,600, shall be allocated to taxpayers at large; and
except for such costs as the Town Meeting, by a two-thirds vote, at a town
meeting subsequent to this November 15, 1999 Special Town Meeting, shall
allocate to taxpayers at large.
2. Assessment by Uniform Unit Method.
a. The Town, acting through its Sewer Commissioners, shall assess the owners of
all land abutting any way in which there is a public sewer line constructed by
the Town, by the uniform unit method, as authorized by G.L. c. 83 §15.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
18
CHAPTER D ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS CONTINUED
D10. Sewer Assessment Bylaw
2. Assessment by Uniform Unit Method - continued
b. The Sewer Commissioners shall establish sewer assessment units, as follows:
(i) The owner of land used for a single family residence shall be assessed on the
basis of one sewer unit. The owner of undeveloped land zoned for single
family residential use shall be assessed on the basis of the maximum number
of single family residences which may be constructed on such land as of right
under the zoning requirements then in effect, without approval of the further
subdivision of such land under the Subdivision Control Law.
(II) The owner of land used for multi-family residential use, shall be assessed on
the basis of .67 times the number of dwelling units presently existing on such
land, provided each unit has fewer than three bedrooms as defined by Title V.
Vacant land zoned for multi-family use shall be assessed on the basis of .67
times the maximum number of units which can be constructed as of right
under the zoning then in effect, without approval of further subdivision of such
land under the Subdivision Control Law. Multi-family units with three or more
bedrooms shall be assessed on the basis of one sewer unit per dwelling unit.
Each owner of a condominium or cooperative dwelling unit in a multi-family
residential building shall be assessed only for his or her dwelling unit.
(iii) The owner of land used or zoned for business use, including land in the
Village, Office, Business districts, except land in such districts actually used
for residential or other purposes, shall be assessed on the basis of a number
of sewer units calculated by multiplying the maximum floor area ratio (FAR)
permitted as of right under the zoning requirements then in effect times the lot
area and dividing the result by 4000, in accordance with the following formula.
Number of Sewer = Maximum FAR x Lot Area
Units 4000
(iv) The owner of land used or zoned for industrial use shall be assessed on the
basis of a number of sewer units to be determined by the Sewer
Commissioners, taking into account the expected daily sewage flow from
such land based on Title V design flows.
(v) The owner of land used or zoned for other purposes not specified in the
foregoing sections, including , but not limited to, institutional and non-profit
uses, shall be assessed on the basis of a number of sewer units to be
determined by the Sewer Commissioners, taking into account the expected
daily sewage flow from such land based on Title V design flows.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
19
CHAPTER D ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS CONTINUED
D10. Sewer Assessment Bylaw - continued
3. User Fees for Land Not Subject to Assessment. The Sewer Commissioners
shall establish just and reasonable fees for the use of the public sewer system by
the owner of any land, including public land, not liable to assessment, which fee
shall be based on the avoided cost of construction of sewage disposal facilities to
serve such land.
4. Assessment Rates. The Sewer Commissioners shall establish the assessment
rate for land within the Middle Fort Pond Brook sewer area, based on total
construction costs for the sewerage system serving such area, including all costs of
land acquisition, engineering and design, financing and construction, divided by the
total number of existing and potential sewer units within such area. In establishing
such rate, the Sewer Commissioners shall apportion the total construction costs
between costs required to serve the Middle Fort Pond Brook area and costs required
to serve future areas within the Town and shall assess owners within the Middle Fort
Pond Brook area only such costs as are reasonably necessary to serve such area,
after deducting any construction costs to be recovered pursuant to Section 3 from
users of the system not subject to assessment.
5 Sewer Privilege Fees.
a. The Sewer Commissioners may establish reasonable fees pursuant to G.L. c. 83,
§ 17 to cover costs of construction of common sewers and other facilities required
to serve land not previously served by the sewer system and not previously
assessed to the owner of such land. Any such fee shall be reduced to the extent
the landowner pays such expenses, in accordance with G.L. c. 83, § 22.
b. The Sewer Commissioners may establish reasonable fees pursuant to G.L. c. 83,
§ 17, to cover costs of construction of common sewers and other facilities
required to serve land previously assessed a sewer betterment based on its
existing use and/or its existing zoning potential where such land is later developed
and/or subdivided for more intensive use (such as through a comprehensive
permit under G.L. c. 40B, a zoning change, a subdivision, an approval not
required plan, or other means). This fee shall be calculated based on the number
of Sewer Assessment Units attributable to the intensified use of the land minus
the number of Sewer Assessment Units originally assessed to the land, and may
be adjusted by such other factors as the Sewer Commissioners, by regulation
promulgated pursuant to this bylaw, determine to be appropriate. This fee shall
be paid before any sewer connection permit or building permit is issued for the
intensified use or, if a sewer connection permit or building permit is not required
for the intensified use, before that use is commenced. The Sewer Commissioners
may, by regulation promulgated pursuant to this bylaw, divide this fee among the
land involved.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
20
CHAPTER D ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS CONTINUED
D10. Sewer Assessment Bylaw
5 Sewer Privilege Fees - continued
c. The fees charged under this Section may be applied by the Sewer
Commissioners in their discretion to the costs of construction of the common
sewers and other facilities, the debt service with respect thereto, and other costs
and expenses of the sewer system as appropriate.
6. Annual User Fees. The Sewer Commissioners may from time to time establish
just and equitable annual user charges to cover the cost of maintenance, repairs
and operation of the sewer system.
7. Rules and Regulations Concerning Sewer Assessments. The Sewer
Commissioners may adopt such reasonable rules and regulations with respect to
the calculation of sewer assessments or fees as may be necessary or appropriate
to implement the provisions of this bylaw.
8. Applicability of General Laws. Except as provided herein or in any special
legislation applicable to the Town, the provisions of the General Laws relative to the
assessment, apportionment, division, re-assessment, abatement and collection of
sewer assessments and to liens therefore and interest thereon shall apply to
assessments made hereunder.
9. Rules and Regulations Concerning Use of Sewer System. The Sewer
Commissioners may establish rules and regulations concerning the use of the
public sewer system, including but not limited to, rules and regulations prohibiting
the deposit of any harmful or deleterious substance into the system, for regulating
connections to the system and establishing civil penalties for violation of such rules.
D11. Automatic Amusement Devices (Rescinded 4/7/99-Article 40)
D12. Sealing Fees (Rescinded 4/7/99-Article 40)
D13. Public Bidding (Rescinded 4/2/01-Article 22)
D14. Disposal of Personal Property
Any board or officer in charge of a department of the Town may, with the approval of the
Board of Selectmen, transfer to another town department or transfer by sale, any
personal property of the Town within the possession or control of the department which
has become obsolete, or is not required for further use by the department; provided,
however that any such property which is to be disposed of, the aggregate value of
which, in the opinion of the Board of Selectmen, exceeds $1,000.00, shall only be sold
following public bid in a manner prescribed by said Board of Selectmen.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
21
CHAPTER D ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS CONTINUED
D15. Fee for Permitting of Ice Cream Truck Vendors
Pursuant to M.G.L. c. 6, § 172B½ and 520 CMR 15.00, the application fee for the
issuance or renewal of a permit to engage in Ice Cream Truck Vending as defined in
520 CMR 15.02 shall be $100, or such larger amount as from time-to-time the
Permitting Authority may determine and the Board of Selectmen may approve, to cover
the Permitting Authority’s costs for conducting the requisite criminal background check
pursuant to 520 CMR 15.05(1)(b) and (2)(b), conducting the investigation into the
criminal history of the permit applicant to determine eligibility pursuant to M.G.L. c. 6,
§172B½ and 520 CMR 15.05(3)(b), and otherwise administering the ice cream truck
vendor permit application review.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
22
C H A P T E R E
GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS
E1. Street Numbering
Street numbers shall be provided for each dwelling, each business building and each
industrial building by the owner of such structure in accordance with the following:
a. The number shall be at least three (3) inches in height and shall be clearly visible
from the street or roadway upon which the building faces. The numbers shall be
placed on the structure itself or on a suitable support near the main entrance to
the structure.
b. The numbers shall be those which have been in current use, except as provided
in clause (c) below. If the structure has not been previously assigned a street
number, it shall be the owner's responsibility to obtain such a number from the
engineering department of the Town during regular office hours.
c. If a survey of street numbering is completed and if changes in street numbering
are required in order to implement that survey, then the owner of the affected
structure shall make the required changes within three (3) months of receiving
proper notification. Numbers shall be installed as outlined in clause (a) above.
d. The enforcement of this Bylaw shall be in the jurisdiction of the Chief and Deputy
Chief, Fire Department. Failure to comply with this regulation shall subject the
offending property owner to a fine not exceeding ten dollars ($10.00).
E2. through E3. Discharge of Firearms
E2. No person shall fire or discharge any firearm within the limits of any park,
playground or other public property except with the consent of the Board of Selectmen,
nor discharge any firearm on any private property except with the consent of the owner
or legal occupant thereof.
E3. This Bylaw shall not apply to lawful defense of life or property, nor to any law
enforcement officer acting in the discharge of his duties. Enforcing person - regular
police officer - Fine $25.00.
E4. Abandoned Wells
The owner or owners of land whereon is located an abandoned well or a well in use
must either provide a covering for such well capable of sustaining a weight of three
hundred pounds or fill the same to the level of the ground. The penalty for the violation
of this Bylaw shall be a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more
than five hundred dollars ($500.00).
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
23
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E5. Excavations
The owner or owners of any land which has been excavated in any way shall, within five
(5) days following receipt of written notice from the Selectmen that the Selectmen have
determined that said excavation constitutes a hazard to public safety, erect barriers or
take other suitable measures to protect persons from harm therefrom. Failure to comply
herewith shall be subject to prosecution under the provisions of Section 21 (19) of
Chapter 40 of the General Laws and the penalty for violation hereof shall not be more
than two hundred dollars ($200.00).
E6. through E9. Unregistered Motor Vehicles
E6. Unregistered motor vehicles which are unfit for use, permanently disabled or
otherwise inoperative due to dismantling or other causes shall not be stored, parked or
placed upon land in the Town unless the same shall be within a building or in an area
unexposed to the view of the public and abutting residents or shall be in an area
properly approved for the keeping of same by licensed junk dealers or automobile
dealer.
E7. Owners or persons having control of the land on which such storing, parking or
placing of unregistered motor vehicles occurs shall, within five (5) days following receipt
of a notice from the Selectmen, remove or enclose such vehicle.
E8. The penalty for violation of this Bylaw shall be not less than twenty-five dollars
($25.00) for each offense. Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
E9. No person shall operate a recreational motor vehicle within the limits of any park,
playground or other public property except with the written consent of the Board of
Selectmen, nor on any private property except with the written consent of the owner or
legal occupant thereof. The penalty for violation of this Bylaw shall be a fine of not more
than fifty dollars ($50.00).
E10. Registration of Ownership of a Building used for Multi Family Occupancy
The owner of any house or building, or part thereof, which is rented, leased, let or hired
out to be occupied or is occupied or is intended, arranged or designed to be occupied
as the home or residence of more than two (2) families living independently of each
other and having a common right in halls, stairways, yard, cellar, sinks, water closets or
privies, or any of them, and every lessee of the whole or of two (2) or more tenements in
any such house or building shall annually during the month of April file in the office of
the Town Clerk a notice containing his name and address, and also a description of the
property, by street number or otherwise, as the case may be, in such manner as will
enable the Board of Health and building inspector easily to find the same; and also the
number of apartments in each house, the number of rooms in each apartment, the
number of families occupying the apartments. The notice shall contain the name and
address of some agent for the house, for the purpose of receiving service of process,
and notice to and service of process upon each agent shall bind the principal.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
24
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E11. Fire Lanes
a. The Fire Chief may designate Fire lanes within the limits of any private way, parking
area, or driveway for the access of fire apparatus to multiple family dwellings,
stores, schools and places of public assembly. To the extent feasible fire lanes
shall not be located in any area used for parking spaces before May 13, 1974.
After May 13, 1974, no parking spaces required by the Zoning Bylaw shall be
located in any area designated as a Fire Lane.
b. The owner of record of any area designated as a Fire Lane shall provide and install
signs that shall read "FIRE LANES - NO PARKING - TOW ZONE". The size,
materials and location of such signs shall be approved by the Fire Chief.
c. It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block any area designed as a Fire Lane with a
vehicle or by any other means.
d. Any vehicle parked or left unattended within a designated Fire Lane may be
removed or towed under the direction of a Police Officer at the owner's expense.
e. Any person violating section (b) shall, for each offense, be punished by a fine of fifty
dollars ($50.00). Each day that such violation continues shall be a separate
offense.
f. Any person violating section (c) or section (d) shall, for each offense, be punished
by a fine of ten dollars ($10.00).
E12. through E21. Regulations and Licensing Solicitors and Canvassers
E12. License Required
It shall be unlawful for any solicitor or canvasser as defined in this Bylaw to engage in
such business within the Town of Acton without first obtaining a license therefore in
compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw. The provisions of this Bylaw shall not
apply to any person engaged in the soliciting for charitable, benevolent, fraternal,
religious or political activities, nor to any person exempted under Chapter 101 of the
General Laws, nor to any person duly licensed under Chapter 101 of the General Laws,
nor to any person exempted by any other General Law, nor shall this Bylaw be
construed to prevent route salesmen or other persons having established customers to
whom they make periodic deliveries from calling upon such customers or from making
calls upon prospective customers to solicit an order for future periodic route deliveries.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
25
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E12. through E21. Regulations and Licensing Solicitors and Canvassers-cont
E13. Definition
A solicitor or canvasser is defined as any person who, for himself, or for another person,
firm or corporation, travels by foot, automobile or any other type of conveyance from
place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to
lease or to take orders for retail sale of goods, wares, merchandise, or services,
including, without limitation, the selling, distributing, exposing for sale or soliciting orders
for magazines, books, periodicals or other articles of a commercial nature, the
contracting of all home improvements, or for services to be performed in the future
whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for retail sale a sample of the
subject of such sale or whether he is collecting advance payment on such retail sales.
E14. Applications
Applicants for a license shall file with the Chief of Police, on a form issued by the Police
Department, a written application signed under the penalties of perjury, containing the
following information:
a. Name of applicant.
b. Address of applicant (local and permanent address).
c. Applicant's height, weight, eye and hair color.
d. Applicant's Social Security Number.
e. The length of time for which the right to do business is desired.
f. A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold.
g. The name and home office address of the applicant's employer, if self-employed,
it shall so state.
h. A photograph of the applicant which picture shall be submitted by the applicant
and be 2" x 2" showing the head and shoulders of the applicant in a clear and
distinguishing manner.
i. If operating a motor vehicle, the year, make, model, motor number, registration
number, state of registration, vehicle's owner and address.
At the time of filing the application, each applicant shall pay a fee of $10.00.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
26
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E12. through E21. Regulations and Licensing Solicitors and Canvassers - cont
E15. Investigation and Issuance
1. Upon receipt of the application, the Chief of Police shall investigate the applicant's
reputation to determine from prior business practices he/she is a suitable person to
be licensed.
2. After such investigation the Chief of Police shall endorse on such application his
approval or disapproval. If disapproved, the applicant shall have the right of appeal
to the Board of Selectmen.
3. Such license when issued shall contain the signature of the Chief of Police or the
Board of Selectmen and shall show the name, address, and photograph of said
licensee, the date of issuance, and the length of time the same shall be operative,
as well as the license number. The Police Department shall keep a record of all
licenses issued for a period of six (6) years. Solicitors and canvassers when
engaged in the business of soliciting or canvassing are required to display an
identifying badge issued by the Police Department, by wearing said badge on an
outer garment. Each licensee is required to possess an individual license.
E16. Expiration of License
Each license issued under the provision of this Bylaw shall be enforced for a period not
exceeding sixty (60) days, unless sooner revoked.
E17. Renewal of License
A license issued under the provisions of this Bylaw may be renewed by the Chief of
Police. An applicant requesting a renewal of a license must apply in person for such
license renewal, and provide such material as required by the Chief of Police.
E18. Transfer or Revocation of License
No license shall be transferred. The Chief of Police may revoke a license for any
violation of this Bylaw.
E19. Misrepresentation
1. No solicitor or canvasser, licensed or exempted from license, may misrepresent, in
any manner, the buyer's right to cancel as stipulated by Chapter 93, 93A and 255D
of the General Laws.
2. No solicitor or canvasser, licensed or exempted for license, may use any plan,
scheme or ruse which misrepresents the true status or mission of the person
making the call in order to gain admission to a prospective buyer's home, office, or
other establishment with the purpose of making sale of consumer goods or
services.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
27
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E12. through E21. Regulations and Licensing Solicitors and Canvassers - cont
E20. Duty of Police to Enforce
The Police Officers of the Town of Acton shall enforce this Bylaw.
E21. Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this Bylaw shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine not to exceed fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every offense.
Each day on which a person solicits without a license shall constitute a separate
offense.
E22. through E25. Animal Control Bylaw
E22 No person shall own or keep a dog, six months or older, within the Town unless a
license for such dog is obtained from the Town Clerk. No person shall maintain a
kennel within the Town unless a license for such kennel is obtained from the Town
Clerk. No kennel may obtain a license from the Town Clerk until such kennel has
passed an inspection by the Animal Control Officer. The license period is the time
frame between January 1st and the following December 31st, inclusive. The fee for
each such license will be determined by the Board of Selectmen in a public meeting.
E23 Any person who is the owner or keeper of a dog or a kennel in the Town of Acton
and who fails to license said dog or kennel within the time required by Chapter 140,
Sections 137 and 137A of the General Laws shall be subject to a penalty of fifty dollars
($50.00) to be collected as provided by law.
E24 No person owning or keeping any animal in the Town of Acton shall permit the
animal to go at large to the injury or nuisance of others. In addition, a dog should not go
outside the boundaries of the property of its owner or keeper unless under the complete
and effective control of said owner or keeper by means of a leash or otherwise.
E25 Owners or keepers of animals in violation of the foregoing section shall, be
subject to fines or other remedies permitted by Chapter 140 of the General Laws as
determined by the Board of Selectmen.
E26 The Town of Acton Animal Control Officer, or any other Town official acting as his
or her deputy or designee, is authorized to enforce this Bylaw and the Commonwealth’s
animal control laws found in Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 140, Sections 137A
through 174F as may be amended or enlarged from time to time.
E26. through E34. Use of Tobacco and Smoking Products - Deleted
Miscellaneous Prohibitions (HAS BEEN DELETED) ATM 4-3-06 Article 34
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
28
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E35. Peeping or Spying
Unless authorized by the owner or tenant no person, except an officer of the law in the
performance of his duties, shall enter upon the premises of another person or upon any
public property with the intent of peeping in a window of any home or other building or
by spying in any manner upon any person.
Any person violating the provisions of this section may, upon conviction of such
violation, be fined not more than twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each offense.
E36. Graffiti & Rubbish
No person shall make any indecent figure or write any indecent or obscene words upon
any fence, building or structure in any public place, or upon any street, sidewalk or wall.
E37. Injurious Debris
No person shall throw in any manner in any public way in the Town, any article,
substance, or material which may prove injurious in any respect to the hoofs of animals,
or the rubber tires of automobiles for other vehicles.
E38. Street/Sidewalk Obstruction
No person shall place, or cause to be placed, in any of the public streets, or sidewalks
in the Town, without the written license from the Selectmen, any material whatever, or
any rubbish of any kind and suffer same to remain for twenty-four hours.
E39. Public Way Obstruction/Destruction
No person shall break or dig up the surface for any purpose whatever; set or place any
fence, post, tree, or edgestone, or alter or change the position or direction of any fence,
post, tree or edgestone; swing any door or gate; or change the grade or width in, upon,
or over any public way without the written license of the Board of Selectmen, or its
designee,which shall prescribe the limitations or restrictions of such activity.
E40. Discharge of Water on Town Ways
No person shall be allowed to discharge in any manner from pipes or hoses from sump
pumps, or subdrains from private property onto the public way, or onto public drains,
without the written permission of the Board of Selectmen and Engineering Department,
not including a temporary discharge which does not exceed 24 hours during any six (6)
month period.
E41. Alcoholic Beverage on Town Common
No person shall, at any time, consume any alcoholic beverage on the Town Common.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
29
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E42. Alcohol in Public
No person shall drink or possess an unsealed container of any alcoholic beverage as
defined in Chapter 138, Section 1 of the Massachusetts General Laws while in or upon
any public way or any way which the public has a right of access, whether in or upon a
vehicle, or on foot, or while in or upon any public place or public building or playground
(except that the Board of Selectmen may, if they deem it appropriate, issue a special
one-day liquor license for events at the Senior Center and NARA Park), or while in or
upon a private parking lot, or a private way to which the public has access as invitees or
licensees, or in or upon any private land or place without the written consent of the
owner or authorized person in control thereof. A police officer may arrest without a
warrant any person who commits a violation of this Bylaw in his presence and may
seize the alcoholic beverages, which shall be kept by him and destroyed upon
adjudication or returned to the person entitled to lawful possession.
E43. Night Hour Bylaw
1. No store or place of business engaged in the retail sale of food shall, except as
hereinafter provided, be open for the transaction of business between the hours of
12:00 midnight and 6:00 A.M.
2. The term food used in this bylaw shall include any article or commodity, however
stored or packaged, intended for human consumption, and shall include alcoholic
beverages to be consumed off the premises at which they are sold, unless any
other law or permit or license granted to the seller of such beverages shall
otherwise provide)
3. This Bylaw shall not apply to the sale of food or alcoholic beverages when such
sale is by a common victualler or innholder, licensed under Chapter 140 of the
General Laws, primarily engaged in the sale of food to be consumed on the
premises where sold.
4. In cases where, in their opinion, the public good requires it, the Board of Selectmen
may issue a special permit allowing a store or place of business engaged in the
retail sale of food to remain open for the transaction of such business to an hour,
specified in the permit, later than 12:00 midnight or to remain open 24 hours a day.
Such special permits shall remain in effect for a period of one (1) year.
5. Violators of this Bylaw shall be subject to a fine of $200.00 for each violation. In
case of continuing violation, every calendar day upon which a store shall remain
open in violation of this Bylaw shall be deemed a separate offense.
6. This bylaw shall not apply to any store or place of business engaged in the retail
sale of food which was on March 17, 1988 regularly and customarily open for the
transaction of business between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 6:00 A.M. Such
exemption to existing business shall lapse and be of no further force and effect
should any such businesses at any time fail to operate between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 6:00 A.M. for four (4) consecutive weeks.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
30
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E44. Fire and Police Alarms
No person shall install, maintain or use any alarm system or other equipment designed
to summon the Acton Police Department or the Acton Fire Department that is
automatically keyed to or directly or indirectly activates the telephone numbers or lines
controlled by or listed to the Police Department or Fire Department without a permit
issued by the Acton Chief of Police or the Acton Fire Chief, respectively, or his
designee, pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen. Said
rules and regulations may impose fines for their violation. The Police Chief or Fire Chief
or his designee shall be empowered to enforce said rules and regulations and may use
the alternative method pursuant to Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts
General Laws. All such alarm systems or other equipment designed to summon the
Acton Police Department or the Acton Fire Department shall be removed or an
appropriate permit obtained within 60 days of the effective date of this bylaw.
E45. Non-Criminal Disposition
Any bylaw of the Town of Acton or regulation of any town officer, board or department,
the violation of which is subject to a specific penalty, may, in the discretion of the town
official who is the appropriate enforcing person, be enforced in the method provided in
Section 21D of Chapter 40 of the General Laws. Enforcing person as used in this bylaw
shall mean any regular police officer with respect to any offense; the Building
Commissioner, Zoning Enforcement Officer, Health Director, Fire Chief, or Deputy
Chief, Conservation Administrator, DPW Director, Highway Superintendent, Engineering
Administrator, Animal Control Officer and any such other official as the Board of
Selectmen may from time to time designate, each with respect to violation of bylaws
and rules and regulations within their respective jurisdictions. If more than one (1)
official has jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an enforcing person
with respect thereto.
Without intending to limit the generality of the foregoing, it is the intention of this bylaw
that the following bylaws, rules and regulations are to be included within the scope of
this bylaw and that the specific penalties as listed here shall apply in such cases.
Rules and Regulations of the Acton Board of Health - enforcing person – Health
Director - $10.00 per offense per day.
Chapter E - Sections E1- Street Numbering Bylaw; enforcing person - Chief and
Deputy Chief, Fire Department - Fine $10.00.
Chapter E - Sections E2, 3 - Discharge of Firearms Bylaw - enforcing person - regular
police officer - Fine $25.00.
Chapter E - Sections E6, 7, 8, 9 - Unregistered Motor Vehicles Bylaw - enforcing
person - regular police officer - Fine $25.00.
Chapter E - Sections E11, - Fire Lanes Bylaw - enforcing person, Chief and Deputy
Chief, Fire Department - Fine $50.00.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
31
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E45. Non-Criminal Disposition - continued
Chapter E - Sections E12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 - Regulations and
Licensing Solicitors and Canvassers Bylaw; enforcing person - regular police
officer - Fine $50.00.
Chapter E - Sections E22, 23, 24, 25 - Animal Control Bylaw; enforcing person –
Animal Control Officer - Fine $25.00 – except $50.00 for violation of Section
E23.
Chapter E - Section 34 - DELETED
Chapter E - Sections E35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42 – Miscellaneous Prohibitions
Bylaw; enforcing person - regular police officer - Fine $25.00.
Chapter E - Section E43 - Night Hour Bylaw - enforcing Person - Regular Police
Officer - Fine $50.00, each offense.
Chapter E - Section E44 - Police and Fire Alarms - enforcing Persons - Chief of
Police, Fire Chief or, Conservation Administrator - Fine $50.00, each
offense.
Chapter E - Section E45 - Non-Criminal Disposition - Rules and Regulations of the
Conservation Commission - Rules and Regulations of the Board of
Selectmen relating to use of land under their jurisdiction - Rules and
Regulations of the Tree Warden - enforcing Persons - Municipal Properties
Director, Conservation Administrator - Fine $50.00, each offense.
Chapter E - Section E58 - Police Details - enforcing Persons – Regular Police Officer -
Fine $300.00, each offense.
Chapter F - Sections F1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 – Wetland Protection
Bylaw; enforcing persons - Conservation Administrator, Regular Police
Officer - Fine $300.00 each offense.
Chapter G - Sections G1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 - Earth Removal Bylaw of the Town of Acton;
enforcing person - Building Commissioner - Fine $50.00 first offense;
$100.00 second offense; $200.00 each subsequent offense.
Chapter H - Disposal Bylaw; enforcing person - Highway Superintendent or Director of
Public Works - Fine $200.00. (CHAPTER H RESCINDED 4/6/92 - ART.12)
Chapter I - Hazardous Materials Control Bylaw; - enforcing person - Fire Chief or
Health Director - Fine $50.00 first offense; $100.00 second offense; $200.00
each subsequent offense.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
32
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E45. Non-Criminal Disposition - continued
Chapter L - Handicapped Parking Bylaw - enforcing person - Regular Police Officer -
Penalty per violation as established from time-to-time by order or regulations
of the Board of Selectmen adopted pursuant to Acton General Bylaw
Chapter L, Section L2.
Chapter M - Zoning Bylaw; enforcing persons: Zoning Enforcement Officer. - Fine:
Each day that a violation of the Zoning Bylaw continues shall constitute a
separate offense. Violation of the Zoning Bylaw shall be subject to a penalty
of $300.00 for each offense, except that violation of Section 7 of the Zoning
Bylaw shall be subject to a penalty of $50.00 for each offense for the first 7
days, and $300.00 for each offense thereafter.”
Chapter P - Local Historic District Bylaw; enforcing Person – Building Commissioner
Fine $25.00, each offense.
Chapter U - Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System; Enforcing Person –
Board of Health or its authorized agent or employee; Fine $100.00 per day
for the first offense; $200.00 per day for the second offense; $300.00 per day
for the third and each subsequent offense.
Chapter X - Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control; Enforcing
Person – Conservation Administrator, DPW Director or Health Director, or
their respective authorized agents or employees; Fine $100.00 per day for
the first offense; $200.00 per day for the second offense; $300.00 per day for
the third and each subsequent offense.
Specification for Regulating Construction within Public Ways; enforcing person -
Director of Public Works, Engineering Administrator - Fine $50.00.
E46. through E56. Sale of Tobacco and Smoking Products - Deleted
ATM 4-3-06 Article 34
E57. Motorized Craft on Ice House Pond:
A. Except for emergency rescue and law enforcement purposes, and for purposes of
construction and maintenance by the Town of Acton or its designee, no person
shall launch, place, float, use, or land a craft with an internal combustion engine in
or on Ice House Pond, which pond is located off Concord Road in the East Acton
area. The Police Officers of the Town of Acton shall enforce this bylaw. Violation of
this bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars ($300.00),
whereby each incident of violating this bylaw and each day that such violation
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
33
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E58. Police Details
1. Requested Police Details. Any person or entity performing any construction,
operation, excavation, maintenance, repair, installation, restoration, utility work or
other work within, over, under or along any public way, street, sidewalk, road
shoulder or other public place within the Town shall first notify the Acton Police
Department. Any person may request that police details be furnished by the Acton
Police Department as the Chief of Police (or his or her designee) may determine to
protect public health, safety and welfare during the performance of such work or for
any other activity or event for which a police detail is requested. The person or
entity requesting such police details shall pay the Acton Police Department at the
prevailing rate for all such police details as are provided by the Acton Police
Department pursuant to such a request. The Chief of Police (or his or her designee)
may in his or her discretion determine that such police details are not required in the
event the person or entity complies throughout such work with applicable provisions
of the General Laws permitting the use of flagmen as an alternative to such police
details.
2. Required Police Details. Upon receipt of a notice pursuant to the prior section, or on
his or her own initiative, the Chief of Police (or his or her designee) shall have the
authority to require police details where he or she determines that the passage or
flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic may be disrupted, or where the public safety,
health and welfare may be otherwise affected, on any public way, street, sidewalk,
road shoulder or other public place within the Town as a result of any construction,
operation, excavation, maintenance, repair, installation, restoration, utility work or
other work within, over, under or along said public way, street, sidewalk, road
shoulder or other public place, except where police details are provided by the
Massachusetts State Police for that work. The person or entity performing such
work shall pay the Acton Police Department at the prevailing rate for all such police
details as are provided by the Acton Police Department.
3. Prohibited Work. No person or entity shall perform any construction, operation,
excavation, maintenance, repair, installation, restoration, utility work or other work
within, over, under or along said public way, street, sidewalk, road shoulder or other
public place within the Town until the person or entity has complied with these
bylaws.
4. Regulations. The Chief of Police shall adopt written criteria consistent with
applicable law and with these bylaws concerning the process to be implemented,
payments to be made for, and emergency exceptions (if any) to the procurement of
such police details. The Chief of Police may require the posting of a bond or cash in
advance of such work as reasonably necessary to secure payment for such police
details.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
34
CHAPTER E GENERAL PUBLIC REGULATIONS CONTINUED
E58. Police Details (continued)
5. Failure to Pay. Any such person or entity who fails to make payment for requested
or required police details when due shall pay to the Town, in addition to the cost of
the police details as set forth above, interest at the rate equivalent to that assessed
for unpaid taxes pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
59, Section 57, as said provisions may from time to time be amended, calculated
from the date the police details are provided to the date on which the person or
entity makes full payment for such police details as required hereunder.
6. Violations. Any such person or entity that violates any provision of this Section E58
shall be subject to a penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense.
Each day that such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The
Chief of Police or his or her designee is hereby authorized to stop any work
conducted in violation of any provision of Section E58.
7. Exemptions. The Town of Acton is exempt from the requirements of Section E58.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
35
C H A P T E R F
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
WETLAND PROTECTION
F1. Purpose
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect the wetlands, vernal pools, adjoining buffer
zones, banks, lands subject to flooding and riverfront areas (collectively, “the resource
areas”) of the Town of Acton by controlling activities deemed to have a significant
impact upon wetland interests. Said wetland interests include (but are not limited to) the
following: public or private water supply, groundwater, flood control, erosion control,
storm damage prevention, water pollution prevention, fisheries, protection of
endangered or threatened species, and wildlife habitat (collectively, the interests
protected by this Bylaw.) The Town of Acton Wetlands Map shows the approximate
location of most of the Town’s wetlands and shall be used as a guide to wetland
location.
F2. Provisions
No person shall remove, dredge, fill or alter any resource area except as provided in
Section 4, without first filing a Determination of Applicability, or a written Notice of Intent
under this Bylaw, and obtaining and complying with the terms of said Determination or
with an Order of Conditions.
F3.1 Definitions
The term "person" as used in this Bylaw shall include any individual, group of
individuals, association, partnership, corporation, or business organization, trust or
estate, the Commonwealth, or any political subdivision thereof, administrative agency,
public or quasipublic corporation or body, or any other legal entity or its legal
representatives, agents or assigns.
F3.2
The term "abutter" as used in this Bylaw shall include all property owners, determined
by the most recent maps in the Assessor’s Office, that abut the land on which the
proposed activity is to take place and such other persons as the Commission may
determine.
F3.3
The term “activity” shall mean any form of draining, dumping, dredging, damming,
discharging, excavating, filling or grading; any form of construction, reconstruction, or
expansion of any building, structure, road or other way; or alteration or any changing of
the physical, chemical, or biological characteristics of an area of land or water.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
36
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F3 Definitions - continued
F3.4
The term "alter" as used in this Bylaw shall include, without limitation, the following
actions when undertaken in areas subject to this Bylaw:
(a) Removal, excavation, or dredging of soil, sand, gravel, or aggregate materials of
any kind;
(b) Changing of drainage characteristics, flushing characteristics, sedimentation
patterns, flow patterns and flood retention characteristics;
(c) Drainage or other disturbance of water level or water table;
(d) Dumping, discharging or filling with any material which may degrade water
quality;
(e) Driving of piles, erection of buildings or structures of any kind;
(f) Placing of obstructions whether or not they interfere with the flow of water;
(g) Destruction of plant life, including the cutting of trees, which may significantly
impact the interests protected by this Bylaw;
(h) Changing of water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand or other physical or
chemical characteristics of the water;
(i) Application of pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers.
F3.5
“Buffer zone” shall mean that area of uplands within 100 feet horizontally outward from
the boundary of a wetland, vernal pool (except as provided for in Section 3.14), bank, or
land subject to flooding. (Note: there is no buffer zone associated with the riverfront
area.)
F3.6
“Certificate of Compliance” shall mean a written determination by the Commission
verifying that work has been completed in accordance with an Order of Conditions.
F3.7
“Commission” shall mean the Acton Conservation Commission, that body of members
lawfully appointed pursuant to M.G.L. Chapter 40, Section 8c, for the purposes of
administering and enforcing the Wetlands Protection Act, M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section
40, and the Town of Acton Wetland Protection Bylaw.
F3.8
“Determination Of Applicability” shall mean any review and written finding by the
Conservation Commission as to whether a site or the work proposed thereon is subject
to the jurisdiction of the Bylaw. See also Section F5 of the Bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
37
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F3 Definitions - continued
F3.9
“Dredge” shall mean to clean, deepen, widen or excavate, either temporarily or
permanently.
F3.10
“Extension Permit” shall mean a written extension of time granted by the Conservation
Commission once for a period of up to 3 (three) years, within which time authorized
work shall be completed.
F3.11
“Fill” shall mean either of the following, whichever is applicable:
(a) to deposit or place any material so as to raise in elevation, either temporarily or
permanently;
(b) anything that fills or is used to fill - especially earth or gravel used for filling a hole,
F3.12
“Notice of Intent” shall be a written notice filed by any person intending to alter, or in any
way change, the physical or chemical properties of land subject to protection under the
Bylaw.
F3.13
“Order of Conditions” shall mean the document issued by the Conservation Commission
or the courts containing conditions which regulate or prohibit any activity subject to the
Bylaw, which is to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds or Land Court.
F3.14
The term “vernal pool” as used in this Bylaw shall include, in addition to that already
defined under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and regulations (310 CMR
10.00), any confined basin or depression not occurring in existing lawns, gardens,
landscaped areas, or driveways that meets the certification criteria established in the
Guidelines for Certification of Vernal Pool Habitat published by the Massachusetts
Division of Fisheries and Wildlife, regardless of whether the site has been certified by
the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife. The buffer zone for vernal pools
shall extend 100 horizontal feet from the mean annual high-water line defining the
depression.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
38
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F3 Definitions - continued`
F3.15
The term “wetland” as used in this Bylaw includes Vegetated wetlands are wet
meadows, marshes, swamps and bogs where 50% or more of the vegetative
community consists of wetland indicator plants as defined in the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40) and regulations at 310 CMR 10.00.
When vegetation is not sufficient to determine the boundary of a wetland, characteristics
of hydric soils or observations of flowing water, standing water or saturated soils may be
used.
Any non-vegetated area such as a creek, brook, stream, river, pond, lake, lands under
said waters, and certified and uncertified vernal pools as defined in the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40) and regulations at 310 CMR 10.00 and
Section F3.14 of this Bylaw.
F3.16
“Bank” is the portion of the land surface that normally abuts and confines a water body
such as a creek, brook, stream, river, pond or lake as defined in the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40) and regulations at 310 CMR 10.00. A
bank may be partially or totally vegetated, or comprised of exposed soil, gravel or stone.
F3.17
“Lands subject to flooding” are areas of temporary or occasional flooding as defined in
the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40) and regulations at
310 CMR 10.00. Bordering land subject to flooding is the estimated maximum lateral
extent of floodwater that will theoretically result from the statistical 100-year frequency
storm. Isolated land subject to flooding is an isolated depression or closed basin
without an inlet or an outlet. It is an area that at least once a year confines standing
water to a volume of at least ¼ acre-feet and to an average depth of at least six inches.
Some isolated lands subject to flooding may be vernal pools.
F3.18
The term “resource area” shall mean any area subject to protection under this bylaw
and include any bank, wetland, vernal pool, buffer zone, lands subject to flooding or
riverfront area.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
39
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F3 Definitions - continued
F3.19
The “Riverfront Area” is the area of land between a river’s mean annual high water line
and a parallel line measured horizontally 200 feet away. The riverfront area may
include or overlap other resource areas or their buffer zones. A river is a flowing body
of water that empties to any ocean, lake, pond or river and which flows throughout the
year (except during drought conditions). Perennial streams are rivers; intermittent
streams are not rivers. Determination of flow status shall be based on: field
observations (witnessed by Conservation Commission or its authorized agent); USGS
or other government maps; size of channel or bank; watershed size; stream order;
streambed characteristics; local geology; biological community; and/or other appropriate
evidence.
F4.1 Exemptions
No Notice of Intent hereunder need be filed in connection with an emergency project
necessary for the protection of health or safety of the citizens of Acton to be performed
or ordered to be performed by an administrative agency of the Commonwealth or by the
Town. An emergency project shall mean any project certified to be an emergency by
the Town of Acton Conservation Commission or its agents within 24 hours. In no case
shall any removal, dredging, filling or altering commence prior to such emergency
certification nor extend beyond the time necessary to abate the emergency.
F4.2
No Notice of Intent hereunder need be filed in connection with maintaining, repairing, or
replacing, but not substantially changing or enlarging, an existing and lawfully located
structure or facility used in the service of the public to provide electric, gas, water,
telephone, or telecommunication services.
F4.3
No Notice of Intent need be filed in connection with normally accepted maintenance
procedures on land in agricultural use. The term "land in agricultural use" shall mean
any qualifying wetland within a farm which is qualified or eligible to be qualified under
the Farmland Assessment Act, Massachusetts General Laws, Ch. 61A ss. 1 & 2. Any
proposed changes to land in agricultural use which may have a significant impact on
any of the interests protected by this Bylaw must be submitted to the Conservation
Commission for a Determination of Applicability.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
40
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F4.4 Septic Systems Meeting State Title V
No Notice of Intent need be filed for the replacement, repair, or installation of a
residential septic system that meets the requirements of Title V of the State
Environmental Code (310 CMR 15.00), that has received a permit from the Acton Board
of Health, and that meets the setback requirements of this Bylaw. Any such septic
system replacement, repair, or installation that may have a significant impact on any of
the interests protected by this Bylaw must be submitted to the Conservation
Commission for a Determination of Applicability.
F4.5 Limited Projects
Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Bylaw, the Commission may issue an Order
of Conditions for limited projects listed under Section 10.53(3) of the Wetland Protection
regulations promulgated under the Massachusetts Wetland Protection Act (310 CMR
10.53(3)).
F4.6 Waivers
Strict compliance with this Bylaw may be waived when, in the judgment of the
Conservation Commission, such action is in the public interest and is consistent with the
intent and purpose of the Bylaw. Any request for a waiver must be submitted to the
Commission in writing. The waiver shall be presented at the time of filing along with a
written justification stating why a waiver is desired or needed, is in the public benefit,
and is consistent with the intent and purpose of the Bylaw.
F5 Determination of Applicability
Any person may request the Conservation Commission to make a determination as to
whether or not a proposed project in the wetland or "buffer zone" is significant to the
interests protected by the Bylaw. This request for a Determination of Applicability shall
be sent by certified mail, or hand delivered to the Acton Conservation Commission or its
authorized representative. A person delivering this request by hand shall be given a
dated receipt. The Commission shall make such a determination within 21 days of the
receipt of said request, and it shall notify the applicant by certified mail, of the results of
the determination. If the Conservation Commission determines that the subject area is
significant to the interests protected by this Bylaw, and said interests are not fully
protected by the project as proposed, the Commission will require the applicant to file a
Notice of Intent, or will attach such Orders of Conditions to ensure protection of the
interests of this Bylaw. The Commission, or its agents, may, for the purpose of carrying
out its duties under this Bylaw, request such plans or information as may be necessary
for its evaluation, may enter upon the subject land, and may make or require to be
made such examination or survey as it deems necessary.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
41
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F5.1 Abbreviated Notice of Resource Area Delineation
Any person may request the Conservation Commission to make a determination as to
the precise boundaries of a resource area, including the buffer zone. This request for
Resource Area Delineation shall be sent by certified mail, or hand delivered to the Acton
Conservation Commission or its authorized representative. A person delivering this
request by hand shall be given a dated receipt. Prior to issuing a Resource Delineation,
the Conservation Commission shall hold a public hearing within 21 days of the filing.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given by the Conservation
Commission not less than five days prior to the public hearing, by publication in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town and by mailing a notice to the applicant,
the Board of Health and the Planning Board. Such hearing may be held at the same
time and place as any public hearing required to be held under M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40. If
the Commission determines that additional data or information is necessary, the hearing
may be continued to a future date time certain, agreeable to both the Applicant and the
Commission, and shall be posted not less than five (5) days prior to said continuation.
The Resource Area Delineation shall be issued within 30 days after the public hearing
and may be identical to any such delineation issued under the provisions of the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act (M.G. L. Ch. 131, s. 40).
F6.1 Filing Procedure for a Notice of Intent
The Notice of Intent shall be sent by certified mail, or hand delivered to the Acton
Conservation Commission or its authorized representative, and shall include plans and
specifications as required of an applicant by the Commission. A person delivering this
Notice by hand shall be given a dated receipt. This Notice shall also include a filing fee
to be designated in the rules and regulations of the Commission payable to the Town of
Acton. No filing fee is required when the Town of Acton files an application. These
plans shall also show the location of the wetland boundaries and shall be at a scale of
1" = 40' or any such scale that adequately depicts the area. The applicant shall also
notify the clerk of the Town of Acton by hand delivery or certified mail, that such plans
have been submitted to the Conservation Commission. Provided that the Notice of
Intent fulfills the requirements of this Bylaw and M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40, only one Notice
of Intent need be submitted.
F6.2 Notification of Filing
Any person filing a Notice of Intent under this Bylaw shall also notify by certified mail all
abutters and the owner of the subject property, if different from the applicant, of the filing
of such Notice of Intent. Such Notice shall clearly identify the land on which the work is
to be done and describe the general nature of the work. Notice shall include the date,
place, and time of said public hearing, and where plans may be reviewed. A list of
persons so notified and proof of such notification shall be filed with the Conservation
Commission prior to the Public Hearing.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
42
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F6.3 Extension Permits
The Commission may extend an Order of Conditions once for a period of up to three
years. Written requests for an Extension Permit shall be made not less than thirty
calendar days prior to the expiration of said Order of Conditions.
The Commission may deny an Extension Permit under any of the following
circumstances:
(1) Where no activity has begun on the project, except where such failure is due to
unavoidable delay such as appeals in obtaining other necessary permits.
(2) Where new information not available at the time of the original permit filing has
become available and indicates that the Order of Conditions is insufficient to
protect the areas subject to protection.
(3) Where activity is causing damage to areas subject to protection.
(4) Where there has been activity in violation of the Order of Conditions.
(5) Where an Extension Permit has been previously granted for the Order of
Conditions.
F7.1 Public Hearing
Prior to issuing any Order of Conditions (Section 8.2) the Conservation Commission
shall hold a public hearing within 21 days of the filing of said Notice of Intent. Notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be given by the Conservation Commission not
less than five days prior to the public hearing, by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town and by mailing a notice to the applicant, the Board of Health and
the Planning Board. Such hearing may be held at the same time and place as any
public hearing required to be held under M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40. If the Commission
determines that additional data or information is necessary, the hearing may be
continued to a future date time certain, agreeable to both the Applicant and the
Commission, and shall be posted not less than five (5) days prior to said continuation.
F7.2 Failure to Act
If the Conservation Commission has failed to hold a public hearing within the 21 day
period as required, or if after holding such a hearing, has failed within 21 days from the
date of the close of the public hearing to issue an Order of Conditions, an appeal may
be made to the Board of Selectmen, who within ten days, shall instruct the Commission
to act within a period not to exceed ten days. If after this ten day period, no action has
been taken by the Conservation Commission; the application shall be considered
approved.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
43
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F8.1 Burden of Proof
The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that the work proposed in the application
will not harm the interests protected by this Bylaw. Failure to provide adequate
evidence to the Commission that the proposed work will not harm any of the interests
protected by this Bylaw shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny the
application or to grant a permit with an Order of Conditions, or, at the Commission's
discretion, to continue the hearing to another date to enable the applicant or others to
present additional evidence.
F8.2 Order of Conditions
The Conservation Commission may impose such conditions on any proposed removing,
dredging, filling or altering as it deems necessary to protect and preserve the interests
covered by this Bylaw. In preparing the Order of Conditions the Commission shall take
into account the cumulative adverse effects of loss, degradation, isolation and
replication of protected resource areas throughout the municipality, resulting from past
activities, permitted and exempt, and foreseeable future activities. Such Order of
Conditions shall be in writing and may be subject to the same constraints and be
identical to any such order issued by the Acton Conservation Commission under the
provisions of M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40, or successor statutes, and shall be issued within 30
days after the public hearing. Such Order of Conditions will expire three years from the
date of issuance, unless renewed prior to expiration. No proposed work governed by an
Order of Conditions shall be undertaken until all permits, approvals, and variances
required by local Bylaws have been obtained and all applicable appeal periods have
expired. The final Order of Conditions issued under this Bylaw shall be recorded with
the Registry of Deeds for the district in which the land is located. However, if said Order
is identical to the final Order of Conditions issued under the provisions of M.G.L. Ch.
131, s. 40, only one Order of Conditions need be recorded. The Conservation
Commission shall have the right to file the Order of Conditions with the Registry of
Deeds should the applicant fail to do so within 60 days. If a wetlands replication is
required, the applicant will adhere to replication procedures established by the
Commission or as set down in the Commission's Rules and Regulations.
F8.3 Setbacks for Activities
The following are the minimum distances (setbacks) of activity from the edge of
wetlands or vernal pools. No activity shall be allowed within these setbacks except as
provided below. These setbacks are the minimum and may be extended further if
deemed necessary for the protection of the interests of the Bylaw by the Commission.
The increased setbacks adopted by vote of the 2003 Annual Town Meeting shall
become effective 90 days from date of this Town Meeting vote or on July 7, 2003,
whichever is later, and that each of the Bylaw’s existing setbacks shall remain in effect
unless and until said setback is so increased.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
44
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F8.3 Setbacks for Activities - continued
The setbacks shall be as follows:
(1) 0-foot setback for wetland-dependent structures (drain outfalls, weirs, etc.),
fences, and structures necessary for upland access where reasonable alternative
access is unavailable.
(2) 50-foot buffer of undisturbed natural vegetation.
(3) 75-foot setback to the edge of driveways, roadways, and structures.
(4) 50-foot chemical-free area within which no pesticides, herbicides, or fertilizers
shall be used.
(5) 100-foot setback for underground storage of gasoline, oil, or other fuels and
hazardous materials.
(6) 100-foot setback from the mean high water line of vernal pools.
When in the opinion of the Commission compliance with these setbacks will result in
greater harm to the interests of this Bylaw than would waiver of the setbacks, the
Commission is permitted to grant such waivers.
Pre-existing activities or structures not meeting the setbacks set forth above need not
be discontinued or removed [but shall be deemed to be non-conforming]. No new
activity shall be commenced and no new structure shall be located closer to the edge of
wetlands or vernal pools than existing non-conforming like activities or structures, but
the Commission may permit new activity or structures as close to the edge of wetlands
or vernal pools if it finds that such activity or structure will not affect the interests
protected by the Bylaw no more adversely than the existing activity or structure.
F8.4 Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Where activities are proposed within the buffer zone, erosion and sedimentation barriers
and other erosion controls as necessary shall be installed between the area of activity
and the wetlands or vernal pool to prevent the transport of sediment into wetlands or
vernal pools. Similarly, erosion and sedimentation controls shall be installed when
activities outside the buffer zone create a significant potential for transport of sediment
into wetlands or vernal pools.
F8.5 Storage of Fill or Materials
If any fill is to be stored on site, it shall be stored outside of the buffer zone and/or it
shall be surrounded by staked hay bales to prevent erosion and sedimentation.
There shall be no storage, disposal or burial of construction debris (for example, scrap
lumber, metals, concrete, asphalt, piping, logs, stumps, etc.) within the buffer zone
without the express permission of the Commission in an Order of Conditions.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
45
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F9.1 Wetlands Replacement
Wetlands or vernal pools that are altered shall in all instances be replaced by
replacement wetlands of similar character. Replacement wetlands shall include, at
minimum, equal area as the altered wetlands or vernal pool in a hydrologically
connected location to the unaltered remainder of the wetlands or vernal pool.
F9.2 Requirements for Wetlands Replacement
Projects involving the filling and/or permanent alteration of wetlands or vernal pools
shall meet the following requirements:
(1) The proposed replacement area design must be submitted to the Commission for
approval as part of the Notice of Intent.
(2) The replacement area must be shown to duplicate sufficiently the functions of the
wetland proposed to be altered.
(3) The replacement area shall be constructed, to the extent possible, immediately
after alteration of the existing wetland and during the same growing season.
(4) If after three growing seasons, the Commission determines that the replacement
area has not satisfactorily developed into a wetland or vernal pool, the applicant or
owner may be required to submit new plans to successfully replicate the original
altered wetland. No Certificate of Compliance shall be issued until the
Commission has determined that a satisfactory replacement area has been
completed.
F10. Denial
The Conservation Commission is empowered to deny a permit for failure to meet the
requirements of this bylaw; for failure to submit necessary information and plans
requested by the Commission; for failure to meet the design specification, performance
standards, and other requirements in regulations of the Commission; for failure to avoid
or prevent unacceptable significant or cumulatively adverse effects upon the wetland
values protected by this bylaw; or where the Commission deems that no conditions are
adequate to protect those values. Due consideration shall be given to any
demonstrated hardship on the applicant by reason of denial, as presented at the public
hearing.
F11. Prior Violation
Any person who purchases, inherits or otherwise acquires real estate upon which work
has been done in violation of any order pursuant to this Bylaw, shall forthwith comply
with any such order, or restore such real estate to its condition prior to any such
violation; provided however that no such action, civil or criminal shall be brought against
such person unless commenced within three years following the date of acquisition of
the real estate by such person.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
46
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F12. Bond
The Conservation Commission may require the posting of a bond with surety, running to
the Town of Acton, and sufficient as to form and surety in the opinion of the Town
Counsel, to secure the faithful and satisfactory performance of work required by any
final Order of Conditions, in such sum and upon such conditions as the Commission
may require. Other evidence of financial responsibility which is satisfactory to the
Commission may be accepted in lieu of a bond. Notwithstanding the above, the amount
of such bond shall not exceed either the estimated cost of the work required by the final
Order of Conditions, or the estimated cost of the work required for the restoration of
affected lands and properties if the work is not performed as required, whichever is
greater.
F13. Rules and Regulations
After due notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate procedural rules
and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this bylaw. However, failure to promulgate
such rules and regulations or a legal declaration of their invalidity by a court of law shall
not act to suspend or invalidate the effect of this bylaw.
F14. Enforcement
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw or of any condition of a permit
issued pursuant to it may be subject to a fine of not more than $300. Each day during
which a violation continues may constitute a separate violation. This bylaw may be
enforced pursuant to Mass. General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21D, by the Constable,
Police Chief, Police Officer, Conservation Administrator, or other agent allowed by law.
Upon request of the Commission, the Board of Selectmen or Town Counsel may take
such other legal action as may be necessary to enforce this bylaw and permits pursuant
to it. The following provides a schedule of fines for specific violations.
Alteration of a wetland or vernal pool without an Order of Conditions issued pursuant
to this Bylaw - $300
Work within the buffer zone without prior submittal of Request for Determination or
Notice of Intent - $200
Failure to provide sedimentation controls required by an Order of Conditions - $200
Disposal of construction debris within the buffer zone - $300
Failure to construct storm water or drainage structure according to plans - $300
Removal of trees designated for protection - $10 per inch of circumference
Storage of fill within the buffer zone - $150
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
47
CHAPTER F ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION CONTINUED
F15. Appeals
A decision of the Commission may be reviewed by the Superior Court in an action filed
within 60 days thereof, in accordance with Massachusetts General Law 249, Section 4.
F16. Severability
The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other
section or provision thereof.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
48
C H A P T E R G
EARTH REMOVAL
G1
The removal of soil, loam, sand, or gravel from any land in the Town not in public use is
prohibited unless authorized by permit from the Board of Appeals, organized under the
Protective Zoning Bylaw, except under the following conditions:
a. When such removal is at the site of, incidental to, and in connection with, the
necessary excavation and grading of (1) a building and appurtenant driveways for
which a permit has been granted by the Board of Selectmen or other licensing
body, or (2) the construction of a street that has been approved by the Planning
Board; the volume of loam so removed shall not exceed the volume of loam in that
part of the site to be occupied by such buildings and appurtenant driveways or by
the pavement of such street.
b. When such removal is in accordance with special permission from the Board of
Appeals issued under the provisions of the Protective Zoning Bylaw as now in
effect or as hereafter amended.
G2
Application for a permit shall be filed with the Board of Appeals by the record owner of
the land and shall be accompanied by a plan showing the location, boundaries, and
area of the land involved and the portion thereof from which the applicant proposes to
make such removal.
G3
The Board of Appeals shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing on the application
and shall give due notice thereof at the expense of the applicant, by publishing notice
of the time, place and purpose of the hearing in a local newspaper, and by mailing a
copy of said notice to the applicant and to the owners of all property deemed by said
Board to be affected thereby, as they appear in the most recent local tax list.
G4
In granting a permit, the Board of Appeals shall impose limitations as to the time, and as
to the extent of the permitted removal and such other appropriate conditions, limitations,
and safeguards as the Board deems necessary for the protection of the neighborhood
and of the public health, safety, convenience and welfare, and may condition the
continuance of the permit upon compliance with the regulations of the Board of Appeals
then in force or thereafter adopted. In its discretion the Board may require surety bond,
cash, or other adequate security to insure compliance with the terms, conditions, and
limitations of the permit. The concurring vote of all the members of the Board shall be
necessary for the issuance of a permit.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
49
CHAPTER G EARTH REMOVAL CONTINUED
G5. This bylaw shall be enforced by the Board of Selectmen or other licensing body.
G6. The penalty for violation of this Bylaw shall be as follows.
For the first offense...................$ 50.00
For the second offense..............$100.00
For each subsequent offense.....$200.00
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
50
C H A P T E R H
DISPOSAL BYLAW
THIS SECTION WAS RESCINDED ON APRIL 6, 1992
ANNUAL TOWN MEETING - ARTICLE 12
H1. No refuse originating from outside the corporate limits of the Town of Acton shall be
disposed of in the Town's refuse disposal facility. Violators of this Bylaw shall be
subject to a fine not to exceed $200.00. Each action of disposal of refuse shall
constitute a separate violation under this Bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
51
C H A P T E R I
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
CONTROL BYLAW
1. Authority, Purpose and Definition
1.1 Authority
This Bylaw is adopted by the Town under its Home Rule Authority, its Police Powers to
protect the public health safety and welfare and its authorization under Massachusetts
General Laws, (MGL) Chapter (c) 40, section 21, MGL CHAPTER 111, section 31, and
MGL, Chapter 148, sections 9 and 13.
1.2 Purpose
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect, preserve, and maintain the Town's existing and
potential groundwater supply, groundwater recharge areas, surface waters, air quality
and natural environment and to assure public health and safety through the proper
management of hazardous materials and waste.
1.3 Definitions
The following terms shall be the following meanings in this Bylaw:
1.3.1 "Abnormal Loss of Material or Waste" means a loss of greater than .05% of
the material stored over a period of one calendar month, unless such limit is
undetectable in which case the Board of Health shall set the limit.
1.3.2 "Biodegradable" means a product or material which decomposes at a
significant rate into non-toxic materials by natural biological processes.
1.3.3 "CMR" means the Code of Massachusetts Regulations.
1.3.4 "Container" means any portable device in which hazardous materials or
wastes or special wastes are stored, transported, treated, disposed of or
otherwise handled.
1.3.5 "DEP" means the Department of Environmental Protection and/or its
successors.
1.3.6 "Discharge" means the disposal, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking,
escape, incineration or placing of any hazardous material or waste or special
waste, into or on the land, water or air. Discharge includes, without limitation,
leakage of such hazardous materials or wastes from containers, tanks or
storage systems, or disposal of such materials or wastes into any sewage
disposal systems, dry well, catch basin or landfill.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
52
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
1.3 Definitions Continued
1.3.7 "Fire Chief" means the Fire Chief of the Town of Acton and shall include any
designee of the Fire Chief.
1.3.8 "Hazardous Material or Waste" means any substance, including petroleum or
derivatives thereof, or combination of substances which because of their
quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, infectious, flammable,
combustible, radioactive, genetic or toxic characteristics, may cause or
significantly contribute to a present or potential risk to human health, safety,
or welfare, to the groundwater resources air quality, or to the natural
environment. Any substance regulated under applicable Acton Board of
Health regulations and under any State or Federal laws and regulations
regulating hazardous, chemical, biological or waste materials, or any
amendments thereof, shall be considered hazardous material or waste.
1.3.9 "Owners or Operators" means each and every person who alone or severally
with others has legal title to any property on which is located any hazardous
material or waste or special waste subject to this bylaw; or a tenant, licensee
or person in possession, who has care, charge or control of any such
property, in any capacity including without limitation agent, executor,
administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the holder of legal title; or
agent, trustee or a person appointed by a court of competent jurisdiction; or a
mortgagee in possession of such property. Each and every such person is
bound to comply with the provisions of this bylaw as if he were an owner.
1.3.10 A "Hazardous Material Generator" means any commercial enterprise,
government agency, owner or operator who produces, prepares, imports or
compounds hazardous material or waste or special waste by combining
previously non-hazardous materials to create hazardous materials.
1.3.11 A "Hazardous Material User" means any commercial enterprise, government
agency, owner or operator who utilizes hazardous materials or waste or
special waste, for any purposes other than those specifically exempt from the
requirements of this bylaw under section 2.2.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
53
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
1.3 Definitions - Continued
1.3.12 “Special Waste” means any solid waste that is determined not to be a
hazardous waste pursuant to 310 CMR 30.000 and that exists in such
quantity or in such chemical or physical state, or any combination thereof, so
that particular management controls are required to prevent an adverse
impact from the collection, transport, transfer, storage, processing, treatment
or disposal of the solid waste. Without limitation, special waste includes
waste that will require special management to ensure protection of public
health, safety, or the environment based upon the physical, biological, or
chemical properties of the waste. Special wastes include but are not limited
to: asbestos waste, infectious wastes, except as specified in 310 CMR
19.061(6)(c)4, sludges including wastewater treatment sludges, and industrial
process wastewater treatment sludges. For the purposes of this bylaw,
special wastes do not include drinking water treatment sludges. (Ref: 310
CMR 19.006 and 19.061(2) and (3).).’
1.3.13 "Storage" means the holding of any hazardous materials or wastes for more
than 24 hours.
1.3.14 "Storage System" means one or more tanks(s), and all connecting pipes,
valves or other devices appurtenant thereto.
1.3.15 "Tanks" means any stationary device used to store or to contain an
accumulation of hazardous materials or wastes.
1.3.16 "Underground Storage System" means a system in which any or part of any
of the tanks, connecting pipes, valves or other devices are buried below the
surface of the ground unless otherwise specified by the Board of Health.
2. Prohibition, Discharge Reporting and Remedial Actions
2.1 Prohibitions
2.1.1 There shall be no discharge of hazardous materials or wastes or special
wastes within the Town of Acton through land, water, or air transmission
without a permit for such action by an authorized agent of a federal or state
agency or without a hearing from the Board of Health unless otherwise
excepted or exempted under this bylaw.
2.1.2 There shall be no discharge of hazardous materials or wastes or special wastes
within the aquifer protection Zones 1,2,3, as delineated in the Section 4.3of the
Acton Zoning Bylaw, as printed on May 1, 1990 and subsequent amendments
thereof, either through land, water or air transmission unless otherwise
excepted or exempted under this bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
54
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
2.1 Prohibitions - continued
2.1.3 There shall be no new installations of underground storage tanks for
hazardous materials or waste or special waste within the aquifer protection
Zones 1 & 2 as delineated in the Section 4.3 of the Acton Zoning Bylaw, as
printed on May 1, 1990 and subsequent amendments thereof; or within the
flood plain, defined by the Federal Emergency Management Agency "Flood
Insurance Study, Town of Acton" January 6, 1988, as amended; or within 500
feet of a surface water body, wetland or private well. Replacement of
underground storage tanks for flammable materials that pre-exist this bylaw
shall be allowed only after the Fire Chief or his designee determines that
aboveground storage of the flammable and/or combustible material would
create a fire and/or explosion hazard.
2.1.4 No area within which hazardous materials or waste or special waste are used,
stored or generated may contain a floor drain that leads to a storm drain or a
septic system. Floor drains in such areas shall drain into containment vessels
for removal by a DEP approved hazardous waste carrier. All other drains shall
be permanently sealed off.
2.1.5 No residues or waste waters resulting from hazardous material or waste or
special waste spill clean up procedures shall be disposed of into drains or
other facilities leading to storm drains or septic systems or into the Acton
Transfer Station. All such residues and waste waters shall be contained for
removal by a DEP approved hauler.
2.2 Exceptions
Applications of fertilizers, herbicides and pesticides used in accordance with applicable
local, state and federal regulations shall be exempt from Section 2 of this bylaw,
applications of deicing chemicals in conformance with the Massachusetts Snow and
Ice Control Program, applications of swimming pool chemicals, and applications of
water treatment chemicals by the Acton Water District. Storage of such chemicals,
however, shall not be exempt from the appropriate storage requirements of Section 3
of this bylaw. This bylaw shall not apply to discharge of ordinary sanitary wastewater
into a septic system installed in accordance with applicable State and local regulations
or to ordinary uses of household or garden products used in accordance with
applicable labeling instructions from state and federal law. Nothing in this bylaw
prohibits the Board of Health from limiting or prohibiting the use of any such product by
appropriate regulations.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
55
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
2.3 Reporting of Discharges
Owners or operators shall immediately report any discharge or abnormal loss of
hazardous materials or waste or special waste and shall provide a reasonable estimate
of the nature and quantity of the discharged hazardous materials or wastes or special
wastes and supply pertinent Material Safety Data Sheet's to the Fire Chief, the Health
Director, Civil Defense and Local Emergency Planning Committee and the appropriate
office in the D.E.P. These reporting requirements are in addition to all State and
Federal reporting requirements.
2.4 Remedial Actions Following Discharges
2.4.1 Any discharge of hazardous material or waste or special waste shall be
immediately contained and reported. Clean up activities of significant
discharges shall be taken under the direction of the Fire Chief, Health Director
and/or other applicable agency. Clean-up and proper disposal of any
discharged or abnormally lost hazardous material or waste or special waste
shall be the responsibility of the owner or operator, hazardous material
generator, or user including cost of the cleanup and disposal.
2.4.2 Following the immediate assessment according to section 2.3 and
containment of any hazardous material or waste or special waste discharge a
detailed report on the spill, remedial procedure plan and a schedule for all
ongoing clean up actions to be undertaken shall promptly be submitted to the
Fire Chief and the Board of Health. Action shall not be taken unless the Fire
Chief and Board of Health deem that the remedial procedure will not contribute
to a fire, explosion and/or environmental hazard. A detailed report on the spill
and a remedial plan shall be submitted to the Fire Chief.
2.4.3 Collection and disposal of contaminated material shall be conducted by a
handler that is licensed by the DEP.
3. Permits and Accounting for Hazardous Materials and Waste
3.1 Permits For Hazardous Materials and Waste
Any hazardous materials or waste generator or user of hazardous materials or waste
or special waste which exceeds the thresholds in s. 3.1.1., including residential tanks
as specified in s. 5.3.4, must obtain a permit from the Board of Health to store, use or
generate hazardous materials or wastes or special wastes. The permit shall be
granted for one year, and may be renewed by the Health Director, unless there has
been a substantial change in the quantity, type or method of storage, generation or
use, or the Health Director concludes for any reason that reissuance of the permit
should be reviewed by the Board. This permit shall be in addition to any license
required in accordance with M.G.L. Ch. 148, s. 13 and/or any permit required in
accordance with 527 CMR 14.00 or any other Fire Prevention Regulation.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
56
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
3. Permits and Accounting for Hazardous Materials and Waste-cont
3.1.1 A permit must be obtained for hazardous materials and wastes and special
waste when use, generation or storage are above the following thresholds:
1. Small scale or large scale generator as defined in the Massachusetts
Hazardous Waste Management Act, MGL Ch 21C, and the Federal Resource
Conservation and Recovery Act 42 U.S.C., Section 6901 et seq or as defined in
any subsequent amendments or new regulations; or generation in excess of
100 kg/mo of hazardous waste or materials or special waste, whichever is the
smallest quantity.
2. Any storage or use within a twenty-four hour period exceeding 25 gallons liquid
volume or 25 pounds dry weight of any hazardous material or waste or special
waste except for retail sale.
3. Storage, use or generation of any quantity of any chemical on The List of
Extremely Hazardous Materials, as published in the Federal Register Volume
52, Number 77, April 22, 1987, and any additional chemicals added
subsequently.
4. Storage of any hazardous materials or waste overnight in delivery trucks or
tank trailers.
5. Storage of more than 50 gallons or 50 pounds dry weight of any prepackaged
hazardous materials for retail sale.
3.2 Information Required For A Hazardous Materials and Waste and Special
Waste Permit Application
The following information shall be supplied with the application for a permit:
3.2.1 A list of the size, type, age and location of each container or tank. Evidence of
the date of purchase and installation shall be included for existing storage
systems, along with a plot plan showing the location of all containers, tanks,
drains and piping on the property. In complex applications the Health
Department and/or the Board of Health, may require a plot plan certified by a
Professional Land Surveyor. Any changes in the information contained in the
initial application, including any change in the use of the storage system, shall
be reported immediately.
3.2.2 A list of daily amounts stored, used or generated and estimate of yearly
throughput of all hazardous materials and waste and special waste to be used,
stored or generated on the site, and copies of pertinent Material Safety Data
Sheets.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
57
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
3.2 Information Required For A Hazardous Materials and Waste and Special
Waste Permit Application-continued
3.2.3 Documentation stating that all information previously filed with the Board of
Health is correct, or indicating a change in the status of the existing permit shall
be submitted annually. A new permit shall be obtained within thirty days from
the Board of Health whenever:
a. there is any change in the type or method of generation, use or storage, or
significant change in the quantity or composition of hazardous materials or
wastes or special wastes previously permitted.
b. the method of storage, generation or use fails to comply with information
previously submitted to the Board of Health.
3.2.4 The Board of Health may require additional information if it is necessary to
adequately evaluate the application.
3.3 Exceptions to Permit Requirement.
Permits shall not be required under this bylaw for the following:
a. Septic Systems
b. Gasoline and diesel fuel stored in tanks mounted on a vehicle and used solely to
fuel the same vehicle.
c. Hydraulic oil reservoir tanks on heavy vehicular equipment.
d. Use of domestic biodegradable cleaners for residential and business
maintenance.
e. Residential oil tanks in place and in use prior to passage of this bylaw. New
residential oil tanks require permits as noted in section 5.3.4 of this bylaw,
provided that a permit has also been obtained from the Fire Chief.
3.4 Hazardous Materials and Waste and Special Waste Permit Conditions
The Board of Health may impose conditions on any storage permit as necessary to
serve the purposes of this bylaw or to protect the public health and environment.
3.5 Requirements for Approval of Hazardous Material and Waste and Special
Waste Permits
3.5.1 Hazardous materials and waste and special waste permits with the exception
of residential home heating oil tanks, shall be granted by the Board of Health
only if the following criteria are fulfilled:
a. The proposed storage, use or generation system shall provide adequate
discharge prevention safeguards which are appropriate to the materials
and wastes to be stored, used or generated and to the location of the
storage, use or generation.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
58
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
3. Permits and Accounting for Hazardous Materials and Waste - continued
3.5 Requirements for Approval of Hazardous Material and Waste and Special
Waste Permits continued
b. The proposed storage, use or generation system shall comply with all local,
state and federal regulations.
c. The proposed storage, use or generation system shall not cause a threat to
the public health and safety or to the environment.
d. The applicant has established a satisfactory hazardous materials and
waste and special waste discharge contingency plan.
e. All hazardous materials or wastes or special wastes to be stored above
ground shall be stored in product tight containers on an impervious,
chemical resistant surface, under cover and sheltered from the weather
unless otherwise specified by the Board. The storage area shall be
enclosed with a permanent dike of impervious construction providing a
volume of at least 100% of the maximum volume of the largest single
container or tank plus 10% of the total storage capacity. All outdoor
storage areas shall be surrounded by a 5 foot fence, at a minimum, and
shall be kept locked at all times when unattended.
f. Hazardous Waste shall be held on the premises for removal by a licensed
carrier in accordance with the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste
Management Act, MGL Chapter 21C.
g. Owners or Operators shall park delivery trucks or tank trailers only in
designated overnight parking areas approved by the Board of Health and
Fire Department. These parking areas must allow for detection and
containment of discharge from the parked vehicles that are acceptable to
the Board of Health and Fire Department.
3.6 Inventory and Monitoring of Above Ground Storage Systems
All hazardous materials or special wastes stored above ground, with the exception of
residential home heating oil tanks, shall be monitored weekly unless more frequent
monitoring is specified in the permit. Monitoring shall consist of a thorough visual
inspection of the container(s) and tank(s) and stock(s) of materials as well as the dike
area for deterioration, leakage or unaccounted for loss of materials.
3.7 Record Retention
Throughout the permit period, owners, users, generators, or operators shall keep
copies of all Hazardous Waste Transport Manifests on-site, as required under the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 42 U.S.C., Section 6901 et seq. and the
Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Management Act MGL Chapter 21C, 315 CMR,
Section 2.04. If a hazardous waste generator is exempt from the manifest
requirements sufficient proof of a proper disposal method shall be maintained.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
59
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
4. Underground Storage of Flammable or Combustible Products and Hazardous
Materials or Wastes or Special Wastes
4.1 Underground Storage Requirements
4.1.1 Owners or operators storing flammable or combustible materials in
underground storage systems shall obtain a permit from the Fire Chief in
addition to the Hazardous Material Permit from the Board of Health required
under Section 3. Owners and operators storing hazardous materials or wastes
or special wastes underground which are not flammable or combustible need
only obtain a permit from the Board of Health under section 3.
4.1.2 Any discharge or abnormal loss of material from underground storage systems
shall be reported to the Fire Chief, the Health Director and the appropriate
office in the D.E.P. immediately upon detection.
4.1.3 Response procedures to any discharge or abnormal loss of material from
underground storage system shall follow the requirements of 527CMR Section
9.20 or 310 CMR s. 30.697, whichever is applicable. In the case of any
hazardous material for which response procedures are not specified under
state law, response procedures shall be those required for hazardous wastes
under 310 CMR s. 30.697, unless otherwise specified by the Board of Health.
4.1.4 Prior to any change in the material stored in an underground tank, such change
of material shall be approved by the Health Department and (in the case of
flammable or combustible materials) by the Fire Chief. Confirmation by the tank
manufacturer that such a change in material would be compatible with the tank
type shall also be submitted, in writing, to the Board/Fire Chief.
4.2 Underground Tank Construction
4.2.1 All underground storage tanks shall be designed to minimize the risk of
corrosion and leakage, and shall conform to all construction and installation
requirements under applicable state and federal law. All new underground
storage systems for hazardous materials or waste or special waste shall meet
the standards for new underground hazardous waste tanks set forth in 310
CMR s. 30.693 and 30.694, unless otherwise specified by the Board of Health.
Hazardous wastes or waste products that are flammable or combustible shall
meet 527 CMR 9.
4.2.2 All non-conforming tanks (except as provided in 5.3.3) shall be brought into
conformance by January 1, 1999, or a tank age of 20 years, whichever comes
first.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
60
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
4.2 Underground Tank Construction continued
4.2.3 Installation procedures for all underground storage tanks shall conform to all
requirements under applicable state law. Installation procedures for any
underground tanks for any hazardous materials not covered by state
regulations shall comply with the requirements in 310 CMR s. 30,693 for
installation of tanks for underground storage of hazardous wastes, unless
otherwise specified by the Board of Health.
4.2.4 The Board of Health may require the placement of monitoring wells around any
underground storage tank located within any aquifer zone as delineated in
Section 4.3.2 of the Groundwater Protection District section of the Acton Zoning
Bylaw as printed on May 1, 1990.
5. Testing, Monitoring, and Removal Requirements for All Underground
Storage Tanks
5.1 Underground Tank Testing
5.1.1 All underground tanks which do not conform to the requirements for new tank
installations in section 4.2.1 shall be tested for tightness at the expense of the
owner. Testing schedules, except as provided in 5.3.3, shall follow the
requirements of 527 CMR Section 9.13 in the case of flammable or combustible
materials. Tanks for other hazardous materials or waste or special waste shall
be tested annually or more frequently if required by the Board of Health.
5.1.2 Test results for tanks storing flammable or combustible materials shall be
submitted to the Fire Chief and the Health Department. Test results for tanks
storing hazardous materials or wastes or special wastes which are not
flammable or combustible shall be submitted to the Health Department.
5.1.3 Prior to its transfer all underground storage tanks located on a property shall be
tested for tightness at the expense of the owner. The results of such testing
shall be submitted to the Fire Chief and to the Board of Health, and kept on file.
5.1.4 The Fire Chief or the Health Director may request to be present for any tank
testing procedures.
5.2 Inventory and Monitoring of Underground Storage Tanks
5.2.1 Inventory and monitoring of underground tanks for storage of flammable and
combustible materials shall conform to the requirements of 527 CMR s. 9.11
and 9.12. Inventory and monitoring of underground tanks for storage of other
hazardous materials not covered by 527 CMR s. 9.11 and 9.12 shall conform to
the requirements in 310 CMR s. 30.692, unless otherwise specified by the
Board of Health.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
61
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
5.3 Underground Tank Removal
5.3.1 Removal procedures for tanks for storage of flammable or combustible
materials shall follow the requirements of 527 CMR 9.22 and 9.23 as well as
502 CMR 3.00.
5.3.2 Removal procedures for tanks for the storage of hazardous materials or waste
or special waste which are not flammable or combustible shall conform to the
procedure in 310 CMR s. 30.699 for removal of hazardous waste tanks unless
otherwise specified by the Board of Health.
5.3.3 All residential underground storage tanks shall be removed at a tank age of 20
years, unless the structure of the tank is sound. Proof of soundness must
consist of results of a tightness test which follows the requirements of 527 CMR
Section 9.13 and must be provided annually to the Board and the Fire Chief
beginning the twentieth (20th) year of the tank's life.
5.3.4 No underground residential home heating oil tanks shall be repaired and placed
back in service. Any such tank which is in need of repair shall be removed and
replaced by an above ground storage system. All replacements of residential
home heating oil tanks shall require a permit under Section 3 of this bylaw, and
are not excepted by paragraph 3.3 (e).
5.3.5 No underground storage system which has leaked shall be relined, repaired or
continued in use. Tanks which have leaked or need repair shall be removed.
5.4 Information required with Application for Underground Storage Permit
Applications for permits from either the Board of Health or the Fire Chief must include
appropriate drawings showing the location of all tanks in relation to the aquifer
protection zones delineated in section 4.3.2 of the Groundwater Protection District
section of the Acton Zoning Bylaw as printed on May 1, 1990. The location of all tanks
shall conform to all applicable legal requirements, including but not limited to the
Groundwater Protection Bylaw and the Aquifer protection regulations and other
regulations of the Board of Health.
6. Administration and Enforcement
6.1 Compliance with Hazardous Materials Permit Requirements
6.1.1 Owners or occupants of new premises shall obtain a hazardous materials
permit from the Board of Health, licenses from the local licensing authority and
permits from the Fire Chief prior to occupying the premises.
6.1.2 Existing Premises - Owners or occupants of existing premises shall obtain a
hazardous materials permit by January 1, 1992, or upon any change in use or
occupancy of the site, whichever comes first.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
62
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
6.2 Cessation of A Permit
6.2.1 The holder of a hazardous materials and waste and special waste permit shall
notify the Board of Health immediately, in writing, whenever the activities
authorized under the permit cease on a permanent basis.
6.2.2 When an underground storage tank for the storage of flammable or
combustible materials is taken out of service for more than six months, the fire
chief shall require that the tank be removed in accordance with 527 CMR,
Section 9.22 and 9.23. Any underground storage tank for the storage of other
hazardous materials or wastes or special wastes shall be removed in
accordance with the procedures in 527 CMR s. 9.22 and 9.23 unless
otherwise ordered by the Board of Health.
6.3 Promulgation of Rules and Regulations
The Board of Health may from time to time pass regulations specifying categories of
materials which are hazardous materials or wastes under the definition in s. 1.3.8 of
this bylaw. The Board may adopt or amend rules and regulations consistent with the
provisions of this bylaw. A copy of such rules shall be filed with the Town Clerk.
6.4 Fees
Fees necessary for the issuance and renewal of permits or licenses under this bylaw
shall be set by the Board of Selectmen. Fees shall be due on the date of annual
registration and collected by the permit or license granting authority. Failure to pay
shall constitute a violation and shall subject the violator to the penalties of Section 6.7
of this bylaw.
6.5 Variance
A variance from time the terms of this bylaw may be granted by the permit granting
authority after notice to abutters and a public hearing, if it is found that a variance
would satisfy each of the following conditions:
1. Consistency with the public health and environmental protection objectives of
the Massachusetts General Laws and applicable federal, state and local
regulations.
2. Consistency with the purpose and intent of this bylaw.
3. Prevention of an undue burden on the permit applicant, and
4. Equivalent protection as envisioned in section 1.2.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
63
CHAPTER I HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL CONTINUED
6.6 Enforcement Access
The authority granting the permit of its designee may, upon reasonable notice to the
occupant of the premises enter any premises for the purpose of investigating,
sampling, or inspecting any record, condition, equipment, practice, or property relating
to activities subject to this bylaw. The permit granting authority may enter any
premises for the purpose of enforcing this bylaw.
6.7 Penalty
Any person who violates any provision of this bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of not
more than $300.00, as allowed under MGL Chapter 40, Section 21. Each day during
which a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense, and each condition of
this bylaw violated shall constitute a separate offense. This penalty may be imposed
by the Town of Acton Board of Selectman, or a designated officer having police powers
pursuant to MGL. Chapter 40, Section 21D.
7.1 Severability
Each provision of this bylaw shall be construed as separate, to the end that if any part
of it shall be held invalid for any reason, the remainder shall continue in full force and
effect.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
64
C H A P T E R J
SCENIC ROAD BYLAW
To designate the following roads as scenic roads in accordance with the
recommendation of the Planning Board under section 15C, Chapter 40 of the General
Laws as amended by Chapter 67 of the Acts of 1973, which provides in part that any
repair, maintenance, reconstruction, or paving work done with respect to any road
designated as a scenic road shall not involve or include the cutting or removal of trees,
or tearing down, or destruction of stone walls, or portions thereof, except with prior
written consent of the Planning Board after a public hearing:
( * Indicates the entire road has been selected)
*J-1 Windsor Avenue from the southerly sideline of Massachusetts Avenue running
approximately 2610 feet in a southerly direction to the northeasterly sideline of
Central Street, this being the entire road.
J-2 Arlington Street from the northwest end of Hayward Road running
approximately 7000 feet in a northeasterly direction to the southwesterly sideline
of Newtown Road.
*J-3 Bulette Road from the southwesterly sideline of Newtown Road running
approximately 1100 feet in a southwesterly direction to the end, this being the
entire road.
J-4 Robbins Street from the northerly sideline of Stow Street running approximately
2000 feet in a northwesterly direction to the end.
J-5 Stow Street from the northwesterly sideline of Liberty Street running
approximately 3200 feet to the Stow Town Line.
J-6 Liberty Street from the westerly sideline of Martin Street running approximately
2750 feet in a westerly direction to the Stow Town Line.
J-7 Martin Street from the southeasterly sideline of Liberty Street running
approximately 1000 feet in a southeasterly direction to the end.
*J-8 High Street from the easterly sideline of Main Street running approximately 8600
feet to the northerly sideline of Powder Mill Road, this being the entire road.
J-9 School Street from the northerly end of River Street running approximately 1650
feet in an easterly direction to the southerly end of Piper Road.
J-10 Piper Road from the northerly sideline of School Street running northerly
approximately 2750 feet to the western end of Brucewood Road.
*J-11 Hayward Road from the southeasterly sideline of Arlington Street approximately
6900 feet in a generally eastern direction to the western sideline of Main Street,
this being the entire road.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
65
CHAPTER J SCENIC ROAD BYLAW CONTINUED
*J-12 Coughlin Street from the southeasterly sideline of Main Street running
approximately 1200 feet in a southeasterly direction to the westerly sideline of
Taylor Road, this being the entire road.
*J-13 Taylor Road the entire road.
J-14 Minot Avenue from the easterly sideline of Taylor Road running approximately
2000 feet in a southeasterly direction to the northwesterly end of Forest Road.
*J-15 Forest Road from the southeasterly sideline of Minot Avenue running
approximately 2300 feet to the westerly sideline of Hosmer Street, this being the
entire road.
*J-16 Newtown Road from the Littleton Town Line running approximately 11,300 feet
in a generally southeasterly direction to the northwesterly sideline of Main
Street, this being the entire road.
*J-17 Concord Road from the southeasterly sideline of Main Street running
approximately 6400 feet in a generally southeasterly direction to the westerly
sideline of Great Road, this being the entire road.
J-18 Pope Road from the northeasterly sideline of Great Road running approximately
12,250 feet in a northwesterly direction to the Concord Town Line, this being the
entire road.
*J-19 Proctor Street from the northwesterly sideline of Pope Road running
approximately 850 feet in a northwesterly direction to the end, this being the
entire road.
*J-20 Spring Hill Road from the northeasterly sideline of Pope Road running
approximately 1900 feet in a northeasterly direction to the end, this being the
entire road.
*J-21 Esterbrook Road from the easterly sideline of Great Road running
approximately 3800 feet in a generally northeasterly direction to the southerly
sideline of Strawberry Hill Road, this being the entire road.
*J-22 Strawberry Hill Road from the easterly sideline of Great Road running
approximately 6200 feet in a generally easterly direction to the Concord Town
Line, this being the entire road.
*J-23 Brook Street from the southeasterly sideline of Main Street running
approximately 2200 feet in a generally easterly direction to the westerly sideline
of Great Road, this being the entire road.
*J-24 Carlisle Road from the easterly sideline of Main Street running approximately
3300 feet in a generally northeasterly direction to the Carlisle Town Line, this
being the entire road in Acton.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
66
CHAPTER J SCENIC ROAD BYLAW CONTINUED
*J-25 Fort Pond Road from the northeasterly side of Newtown Road running
approximately 2000 feet in a northeasterly direction to the Littleton Town Line,
]this being the entire road in Acton.
J-26 Nagog Hill Road from the northwesterly sideline of Main Street running
approximately 9000 feet in a northwesterly direction to the Littleton Town Line.
*J-27 Simon Hapgood Lane from the northeasterly sideline of Strawberry Hill Road
running approximately 500 feet in a northerly direction to the end, this being the
entire road.
*J-28 Hammond Street from the northeast sideline of Newtown Road running
approximately 3900 feet in an easterly direction to the westerly sideline of
Nagog Hill Road, this being the entire road.
J-29 Minuteman Road from the southwesterly sideline of Newtown Road running
approximately 1000 feet in a westerly direction to the end.
J-30 Central Street from the southeasterly sideline of Hapgood's Crossing 1500 feet
in a southeasterly direction.
J-31 Quarry Road the extension into the Town Forest.
J-32 Isaac Davis Trail beginning at the most westerly end of Minuteman Road
thence southwesterly over land of the Town of Acton and the existing easement
on land of James Progin (#8 John Swift Road - Lot 43A) to John Swift Road.
J-33 Isaac Davis Trail from Musket Drive to Hayward Road over the existing
easement on land of Barbara Keizer (#4 Musket Drive - Lot 147).
J-34 Isaac Davis Trail (formerly known as Revolutionary Road) through Conant's
Land, beginning at Main Street at a point southwesterly about 1175 feet from the
intersection of the southerly line of Main Street and the southerly line of Brook
Street; thence easterly to Great Road and being intended to be all parts of the
old road, and said point at Great Road, being about 350 feet from the southerly
side of Brook Street; said measurement being more or less.
J-35 Pope Road the entire length of Pope Road as a scenic road under G.L.,c. 40 s.
15C, by amending the vote of the 1974 Annual Town Meeting.
J-36 Wheeler Lane in its entirety.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
67
C H A P T E R K
PERSONNEL BYLAW
Effective July, 1985:
K1.1 Establishment and Duties of Personnel Board
A. Composition - The Selectmen will appoint a Personnel Board to be comprised of
five (5) members and not more than three (3) alternates. Preferably three (3) of the
regular members should have substantial experience in professional personnel
management and/or industrial relations. Service on the Personnel Board is
voluntary and without monetary compensation.
B. Terms - Each regular member shall be appointed for three (3) year over-lapping
terms, except that in the first year of appointment, the Selectmen shall appoint one
member for a term of one (1) year; two members for terms of two (2) years; and two
members for terms of three (3) years. Thereafter, each member will be appointed
for a full three (3) year term. The alternate members will also be appointed for a
three (3) year term. The Board shall organize each year after appointment or reappointment
of a regular member, and it shall elect a chairman, vice chairman and
clerk for the ensuing year.
C. Quorum - At any regular or special meeting of the Personnel Board, it shall be
necessary for three (3) members to be present and voting. Should a regular
member not be available for any meeting, an alternate member will participate as a
voting member in the proceedings as designated by the Chairman.
D. Responsibility - The Personnel Board shall be responsible to:
1. Provide advice and counsel to the Town Manager and the Board of Selectmen on
personnel administration within the Town of Acton.
2. Assist the Town Manager and Board of Selectmen in the development and
execution of Town personnel policies and procedures.
3. Serve as an advisory board to the Selectmen on any appeal from the decision of
the Town Manager in personnel matters.
4. Review the Personnel Administration Plan and recommend revisions to the Town
Manager.
5. Maintain liaison with School personnel official with the objective of establishing
and maintaining compatibility of School and Town personnel policies and
procedures.
6. Maintain liaison with the Trustees of the Acton Memorial Library to assure
compatibility in personnel practices and consistency in salary administration
between library employees and other Town of Acton employees.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
68
CHAPTER K PERSONNEL BYLAW CONTINUED
K1.2 Procedures
The Personnel Board will establish its internal organization and will establish the
procedures which it will follow in carrying out its responsibilities.
1. Minutes of all Personnel Board meetings will be kept and retained on file in the
office of the Town Manager.
2. Notice of Personnel Board Meetings will be posted in the Town Hall in accordance
with the provisions of the Open Town Meeting Law.
3. Logistical support for the Personnel Board will be the responsibility of the Town
Manager.
K2. Duties of the Board of Selectmen and Town Manager
K2.1 Statement of Responsibility and Accountability
The Board of Selectmen have the overriding responsibility for personnel administration
in the Town and are accountable to the Town for their performance on that
responsibility. Any changes to the Personnel Administration Plan that have a financial
impact on the Town shall be subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen. Day to
day personnel management is the responsibility of the Town Manager who is
accountable to the Board of Selectmen for his/her performance.
A. Town Manager's Responsibility - The Town Manager shall be responsible for
preparing and adopting a personnel administration plan. The Town Manager is
responsible for the impartial and equitable administration of the Personnel
Administration Plan. The actual operations involved in administering the plan may
be delegated to such staff assistant or staff assistants within the office of the
Town Manager as deemed practical, including the wage and salary, and
classification schedules.
B. Appointing Authority - The appointing authority for employees in the Town of
Acton rests with the Town Manager except as otherwise provided in the Charter of
the Town of Acton.
C Personnel Administration Plan - The Town Manager, or designated
representative shall review the Personnel Administration Plan at least once each
calendar year and may promulgate and publish amendments to the Personnel
Administration Plan.
K2.2 A. Employees Responsibility - It shall be part of the responsibility of each
employee to be thoroughly acquainted with the material contained in the Town of Acton
Personnel Administration Plan and any of its subsequent revisions.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
69
CHAPTER K PERSONNEL BYLAW CONTINUED
K3. Classification Schedule
K3.1 Preparation and Maintenance of the Classification Schedule
The Town Manager, as part of the Personnel Administration Plan, will prepare and
maintain a position classification schedule based on the Factor Evaluation System
(FES) developed by the Federal Office of Personnel Management. The plan will
include a written definition for each position in the Town service which describes the
duties, authority and responsibilities characteristic of positions properly included in the
class. All positions judged to be essentially equal although not necessarily involving
the same duties, but have the same level of difficulty, responsibilities and overall value,
will be grouped together in a class, with a minimum rate of pay, a maximum rate of pay
and three (3) intermediate steps in between, with the exception of the cemetery
employees and except as otherwise grouped in separate schedules. No employee
may be appointed to a position not included in the classification plan approved by the
Town Manager.
K4. Wage and Salary Schedule
K4.1
The Town Manager as part of the Personnel Administration Plan will prepare and
administer the wage and salary schedule for town employees, subject to the
appropriation of necessary funds by the Town. The Town Manager shall review all
factors relevant to the maintenance of a sound compensation practices of public and
private employers, the cost of living, and the ability of the Town to recruit and retain
qualified personnel. The Town Manager will make revisions of the plan which are
appropriate not only to accommodate such considerations but which are necessary
because of the abolishment, modification or establishment of grades.
K5. Other Personnel Rules and Policies
K5.1
The Town Manager shall adopt and administer rules and policies governing hours of
work, holiday and sick leave policies, fringe benefits and other matters relating to
conditions of employment, compensation and benefits, and evaluation and conduct of
Town employees, not inconsistent with statutes or the provisions of collective
bargaining contracts.
K6. Appointments
K6.1 Equal Employment Opportunities
The Town of Acton has and will provide equal employment opportunities for all
applicants. Every individual, regardless of race, creed, color, nationality, age, religion
or sex, applying for employment in the Town will receive equal treatment. The Town's
policy with respect to Equal Employment Opportunity is set forth in the Town of Acton
Equal Employment Opportunity Affirmative Action Plan.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
70
CHAPTER K PERSONNEL BYLAW CONTINUED
K6. Appointments - continued
K6.2 Criteria for Selection
The recruitment, selection, and promotion of employees will be based solely on jobrelated
skills, knowledge, experience, education, as well as prior demonstrated
performance, attitude, and adaptability as they relevantly indicate probable success in
the job being filled. Factors are weighted as determined by the Town Manager. Town
Employees, when fully qualified for a position, will be given preference with respect to
any vacancies.
K6.3 Appointment
A. Method of Appointment - All vacancies shall be filled by permanent
appointment, provisional appointment, emergency appointment, temporary
appointment, promotion, transfer or demotion. Appointment to a vacancy in the
classified service shall be recommended by the department head from the
qualified candidates and submitted to the Town Manager or appropriate Library
Board of Trustees for final appointment.
B. Final Approval - The Town Manager or appropriate Library Board of Trustees will
have final approval regarding starting salary, employment, transfer or promotion of
any individual taking into consideration the recommendations of the department
head, policies of the Town of Acton and applicable state and federal laws. The
Town Manager will notify the department head and the individual to be employed,
promoted or transferred of the starting salary and starting date. In the case of
transfer or promotion, the Town Manager will communicate with all affected
departments in an attempt to determine a mutually compatible starting date and
prepare the necessary forms.
K7. Employee Evaluation and Training
K7.1 Need for Evaluation System
The Town of Acton recognized the need for an operating employee evaluation system
in order to (1) assure the granting of step increases based on merit, (2) fairly and
accurately evaluate an employee's strength, weaknesses, and potential for growth, (3)
encourage and guide the employee's development of special skills and work interests,
and (4) provide a method for improving operational programs through employee input.
K7.2 Maintenance of the System
The Town Manager is responsible for the establishment of the employee evaluation
and development system and for overseeing the program. Employee evaluation is the
continuing day-to-day responsibility of the supervisors, who will prepare evaluation
forms for their subordinates as scheduled below. The Town Manager's office will
provide guidance to supervisors and will make revisions to the system as necessary.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
71
CHAPTER K PERSONNEL BYLAW CONTINUED
K7. Employee Evaluation and Training - continued
K7.3 Training
It shall be the responsibility of the Town Manager to foster and promote employee
training programs for improving the quality of personal services rendered to citizens
and aiding employees to equip themselves for advancement in the service.
K8. Disciplinary Action and Appeals
K8.1
The Town Manager shall adopt and administer rules and regulations governing
remedial and disciplinary actions for any violation of the provisions of the personnel
plan or inefficiency or incompetence in the performance of an employee's duties. Such
rules and regulations shall provide for the opportunity to resolve any disputes by
agreement or negotiation between the employee and his or her immediate supervisor
and shall provide a procedure for orderly appeals of all disciplinary actions or other
grievances.
K8.2
Decisions of the Town Manager in regards to major adverse personnel actions, (such
as lay off, suspension without pay, failure of promotion, demotion, or dismissal) may be
appealed in writing by an employee to the Board of Selectmen within 15 days of the
Town Manager's action. Upon receipt of any such appeal of an action by the Town
Manager, the Board of Selectmen will normally refer the appeal to the Personnel Board
and may, at the Board of Selectmen's discretion, either empower the Personnel Board
to hear and finally decide the appeal or direct the Personnel Board to hear and report
the facts and make its recommendations to the Board of Selectmen for that Board's
final decision. In either case the employee's appeal shall be heard within 45 days and
a decision rendered within 30 days of the close of the hearing.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
72
C H A P T E R L
HANDICAPPED PARKING BYLAW
L1
No vehicle, except a vehicle bearing the license plates or Placards authorized by
General Laws c. 90, s. 2, or other jurisdictions or bearing an Acton temporary
handicapped permit, shall be parked, left standing, or left unattended within a parking
space designated as reserved for vehicles owned and operated by disabled or
handicapped persons; and no vehicle shall obstruct a curb ramp designated for use by
disabled or handicapped persons.
L2
The penalty for violation of this bylaw shall be established by order or regulations of the
Board of Selectmen acting pursuant to this Bylaw and shall, per violation, be not less
than $100.00 and not more than the maximum penalty for such a violation as is
authorized by State law as now in force or hereafter amended. In addition, any vehicle
parked in violation of this bylaw shall be subject to removal in accordance with General
Laws c. 40, s. 22D.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
73
C H A P T E R M
ZONING BYLAWS
* Under Separate Cover *
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
74
C H A P T E R N
PROCEDURE FOR THE DEMOLITION OF
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY
SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
N1. Intent and Purpose
This bylaw is adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting significant buildings
within the Town which constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural,
cultural, political, economic or social history of the town; to encourage owners of such
buildings to preserve, move, rehabilitate or restore such buildings rather than demolish
them or to seek out persons who might be willing to purchase such buildings and
preserve, rehabilitate or restore them. To achieve these purposes the Acton Historical
Commission (hereinafter the “Commission”) is empowered to advise and authorize the
Building Commissioner with respect to the issuance of permits for demolition of
significant buildings. The issuance of demolition permits for significant buildings is
regulated as provided by this bylaw.
N2. Definitions
2.1 "Building" - any combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals, or
property.
2.2 "Demolition" - any act of pulling down, destroying, removing, or razing a building or
more than 25% of any single façade or any significant architectural or structural
feature visible from the exterior of the building, or commencing the work of total or
substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same; demolition does not
include the mere replacement of roofing, siding, windows, or trim for maintenance or
repair. For purposes hereof, “significant architectural or structural features” include
but are not limited to porticos, bay windows, roof lines, dormers, or other unique
features of a building.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
75
CHAPTER N PROCEDURE FOR THE DEMOLITION OF CONTINUED
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY
SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
N2. Definitions - continued
2.3 "Significant Building" - any building or portion thereof not within an Historic District
but which:
a. is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register of Historic Places,
or is the subject of a pending application for listing on said National Register; or
b. is included in the Cultural Resources Inventory prepared by the Commission or on
the MACRIS database maintained by the Massachusetts Historical Commission,
including those buildings listed for which complete survey forms may be pending;
or
c. has been determined by vote of the Commission to be historically or
architecturally significant in terms of period, style, method of building construction,
or association with a famous architect or builder, or an historically or culturally
significant person, provided that the owner of such a building and the Building
Commissioner have been notified, in hand or by certified mail, within ten (10) days
of such vote.
2.4 "Commission" - the Acton Historical Commission.
N3. Procedure
3.1 Within seven (7) days of receipt of an application for a demolition permit for a
significant building the Building Commissioner shall forward a copy thereof to the
Commission. The Building Commissioner shall also notify the Commission (by email
or similarly expedient means) when such a permit has been sent to the
Commission for consideration. No demolition permit shall be issued at that time.
3.2 Within sixty-five (65) days of the date that the Commission receives the application
from the Building Commissioner, the Commission shall conduct a public hearing and
shall give (at applicant’s cost) public notice thereof by publishing notice of the time,
place and purpose of the hearing in a local news publication at least fourteen (14)
days before said hearing and also, within fourteen (14) days of said hearing, shall
mail a copy of said notice to the applicant and to the abutters of the property.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
76
CHAPTER N PROCEDURE FOR THE DEMOLITION OF CONTINUED
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY
SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
3.3 If, after such hearing, the Commission determines that the demolition of the
significant building would not be detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage
or resources of the Town, the Commission shall so notify the Building Commissioner
within ten (10) days of such determination. Upon receipt of such notification, or after
the expiration of ten (10) days from the date that the hearing was closed if he has
not received notification from the Commission, the Building Commissioner may,
subject to the requirements of the State Building Code and any other applicable
laws, bylaws, rules and regulations, issue the demolition permit.
3.4 If the Commission determines that the demolition of the significant building would be
detrimental to the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the Town, such
building shall be considered a preferably-preserved significant building.
3.5 Upon determination by the Commission that the significant building which is the
subject of the application for a demolition permit is a preferably-preserved significant
building, the Commission shall so advise the applicant and the Building
Commissioner, within ten (10) days of said hearing, and no demolition permit may
be issued until at least twenty-four (24) months after the date of such determination
by the Commission for any significant building that falls into one of the categories
identified in Section 2.3.a. of this bylaw, or until eighteen (18) months after the date
of such determination by the Commission for any significant building that falls into
one of the categories identified in Sections 2.3.b. or 2.3.c. of this bylaw.
Any determination on a demolition permit application that is made by the
Commission is granted to the owner filing the application and may not be transferred
to a successor owner unless approved in writing by the Commission. At a duly
called meeting, the Commission may agree to a transfer of the determination if the
transferee has proposed a preservation plan for the Building, or upon a showing of
hardship by the applicant, or for other equitable reasons, if the Commission is
satisfied with any such proposed justification(s).
Any determination under Section 3.3 herein expires two (2) years from the date of
such determination. If demolition has not occurred prior to such date, a new
application for a demolition permit must be filed and processed in accordance with
this bylaw prior to any subsequent demolition. Any demolition permit issued after a
delay imposed under Section 3.5, including as such delay may be modified by
Section 3.6, shall expire two (2) years from the date of its issuance. A new
demolition application shall be required thereafter and shall be processed in
accordance with this bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
77
CHAPTER N PROCEDURE FOR THE DEMOLITION OF CONTINUED
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY
SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
3.6 Notwithstanding the preceding section, the Building Commissioner may issue a
demolition permit for a preferably-preserved significant building at any time after
receipt of written advice from the Commission to the effect that either:
a. the Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable likelihood that either the
owner or some other person or group is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate
or restore such building, or
b. the Commission is satisfied that for at least six (6) months the owner has made
continuing, bona fide and reasonable efforts to locate a purchaser to preserve,
rehabilitate and restore the subject building, including listing on the Multiple Listing
Service (MLS) or comparable residential property sales listing service, and that
such efforts have been unsuccessful.
N4. Enforcement and Remedies
4.1 The Commission and the Building Commissioner are each authorized to institute
any and all proceedings in law or equity as they deem necessary and appropriate to
obtain compliance with the requirements of this bylaw, or to prevent a violation
thereof.
4.2 No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises upon which a
significant building has been voluntarily demolished in violation of this bylaw for a
period of three (3) years after the date of the completion of such demolition unless
authorized by the Commission pursuant to Section 4.4. As used herein "premises"
includes the parcel of land upon which the demolished significant building was
located.
4.3 Upon a determination by the Commission that a building is a preferably-preserved
significant building, the owner shall be responsible for properly securing the building,
if vacant, to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner. Should the owner fail to
secure the building, the loss of such building through fire or other cause shall be
considered voluntary demolition for the purposes of Section 4.2.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
78
CHAPTER N PROCEDURE FOR THE DEMOLITION OF CONTINUED
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY
SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
4.4 At any time, the owner of property on which a significant building has been
voluntarily demolished in violation of Sections 4.2 or 4.3 of this bylaw can apply in
writing to the Commission for an exemption to the provisions of Sections 4.2 or 4.3,
such application to state with particularity the facts and circumstances to prove to
the Commission that an exemption is warranted due to (i) exigent circumstances or
disasters beyond the owner’s (and, if different than the owner, the permit applicant’s)
control, or (ii) documentation evidencing the owner's intent to complete a faithful
restoration of the demolished building. The Commission may in its discretion
determine that the written request states sufficient grounds for exemption from the
provisions Sections 4.2 or 4.3 and authorize an exemption from this bylaw. Any
exemption granted pursuant to this Section 4.4 shall apply only to the voluntary
demolition for which the owner submitted a written exemption request, and not for
any subsequent voluntary demolition to which this bylaw would otherwise apply.
4.5 No demolition permit for a preferably-preserved significant building shall be granted
until all approvals and permits are granted for subsequent development. Necessary
approvals may include but are not limited to building permits, zoning variances or
special permits, licenses, easements and subdivisions of the premises. All appeals
from the granting of such approvals must be concluded before the demolition permit
may be issued. The Commission may, in its discretion, waive this provision upon a
showing by an applicant that no development shall be undertaken for a minimum of
five years. Upon the granting of such waiver, the applicant and the Commission
shall enter into an agreement to memorialize the applicant’s commitment and such
agreement may be recorded in the Middlesex County registry of deeds.
N5. Municipal Buildings
No provision of this bylaw shall apply to buildings owned or operated by the Town of
Acton or the Acton Water District. (This section was inserted at the Special Town
Meeting of 11/28/90) Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Town shall consult in good
faith with the Commission prior to finalizing any plans for the Demolition of any
Significant Building owned by the Town of Acton or the Acton Water District.
N6. Local Historic Districts
This Bylaw shall not apply to any proposed demolition of a building which is located
within a Local Historic District established under the Local Historic District Bylaw,
Chapter P of the Town of Acton Bylaws. The Historic District Commission established
under the Local Historic District Bylaw shall have sole jurisdiction over any demolition
proposals within a Local Historic District.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
79
CHAPTER N PROCEDURE FOR THE DEMOLITION OF CONTINUED
HISTORICALLY OR ARCHITECTURALLY
SIGNIFICANT BUILDINGS
N7. Severability
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this bylaw are severable,
and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this bylaw shall be
declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by the valid judgment or decree of any
court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any
of the remaining phrase, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this bylaw.
N8. Demolition on Account of Threat to Public Safety
Notwithstanding any other provision of this bylaw, nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the demolition of any building, structure or portion thereof in accordance with
Chapter 111, Section 127B (Dwelling Unfit for Human Habitation) or Chapter 143,
Sections 6 through 12 (Inspection and Regulation of, and Licenses for, Buildings,
Elevators and Cinematographs). Prior to initiating proceedings under such statutes, the
Board of Health or its agent under Chapter 111, or the Building Commissioner under
Chapter 143, as the case may be, shall notify the Commission and receive its advice.
The Commission shall be invited to the inspection, as may be required pursuant to the
aforesaid statutes, of such building or structure.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
80
C H A P T E R O
REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION
OF LOCAL LICENSES
(a) The Tax Collector or other municipal official responsible for records of all municipal
taxes, assessments, betterments and other municipal charges, hereinafter referred to
as the Tax Collector, shall annually furnish each department, board, commission or
division, hereinafter referred to as the Licensing Authority, that issues licenses or
permits including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business
enterprise, hereinafter referred to as the Party, that has neglected or refused to pay any
local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than
a twelve month period, and that such Party has not filed in good faith a pending
application for an abatement of such tax or has a pending petition before the appellate
tax board.
(b) The Licensing Authority shall deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers of any party whose name appears on said list
furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the Party and the Tax Collector, as required by applicable
provisions of law, and the Party is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than fourteen
days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or
suspension of said license or permit to any Party. The Tax Collector shall have the right
to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or
suspension. Any findings made by the Licensing Authority with respect to such license
denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such
proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceeding at law,
except for any appeal from such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any license
or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be issued or
renewed until the Licensing Authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector
that the Party is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterments or other municipal charges payable to the municipality as of
the date of issuance of said certificate.
(c) Any Party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement with the
Tax Collector, thereby allowing the Licensing Authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit and the validity of said license shall be
conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement. Failure to comply
with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or
permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by
applicable provisions of law.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
81
CHAPTER O REVOCATION OR SUSPENSION CONTINUED
OF LOCAL LICENSES
(d) The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds
there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its officers or
stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as defined in section one of
chapter two hundred and sixty-eight A in the business or activity conducted in or on said
property.
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permits granted under the
General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: Open burning; section thirteen
of chapter forty-eight; bicycle permits; section eleven A of Chapter eighty-five; sales of
articles for charitable purposes; section thirty-three of chapter one hundred and one;
children work permits; section sixty-nine of chapter one hundred and forty-nine; clubs,
associations dispensing food or beverage license; section twenty-one E of chapter one
hundred and forty; dog licenses; section one hundred and thirty-seven of chapter one
hundred and forty; fishing, hunting, trapping licenses; section twelve of chapter one
hundred and thirty-one; marriage licenses; section twenty-eight of chapter two hundred
and seven; and theatrical events, public exhibition permits; section one hundred and
eighty-one of chapter one hundred and forty.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
82
C H A P T E R P
LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT BYLAW
The Town of Acton hereby creates a Local Historic District, to be administered by an
Historic District Commission as provided for under Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40C, as amended.
P1. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to aid in the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics and architecture of buildings and places significant in the history of the
Town of Acton, the maintenance and improvement of their settings and the
encouragement of new building designs compatible with the historically significant
architecture existing in the Local Historic District(s) when this Bylaw was first adopted in
1990. This Bylaw does not seek to establish an architectural museum, but instead to
inform concerning the historical process of architectural growth and adaptation to
heighten a sense of educated pride in our heritage.
P2. Definitions
The terms defined in this section shall be capitalized throughout this Bylaw. Where a
defined term has not been capitalized, it is intended that the meaning of the term be the
same as the meaning ascribed to it in this section unless another meaning is clearly
intended by its context. As used in this Bylaw the following terms shall have the
following meaning:
"Alteration” or "To Alter” The act of the fact of rebuilding, reconstruction,
restoration, replication, removal, demolition, and other similar activities.
“Building" A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or
property.
"Certificate" A Certificate of Appropriateness, a Certificate of Non-Applicability, or a
Certificate of Hardship as set forth in this Bylaw.
"Commission" The Historic District Commission as established in this Bylaw.
"Construction" or "To Construct” The act or the fact of building, erecting,
installing, enlarging, moving and other similar activities.
"Display Area" The total surface area of a SIGN, including all lettering, wording,
designs, symbols, background and frame, but not including any support structure or
bracing incidental to the SIGN. The DISPLAY AREA of an individual letter SIGN or
irregular shaped SIGN shall be the area of the smallest rectangle into which the
letters or shape will fit. Where SIGN faces are placed back to back and face in
opposite directions, the DISPLAY AREA shall be defined as the area of one face of
the SIGN.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
83
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P2. Definitions cont
"District" The Local Historic District as established in this Bylaw consisting of one
or more DISTRICT areas.
"Exterior Architectural Feature" Such portion of the exterior of a BUILDING or
STRUCTURE as is open to view from a public way or ways, including but not limited
to architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind and
texture of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights,
signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
"Person Aggrieved" The applicant; an owner of adjoining property; an owner of
property within the same DISTRICT area; or an owner of property within 100 feet of
said DISTRICT area and any charitable corporation in which one of its purposes is
the preservation of historic structures or districts.
"Signs" Any symbol, design or device used to identify or advertise any place of
business, product, activity or person.
"Structure" A combination of materials other than a BUILDING, including but not
limited to a SIGN, fence, wall, terrace, walk or driveway.
“Substantially at Grade Level” Located at the existing or altered surface of the
earth or pavement which does not/will not exceed one foot in height above the
surface of the earth or pavement.
"Temporary Structure or Building” A BUILDING not to be in existence for a period
of more than two years. A STRUCTURE not to be in existence for a period of more
than one year.
P3. District
The DISTRICT shall consist of one or more DISTRICT areas as listed in Section 13
(Appendices) of this Bylaw.
P4. Commission
4.1.1 The COMMISSION shall consist of seven (7) regular members appointed by
the Board of Selectmen to staggered three (3) year terms, such that three
members’ terms will expire in one year and two members terms will expire in
the second and third year, and so forth.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
84
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P4. Commission - continued
4.2 The COMMISSION shall include among its regular or alternate members, if
practical, an Acton property owner who resides in each of the three DISTRICT
areas, one Acton resident chosen from two nominees put forward by the Board of
Realtors covering Acton, one Acton resident chosen from two nominees put
forward by the chapter of the American Institute of Architects covering Acton, and
one Acton resident chosen from two nominees put forward by the Acton Historical
Society. If within thirty days after submission of a written request for nominees to
any of the organizations herein named insufficient nominations have been made,
the Board of Selectmen may proceed to make appointments as it desires.
4.3 The Board of Selectmen may at its sole discretion, appoint up to a maximum of
four (4) alternate members to the COMMISSION for three (3) year terms. The
available alternate member(s) with the longest continuous length of service as an
alternate may be substituted and vote on a one for one basis, in place of any
regular member(s) who may be absent or has/have an actual or apparent conflict
of interest, or in the case of a vacancy in the regular memberships.
4.4 Each member shall continue to serve in office after the expiration date of his or
her term until a successor is duly appointed.
4.5 Meetings of the COMMISSION shall be held at the call of the Chairman, at the
request of two members and in such other manner as the COMMISSION shall
determine in its Rules and Regulations.
4.6 A quorum is necessary for the COMMISSION to conduct a meeting. At least four
(4) members of the COMMISSION (or Alternate Members with voting rights as to
a matter(s) under consideration) must be present.
P5. Commission Powers and Duties
5.1 The COMMISSION shall exercise its powers in administering and regulating the
CONSTRUCTION and ALTERATION of any STRUCTURES or BUILDINGS within
the DISTRICT as set forth under the procedures and criteria established in this
Bylaw. In exercising its powers and duties hereunder, the COMMISSION shall
pay due regard to the distinctive characteristics of each BUILDING, STRUCTURE
and DISTRICT area.
5.2 The COMMISSION, after public hearing, may by vote of two thirds (2/3rds) of its
regular members (not to include alternate members) from time to time adopt, and
from time to time amend, reasonable Rules and Regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Bylaw or M.G.L. Chapter 40C, setting forth such forms and
procedures as it deems desirable and necessary for the regulation of its affairs
and the conduct of its business, including requirements for the contents and form
of applications for CERTIFICATES, fees, hearing procedures and other matters.
The COMMISSION shall file a copy of any such Rules and Regulations with the
office of the Town Clerk.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
85
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P5. Commission Powers and Duties - continued
5.3 The COMMISSION, after a public hearing duly posted and advertised at least 14
days in advance in a conspicuous place in Town Hall and in a newspaper of
general circulation in Acton, may adopt and from time to time amend guidelines
which set forth the designs for certain EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL
FEATURES which will meet the requirements of the DISTRICT. No such design
guidelines shall limit the right of an applicant for a CERTIFICATE to present other
designs to the COMMISSION for approval.
5.4 The COMMISSION shall at the beginning of each fiscal year hold an
organizational meeting and elect a Chairman, a Vice Chairman and Secretary,
and file notice of such election with the office of the Town Clerk.
5.5 The COMMISSION shall keep a permanent public record of its resolutions,
transactions, decisions and determinations and of the vote of each member
participating therein.
5.6 The COMMISSION shall undertake educational efforts to explain to the public
and property owners the merits and functions of a DISTRICT.
P6. Alterations and Construction Prohibited Without Certificate
6.1 No BUILDING or STRUCTURE, or any part thereof, which is within a DISTRICT
shall be CONSTRUCTED or ALTERED in any way which affects the EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES visible to the unaided eye from any point at a five
(5) foot elevation above the surface of the public way, on which the underlying lot
or property has frontage, that is no closer to the BUILDING or STRUCTURE than
the closest edge of pavement, or paved sidewalk if any unless the COMMISSION
shall have first issued a CERTIFICATE with respect to such CONSTRUCTION or
ALTERATION, except as this Bylaw otherwise provides
6.1.1 The following conceptual drawings are included to illustrate the review
jurisdiction limitation set forth in paragraph 6.1 above: The viewing areas
shown would be similarly applied to all buildings or structures on a property.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
86
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P6. Alterations and Construction Prohibited Without Certificate continued
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
87
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P6. Alterations and Construction Prohibited Without Certificate - continued
6.2 Where a lot containing such BUILDING or STRUCTURE has frontage on more
than one public way, the COMMISSION shall limit its review powers established
under this BYLAW to the public way from which the view of the BUILDING or
STRUCTURE is, in the opinion of the COMMISSION, most relevant to the
integrity of the DISTRICT. The COMMISSION may, with due notice to the owners
of those properties affected, make advance determinations of and provide the
Town Clerk a list of its determinations as to which public way views are generally
most relevant to the integrity of the various existing BUILDINGS in each
DISTRICT. In the event it is proposed to rely upon a different view than the
relevant and previously listed view when considering any particular application or
complaint as to any BUILDING, the burden is upon the COMMISSION, as part of
its decision, to adequately document in writing the reasons therefore.
6.3 No building permit for CONSTRUCTION of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE or for
ALTERATION of an EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE within a DISTRICT
and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a BUILDING or
STRUCTURE within a DISTRICT shall be issued by the Town or any department
thereof until a CERTIFICATE as required under this Bylaw has been issued by the
COMMISSION.
P7. Procedures for Review of Applications
7.1 Any person who desires to obtain a CERTIFICATE from the COMMISSION shall
file with the Town Clerk and the COMMISSION an application for a CERTIFICATE
of Appropriateness, or non-Applicability or of Hardship as the case may be. The
application shall be accompanied by such plans, elevations, specifications,
material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a
statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as
may be reasonably deemed necessary by the COMMISSION to enable it to make
a determination on the application. The date of the filing of an application shall be
the date on which a copy of such application is received by the office of the Town
Clerk.
7.2 The COMMISSION may appoint one or more of its members to initially and
privately screen applications for CERTIFICATES to informally determine whether
any application includes and/or is submitted with sufficient information upon which
the COMMISSION may reasonably take its required actions. Within fourteen (14)
days following the first filing of an application for a CERTIFICATE with the Town
Clerk, the COMMISSION or its appointee/s may determine without need for a
public hearing, that insufficient information has been provided, in which case the
application may be once returned to the submitting party, with written advice as to
what was considered to be lacking, and the applicant will then thereafter be
required to re-file the application before any further COMMISSION action is
required. Any second filing of essentially the same application must be formally
acted upon by the COMMISSION as is otherwise provided in this Bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
88
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P7. Procedures for Review of Applications - continued
7.3 The COMMISSION shall determine within fourteen (14) days of the filing of an
application for a CERTIFICATE whether said application involves any EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES which are within the jurisdiction of the
COMMISSION.
7.4 If the COMMISSION determines that an application for a CERTIFICATE does not
involve any EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES, or involves an
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE which is not subject to review by the
COMMISSION under the provisions of this Bylaw, the COMMISSION shall
forthwith issue a CERTIFICATE of Non-Applicability.
7.5 If the COMMISSION determines that such an application involves any EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE subject to review under this Bylaw, it shall hold a
public hearing on the application, except as may otherwise be provided in this
Bylaw. The COMMISSION shall hold such a public hearing within forty-five (45)
days from the date of the filing of the application. At least fourteen (14) days
before said public hearing, public notice shall be given by posting in a
conspicuous place in Town Hall and in a newspaper of general circulation in
Acton. Such notice shall identify the time, place and purpose of the public
hearing. Concurrently, a copy of said public notice shall be mailed to the
applicant, to the owners of all adjoining properties and of other properties deemed
by the COMMISSION to be materially affected thereby, all as they appear on the
most recent applicable tax list, to the Planning Board, to any person filing a written
request for notice of hearings, such request to be renewed yearly in December,
and to such other persons as the COMMISSION shall deem entitled to notice.
7.5.1 A public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE need not be held if
such hearing is waived in writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof.
In addition, a public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE may be
waived by the COMMISSION if the COMMISSION determines that the
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE involved, or its category, is so
insubstantial in its effect on the DISTRICT that it may be reviewed by the
COMMISSION without a public hearing. If the COMMISSION dispenses
with a public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE, notice of such
application shall be given to the owners of all adjoining property and of
other property deemed by the COMMISSION to be materially affected
thereby as above provided, and ten (10) days shall elapse after the mailing
of such notice before the COMMISSION may act upon such application.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
89
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P7. Procedures for Review of Applications - continued
7.6 The COMMISSION shall grant a CERTIFICATE, or issue a written decision, within
sixty (60) days from the date the pertinent application was filed (or re-filed in the
event the application was once returned for lack of information), unless the
applicant consents in writing to a specific enlargement of time by which such an
issuance may occur. In the absence of any such enlargement of time, should an
issuance not be forthcoming within the prescribed time, the applicant is entitled as
of right to a CERTIFICATE of Hardship.
7.6.1 If the CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION for which an application for a
CERTIFICATE of Appropriateness has been filed shall be determined to be
inappropriate and therefore disapproved, or in the event of an application for
a CERTIFICATE of Hardship, the COMMISSION shall determine whether,
owning to conditions especially affecting the BUILDING or STRUCTURE
involved, but not affecting the DISTRICT generally, failure to approve an
application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the
applicant and whether such application may be approved without substantial
detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the
intent and purposes of this Bylaw. If the Commission determines that owing
to such conditions failure to approve an application will involve substantial
hardship to the applicant and approval thereof may be made without such
substantial detriment or derogation, the COMMISSION shall issue a
CERTIFICATE of Hardship.
7.7 By the concurring vote of at least four members who were present throughout any
relevant public hearing and the COMMISSION’S discussion leading up to its
finding, the COMMISSION must adopt a specific written findings setting forth the
basis on which it was initially determined that the application in question involved
an EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE subject to approval by the
COMMISSION and may then:
A. Grant an appropriate CERTIFICATE for the work to be performed, to remain
effective regardless of any subsequent change in the ownership of the
property; or
B. Grant an appropriate CERTIFICATE for the work to be performed, to remain
effective regardless of any subsequent change in the ownership of the
property, with conditions and limitations requiring architectural or plan
modifications as to those matters not excluded under Section P9 of this Bylaw
which are within the COMMISSION’S review jurisdiction; or
C. Deny the application with a written statement of the basis for the denial, at
which time it may provide written recommendations for changes not excluded
from the jurisdiction of the COMMISSION by Section P9 of this Bylaw which,
in a subsequent application, might be acceptable to the COMMISSION; or
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
90
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P7.7 Procedures for Review of Applications - continued
D. Deny the application with a fact specific written statement of the basis for the
denial without further recommendations, if essentially the same application
has previously been the subject of a prior denial accompanied by written
recommendations pursuant to sub-paragraph 7.7C above.
7.8 Should the COMMISSION, during the course of reviewing an application, find that
it does not have review jurisdiction under this Bylaw it shall make an appropriate
finding of Non-Applicability.
7.9 Each CERTIFICATE or written decision upon an application by the COMMISSION
shall be dated and signed by the Chairperson or such other person as the
COMMISSION may designate and shall be deemed issued upon filing with the
Town Clerk.
7.10 Each CERTIFICATE or written decision upon an application by the COMMISSION
shall be promptly served on the applicant by the Town Clerk who shall promptly
forward a copy thereof to the applicant at the address shown on the application,
by first class mail, postage prepaid, and a copy shall be further provided to the
Building Commissioner, Planning Board and Board of Selectmen.
7.11 Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be deemed to preclude any person
contemplating construction or alteration of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE within a
DISTRICT from consulting informally with the COMMISSION before submitting
any application referred to in this bylaw on any matter which might possibly be
within the scope of the Bylaw. Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be deemed to
preclude the COMMISSION from offering informal advice to a potential applicant
prior to receiving an application. However, any such preliminary advice offered by
the COMMISSION shall not be deemed to set a precedent nor in any way limit the
COMMISSION in the exercise of its functions under this bylaw.
P8. Criteria for Determinations
8.1 In deliberating on applications for CERTIFICATES, the COMMISSION shall
consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance
of the site, BUILDING or STRUCTURE; the general design, proportions, detailing,
mass, arrangement, texture, and material of the EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL
FEATURES involved; and the relation of such EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL
FEATURES to similar features of BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES in the
surrounding area.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
91
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P8. Criteria for Determinations - continued
8.2 In the case of new CONSTRUCTION or additions to existing BUILDINGS or
STRUCTURES, the COMMISSION shall consider the appropriateness of the
scale, shape and proportion of the BUILDINGS or STRUCTURE both in relation to
the land area upon which the BUILDING or STRUCTURE is situated and in
relation to BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES in the vicinity. The COMMISSION may
in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to
those required by applicable statute or bylaw, however, such requirements shall
not further limit the maximum floor area ratio and height of a BUILDING as defined
and permitted in the Acton Zoning Bylaw.
8.3 When ruling on applications for CERTIFICATES on solar energy systems as
defined in Section 1A of Chapter 40A, the COMMISSION shall consider the policy
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to encourage the use of solar energy
systems and to protect solar access.
8.4 The COMMISSION shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural
features not subject to public view.
8.5 The COMMISSION shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for
the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the
architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the DISTRICT.
8.6 The COMMISSION may impose requirements on the screening and location of
above ground features of septage systems. Such requirements shall not conflict
with requirements of the Acton Board of Health.
P9. Exclusions
9.1 The COMMISSION’S review jurisdiction shall not include the following:
9.1.1 Temporary BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, seasonal decorations or SIGNS
subject, however, to conditions pertaining to the duration of existence and
use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the COMMISSION
may reasonably specify.
9.1.2 Terraces, walks, patios, driveways, sidewalks and similar STRUCTURES,
provided that any such STRUCTURE is SUBSTANTIALLY AT GRADE
LEVEL.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
92
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P9. Exclusions - continued
9.1.3 The number of the residents’ personally owned or leased and regularly used
motor vehicles which may be routinely parked within the boundaries of a
residential property. However, in those circumstances and not withstanding
the provisions of Section 9.1.2, the COMMISSION shall retain limited review
jurisdiction in regard to measures that would minimize the visual impact, as
viewed from the public way, of any expansion of, or portions of, driveways or
other STRUCTURES SUBSTANTIALLY AT GRADE LEVEL which are
intended as parking spaces for more than four (4) motor vehicles.
9.1.4 Storm windows and doors, screen windows and doors, and window air
conditioners.
9.1.5 The color of paint applied to the exterior surfaces of BUILDINGS or
STRUCTURES.
9.1.6 The color of materials used on roofs.
9.1.7 Signs of not more than two (2) square feet in DISPLAY AREA in connection
with use of a residence for a customary home occupation or for professional
purposes, provided only one such sign is displayed in connection with each
residence and if illuminated is illuminated only indirectly; and one sign in
connection with the nonresidential use of each BUILDING or STRUCTURE
which is not more than six (6) square feet in DISPLAY AREA, consists of
letters painted on wood without symbol or trademark and if illuminated is
illuminated indirectly.
9.1.8 The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a BUILDING,
STRUCTURE or EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE damaged or
destroyed by fire, storm, or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is
begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.
9.1.9 The point of access served by handicapped access ramps designed solely for
the purpose of facilitating ingress or egress of a physically handicapped
person, as defined in M.G.L. c.22 s13A.
9.1.10 Non-traditional material(s), providing that the difference between such
material(s) and traditional material(s) cannot, upon review by the
COMMISSION, be reasonably discerned by the unaided eye from the
viewpoint(s) upon which the COMMISSION’s power of review is based.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
93
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P9. Exclusions - continued
9.2 Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to prevent the following;
9.2.1 Ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE within a DISTRICT which does not Involve a
change in design, material or the outward appearance thereof.
9.2.2 Landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs.
9.2.3 The meeting of requirements certified by a duly authorized public officer to
be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe, unhealthful or
dangerous condition.
9.2.4 Any CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION under a permit duly issued prior to
the effective date of this Bylaw.
9.3 Upon request the COMMISSION shall issue a CERTIFICATE of Non-Applicability
with respect to CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION in any category not subject to
review by the COMMISSION in accordance with the above provisions.
P10. Categorical Approval
10.1 The COMMISSION may determine from time to time after a public hearing, duly
advertised and posted at least fourteen (14) days in advance in a conspicuous
place in Town Hall and in a newspaper of general circulation in Acton, that certain
categories of EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES, STRUCTURES or
BUILDINGS under certain conditions may be CONSTRUCTED or ALTERED
without review by the COMMISSION without causing substantial derogation from
the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
P11. Enforcement and Penalties
11.1 No Building Permit shall be issued for the CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION of
any BUILDING or STRUCTURE wholly or partially in a DISTRICT unless a
CERTIFICATE has first been issued by the COMMISSION when such a
CERTIFICATE is required by this Bylaw.
11.2 No ALTERATION or CONSTRUCTION of any BUILDING or STRUCTURE
wholly or partially in a DISTRICT for which a CERTIFICATE is required by this
Bylaw shall deviate from the terms and conditions of such a CERTIFICATE.
11.3 The Building Commissioner of the Town of Acton shall enforce this Bylaw upon a
determination by the COMMISSION that a violation exists, and subject to the
approval of the Board of Selectmen, may institute proceedings in Superior Court
pursuant to M.G.L. c.40C § 13 for injunctive or other relief and/or imposition of
fines.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
94
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P11. Enforcement and Penalties - continued
11.4 The COMMISSION, upon a written complaint challenging some enforcement
action by the Building Commissioner, received by the Town Clerk within five (5)
days following such decision, by a PERSON AGGRIEVED, or other citizen of or
property owner in the Town of Acton, shall hold a timely public hearing to
determine whether or not the Building Commissioner’s action should be upheld,
in whole or in part.
11.5 Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense under the
provisions of M.G.L. c.40C § 13, or alternatively under #E45 of the Town of
Acton Bylaws. Each day during any portion of which such violation continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
P12. Appeals
12.1 An appeal of a determination of the COMMISSION, except as to the propriety of
a decision to invoke the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40C § 13 (institution of an action
in Superior Court) by the Building Commissioner, may be taken by a PERSON
AGGRIEVED by filing a written request with the Town Clerk, acting as an agent
of the COMMISSION, within twenty (20) days of the issuance of a CERTIFICATE
or a disapproval. In the event of such an appeal, the Acton Town Manager, or
his delegate, shall make a timely request to the Metropolitan Area Planning
Council that it promptly designate an arbitrator(s) with competence and
experience in such matters to hear such an appeal. If such a person(s) is/are so
designated he/she/they must hear the appeal in a timely manner and issue a
written decision within forty-five (45) days of the request as specified in M.G.L. c.
40C § 12. The arbitration decision shall be binding on the parties, unless a
Complaint seeking a further appeal is filed in Superior Court within twenty (20)
days from the filing of the arbitration decision with the Town Clerk, pursuant to
M.G.L. c. 40C § 12A.
P.13. Validity and Separability
13.1 The provisions of this Bylaw shall be deemed to be separable. If any of its
provisions, sections, subsections, sentences or clauses shall be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this Bylaw shall continue to be in full force and effect.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
95
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P14. Appendices
Appendix 1: South Acton District
The South Acton District shall be a DISTRICT area under this Bylaw. The location
and boundaries of the South Acton District are defined and shown on the Local
Historic District Map of the Town of Acton, Sheet 1 - 1990 which is a part of this bylaw.
Sheet 1 is based on the 1989 Town Atlas. The delineation of the DISTRICT area
boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein,
except as otherwise apparent on Sheet 1.
Appendix 2: Acton Centre District
The Acton Centre District shall be a DISTRICT area under this Bylaw. The location
and boundaries of the Acton Centre District are defined and shown on the Local
Historic District Map of the Town of Acton, Sheet 2 - 1990 which is a part of this bylaw.
Sheet 2 is based on the 1989 Town Atlas. The delineation of the DISTRICT area
boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein,
except as otherwise apparent on Sheet 2.
Appendix 3: West Acton District
The West Acton District shall be a DISTRICT area under this Bylaw. The location and
boundaries of the West Acton District are defined and shown on the Local Historic
District Map of the Town of Acton, Sheet 3 - 1990 which is a part of this Bylaw. Sheet
3 is based on the 1989 Town Atlas. The delineation of the DISTRICT area boundaries
is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein, except as
otherwise apparent on Sheet 3.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
96
C H A P T E R Q
FINANCIAL CONDITION REPORTS
Local School Committee Financial Condition Reports to the Finance Committee
1.1 The Board of Selectmen shall direct the Local School Committee, or its designee,
to submit to the Finance Committee a quarterly financial report, due no later than
45 days from the end of the quarter, making the Dec. 31 report due Feb. 15, the
March 31 report due May 15, the June 30 report containing all fiscal year end
results due August 15, and the Sept. 30 report due Nov 15, and the report shall
give an accounting of:
1.1A all Local School Committee revenue of whatever type, including but limited
to tax revenue, receipts, fees, fines, etc., receipts of all revolving funds,
enterprise funds, gifts, grants, trust funds, and entrepreneurial activities, and
giving a comparison with projected revenue for the current fiscal year;
1.1B all Local School Committee expenditures of whatever type, including but not
limited to expenses charged to: all items listed in the revenue accounting;
tax receipts; fees, fines, etc. Paid to the town; all revolving funds; all
enterprise funds; gifts and grants to the Local School Committee; all
entrepreneurial activities, and giving a comparison with projected
expenditure for the current fiscal year;
1.1C the current balance of each fund maintained by the Local School
Committee, including but not limited to all general funds, all revolving funds,
all enterprise funds, all gift funds, all grant funds, all entrepreneurial
balances, and all trust funds; the beginning balance of each fund; and, the
sources and uses of each fund.
1.2 The format of the Local School Committee FINANCIAL REPORT TO THE
FINCOM shall: include a presentation reflecting the Local School Committee
Object Budget, that is present spending by cost code; include a presentation
reflecting the Local School Committee Departmental budget with all Departmental
line items; substantially reflect all revolving, enterprise, and trust funds;
substantially reflect all spending authorized the Local School Committee Warrant
Article; give the fiscal year beginning balance and the current balance of each fund
reported; and, provide a means to compare trends in revenue and spending over a
time period of at least five years.
1.3 The Finance Committee shall make all reports received under this article available
to the public.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
97
CHAPTER Q FINANCIAL CONDITION REPORTS CONTINUED
Town Financial condition Reports to the Finance Committee
2.1 The Board of Selectmen, or its designee, shall submit to the Finance Committee a
quarterly financial report, due no later than 45 days from the end of the quarter,
making the Dec. 31 report due Feb. 15, the March 31 report due May 15, the June
30 report containing all fiscal year end results due August 15, and the Sept. 30
report due Nov 15, and the report shall give an accounting of:
2.1A All Town revenue of whatever type, including but not limited to tax revenue
receipts, fees, fines, etc., receipts of all revolving funds, enterprise funds,
gifts, grants, trust funds, and entrepreneurial activities, and giving a
comparison with projected revenue for the current fiscal year;
2.1B All Town expenditures of whatever type, including but not limited to
expenses charged to: all items listed in the revenue accounting; tax
receipts; fees, fines, etc. paid to the town; all revolving funds; all enterprise
funds; gifts and grants to the Town; all entrepreneurial activities, and giving
a comparison with projected expenditure for the current fiscal year;
2.1C the current balance of each fund maintained by the Town, including but not
limited to all general funds, all revolving funds, all enterprise funds, all gift
funds, all grant funds, all entrepreneurial balances, and all trust funds; the
beginning balance of each fund; and, the sources and uses of each fund.
2.2 The format of the TOWN FINANCIAL REPORT TO THE FINCOM shall: include a
presentation reflecting the Town Object Budget, that is present spending by cost
code; include a presentation reflecting the Town Departmental Budget with all
Departmental line items; substantially reflect all revolving, enterprise, and trust
funds; shall substantially reflect all spending authorized by Town Warrant Article;
shall give the fiscal year beginning balance and the current balance of each fund
reported; and, shall provide a means to compare trends in revenue and spending
over a time period of a least five years.
2.3 The Finance Committee shall make all reports received under this article available
to the public.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
98
C H A P T E R R
GROUND WATER CLEANUP STANDARDS
1. Authority
This Bylaw is adopted by the Town of Acton under its Home Rule Authority pursuant to
Article 89, Section 6 of the Amendments to the Massachusetts Constitution (the Home
Rule Amendment), its police powers to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and its
authorization under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40, Section 21, and its
authority to plan for the prevention, control and abatement of water pollution under
M.G.L. c. 21, § 27 (1).
2. Purpose
The purpose of this Bylaw is to protect, preserve, improve and maintain the Town of
Acton’s existing and potential public drinking water sources and to assure public health
and safety through the application of stringent environmental ground water quality clean
up standards which assure restoration of any contaminated water resources area
covered by this Bylaw to a fully useable condition.
3. Recitations
3.1 The Town of Acton relies exclusively on groundwater sources within the Town as
its sole source of public drinking water for residents, businesses and industries in
the Town.
3.2 There have been a number of documented releases and threats of release within
the Town of “oil” and “hazardous material” as those terms are defined under
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 21E and the Massachusetts Contingency
Plan, 310 CMR 40.0000 et.seq. (the “MCP”).
3.3 Groundwater that serves as Acton’s public water supply has been contaminated
or threatened by various releases and threats of release within the Town of “oil”
and “hazardous material”.
3.4 Multiple contaminants in groundwater and/or multiple pathways of exposure to
such contaminants has presented and continues to present extraordinary risks to
Acton’s present and future public drinking water supply sources.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
99
CHAPTER R GROUND WATER CLEANUP STANDARDS CONTINUED
4. Definitions
The following terms shall have the following meanings in this Bylaw:
4.1 “Contaminant” means any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance
or matter in water. See 42 U.S.C. § 300f(6). The term “Contaminant” includes,
without limitation, any material or substance defined as “oil” or “hazardous
material” under Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 21E or the Massachusetts
Contingency Plan, 310 CMR 40.0000 et seq. (the “MCP”).
4.2 “DEP” means the Department of Environmental Protection, its predecessors and/or
its successors.
4.3 “Zone 1” shall be that area defined as “Zone 1 - The Wellhead Protection Area” by
Section 4.3.2.1 of the Acton Zoning Bylaw’s Groundwater Protection District
Regulations.
4.4 “DEP Approved Wellhead Protection Area” means the protective radius around a
public water supply well or wellhead which has been approved by DEP as show on
a DEP Bureau of Waste Site Cleanup Map of the Town of Acton dated October 25,
1996 produced by Mass. GIS and on file with the Town Clerk of the Town of Acton.
In the event of a conflict between Section 4.3 and Section 4.4 hereof, the broader
shall control.
4.5 “Zone 2” means that area of an aquifer which contributes water to a well under the
most severe pumping and recharge conditions that can be realistically anticipated
(180 days of pumping at safe yield, with no recharge from precipitation). See 310
CMR 22.02. Zone 2 shall include (a) all areas in the Town of Acton defined as
“Zone 2 - The Recharge Protection Area” by Section 4.3.2.2 of the Acton Zoning
Bylaw’s Groundwater Protection District regulations, and (b) all areas in the Town
of Acton depicted as Zone 2 as shown on a DEP Bureau of Waste Site Cleanup
Map of the Town of Acton dated October 25, 1996 produced by Mass. GIS and on
file with the Town Clerk of the Town of Acton. In the event of a conflict between
Section 4.5(a), Section 4.5(b) and/or Section 4.6 hereof, the broader shall control.
4.6 “IWPA” means the Interim Wellhead Protection Area, an area extending to a onehalf
mile radius from a public water supply wellhead with an approved pumping
rate of 100,000 gallons per day or greater, that is intended to protect the wellhead
pending the delineation of its Zone 2, as shown on a DEP Bureau of Waste Site
Cleanup Map of the Town of Acton dated October 25, 1996 produced by Mass.
GIS and on file with the Town Clerk of the Town of Acton. See 310 CMR 22.02.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
100
CHAPTER R GROUND WATER CLEANUP STANDARDS CONTINUED
4. Definitions - continued
4.7 “Fully useable condition” means that, with respect to any Resource Area covered
by this Bylaw, Contaminant levels meet or surpass in cleanness on a permanent
basis Groundwater Cleanup Standards established by this Bylaw throughout the
Resource Area for each and every Contaminant.
4.8 “Potentially productive aquifer(s)” means all aquifers within Acton delineated by
the U.S. Geological Survey as a high or medium yield aquifer, as shown on a DEP
Bureau of Waste Site Cleanup Map of the Town of Acton dated October 25, 1996
produced by Mass. GIS and on file with the Town Clerk of the Town of Acton. See
310 CMR 40.0006.
4.9 “Cleanup” means any response action, removal action or remedial action
undertaken pursuant to any federal or state environmental law, rule, regulation,
order or decree involving the clean up or removal of any contaminant from the
environment, including, without limitation, from land, waters and/or groundwaters.
4.10 “Ground Water Cleanup Standards” means the groundwater quality standards
adopted by the Town of Acton pursuant to this Bylaw and are as follows: (1)
Maximum Contaminant Level Goals (“MCLGs”) established under the Safe
Drinking Water Act for each Contaminant for which an MCLG has been
established, see 40 CFR § § 141.50 - 141.52. and (2) where an MCLG for a
specific Contaminant is zero, or where an MCLG for a specific Contaminant has
not been promulgated, 1 part per billion ("ppb") for any such volatile organic
compound ("VOC") and 5ppb total for all such VOC's.
4.11 “Resource Area” means and includes each and all of the following areas in the
Town of Acton:
a. Zone 1 of all public water supply wells,
b. All DEP Approved Wellhead Protection Areas,
c. Zone 2 of all public water supply wells,
d. ALL IWPAs for a Public Water Supply, and
e. All Potentially Productive Aquifers.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
101
CHAPTER R GROUND WATER CLEANUP STANDARDS CONTINUED
5. Scope
Any Cleanup performed in the Town of Acton by a person potentially liable under
Section 5(a) of General Laws Chapter 21E on, in, at, of or affecting any Resource
Area(s) shall on a permanent basis meet or surpass in cleanness the Ground Water
Clean Up Standards established by this Bylaw throughout the Resource Area for each
and every Contaminant for which the Cleanup is or has been undertaken.
6. Application of Ground Water Cleanup Standards
All sampled locations throughout the Resource Area shall meet the Ground Water
Clean Up Standards established by this Bylaw. No averaging of samples may be used
to determine compliance with the Ground Water Cleanup Standards for any particular
sampling point, Resource Area or any combination of Resource Areas. All Resource
Areas which undergo a Cleanup must be restored to a fully useable condition.
7. Enforcement
The Board of Selectmen is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this
Bylaw. Pursuant to G.L. Chapter 40, Section 21, breach of this Bylaw shall be
punishable by a penalty of three hundred dollars ($300.00) for each offense. Each day
during which a breach of this Bylaw continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Without limitation, it shall constitute a breach of this Bylaw to discontinue for more than
thirty (30) days or to abandon a Cleanup of a Resource Area without meeting the
Groundwater Cleanup Standards of this Bylaw. Any breach of this Bylaw shall be
deemed to cause irreparable harm to the Town of Acton and its citizens, residents, and
persons employed in the Town, entitling the Town of Acton to all appropriate injunctive
relief in addition to all other available remedies provided by law.
8. Variance From Groundwater Cleanup Standards
The Board of Selectmen shall have the power, after public hearing for which notice has
been given by publication and posting , by mailing to the applicant, all abutters, all
abutters to abutters, and the Acton Water District Commissioners, to grant upon petition
with respect to a particular Cleanup a variance from the Groundwater Cleanup
Standards of this Bylaw where the Board of Selectmen specifically finds that desirable
relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good and without
nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this Bylaw. In
determining whether to grant such a variance, the Board of Selectmen should consider
the following:
(i) the ability of the applicant to demonstrate that its contribution to a discharge,
release, or disposal of the Contaminants at issue can be distinguished from the
contribution of other parties;
(ii) the amount and concentration of the contaminants involved;
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
102
CHAPTER R GROUND WATER CLEANUP STANDARDS CONTINUED
8. Variance From Groundwater Cleanup Standards - continued
(iii) the degree of toxicity and the fate and transport of the contaminants involved;
(iv) the degree of involvement by the applicant in the generation, transportation,
treatment, storage, or disposal of the contaminants involved;
(v) the degree of care exercised by the applicant with respect to the contaminants
concerned, taking into account the characteristics of such contaminants;
(vi) the degree of cooperation by the applicant with the Federal, State or local
officials to prevent any harm to the public health, safety, welfare, or
environment;
(vii) alternatives proposed by the applicant to protect the public health, safety,
welfare and the environment including, without limitation, any prospective
contribution by the applicant to costs of treatment of the affected groundwater
before its distribution within Acton's public water supply; and
(viii) whether achievement of the Ground Water Cleanup Standards is technologically
infeasible or not cost-effective based on the limits of best available technology,
the marginal costs, the marginal benefits, and the risks to the public health,
safety, welfare and the environment.
The Board of Selectmen may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations in such a
variance to protect the public health, safety, welfare and the environment and to
effectuate the purposes of this Bylaw.
9. Applicability
This Bylaw shall apply to any existing, ongoing or proposed Cleanup to the maximum
extent permitted by law.
10. Severability
If any part of this Bylaw is adjudicated invalid, the remaining parts shall remain in full
force and effect. If this Bylaw is adjudicated invalid or inapplicable in any area or zone, it
shall remain valid and applicable to the maximum geographical extent possible.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
103
CHAPTER S
COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE
Section 1. Establishment; appointment of members; membership; terms of office
1.1 There is hereby established, pursuant to the Community Preservation Act, a
Community Preservation Committee (“Committee”) consisting of nine (9) voting
members. The composition of the Committee, the appointing authority and the terms of
office for the Committee members shall be as follows:
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the Conservation
Commission for a term of three years;
One member of the Historical Commission as designated by the Historical
Commission for a term of three years;
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Planning Board for an
initial term of two years and thereafter a term of three years;
One member of the Recreation Commission as designated by the Recreation
Commission for an initial term of two years and thereafter a term of three years;
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the Housing Authority for a
term of three years;
One member of the Board of Selectmen as designated by the Board of Selectmen
for an initial term of one year and thereafter for a term of three years;
Three members at-large to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen who are legal
residents of the Town of Acton, two members at-large to be appointed for one year
and thereafter for a term of three years, and one member at-large to be appointed
for two years and thereafter for a term of three years.
1.2 If a person designated by one of the boards, commissions, or authorities set forth
above, no longer serves on the appointing authority, the appointing authority may
appoint a new member to complete that term if the existing member no longer wishes to
serve on the Committee. Otherwise, that member may complete his or her term on the
Committee. If any of the commissions, boards or authorities listed in this section no
longer be in existence for whatever reason, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint a
person with similar experience and responsibilities to serve in his or her place.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
104
CHAPTER S COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE CONTINUED
Section 1. Establishment; appointment of members; membership; terms of officecontinued
1.3 In addition to the members of the Committee set forth in Section 1.1, the
Committee may include up to two associate members who are legal residents of the
Town of Acton. Associate members shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen for
one-year terms. The chairperson of the Committee may designate any such associate
member to sit on the Committee for any particular matter(s) in the case of an absence,
inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any member at-large, or in the event
of a vacancy in a member at-large position on the Committee, until said vacancy is
filled.
Section 2: Meetings; quorum; chairman
2.1 The Committee shall comply with the provisions of the Open Meeting Law (MGL c.
39 §23B). The Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a
quorum, which shall be a majority of members of the Committee. The Committee shall
approve its actions by a majority vote of the members present, except as otherwise
required by law.
2.2 At the first meeting of each fiscal year, the Committee shall elect a chairperson, a
vice chairperson, and a clerk by majority vote. These officers shall not be associate
members
Section 3: Duties
3.1 The Committee shall study the needs, possibilities, resources, and preferences of
the town regarding community preservation. The Committee shall consult with existing
municipal boards, including, but not limited to, the Conservation Commission, Historical
Commission, Historic District Commission, Planning Board, Recreation Commission,
Housing Authority, Acton Community Housing Corporation, Finance Committee and
Board of Selectmen in conducting such study. The Committee may consult with other
town boards, committees, and commissions as it sees fit. The Committee shall hold at
least one (1) public informational hearing each year on the needs, possibilities and
resources of the town regarding community preservation for which it shall publicly post
notice by the Town Clerk and publish such notice in a newspaper of general circulation
in town for each of the two weeks preceding the hearing.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
105
CHAPTER S COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE CONTINUED
Section 3: Duties - continued
3.2 The Committee shall make recommendations in proper form to Town Meeting for
the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for the acquisition,
preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of historic resources; for the acquisition,
creation, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration of land for recreational use; for the
acquisition, creation, preservation and support of community housing; and for the
rehabilitation or restoration of open space, and community housing that is acquired or
created with funds received in accordance with the Community Preservation Act, MGL
Chapter 44B, Sections 1 to 17, as amended; provided, however, that funds expended
pursuant to this chapter shall not be used for maintenance. With respect to community
housing, the Committee shall recommend, whenever possible, the reuse of existing
buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites.
3.3 The Committee shall engage in public discussion of all proposed acquisitions prior
to the Town Meeting at which such acquisitions will be considered.
3.4 In each fiscal year, the Committee shall recommend spending, or setting aside for
later spending, not less than 10% of the annual revenues in the Community
Preservation Fund for each of open space, historic resources, and community housing.
The Committee may also recommend an appropriation of not more than 5% of the
annual revenues of the Community Preservation Fund for the Committee’s
administrative and operating expenses. The Committee shall report each year to the
Town Meeting on its actual expenditures and anticipated expenditures for administration
and operating costs.
3.5 The Committee may recommend to Town Meeting that funds be set aside for later
spending for specific purposes consistent with the Community Preservation Act, when
sufficient revenues are not then available in the Community Preservation Fund, or for
general purposes that are consistent with Community Preservation.
3.6 Recommendations to Town Meeting shall include the anticipated costs of the
proposed appropriation consistent with the Community Preservation Act and a
description of the project. In addition to approving appropriations from the Community
Preservation Fund as recommended by the Committee, Town Meeting may approve
such additional appropriations to meet the objectives of the Community Preservation
Act as it deems appropriate.
3.7 The Committee may recommend to Town Meeting that it authorize the taking of the
fee or any other interest in real property, in accordance with Chapter 79 of the
Massachusetts General laws for any of the purposes of the Community Preservation
Act.
3.8 The Committee shall keep a full and accurate account of all of its actions
including its recommendations and the action taken on them, and records of all
appropriations or expenditures made from the Community Preservation Fund. The
records of the Committee shall be public records, to the full extent provided by law.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
106
CHAPTER S COMMUNITY PRESERVATION COMMITTEE CONTINUED
Section 4: Town Meeting, Legislative Body
4.1 All duties and responsibilities of the legislative body as set forth in the Community
Preservation Act shall be vested in the Town of Acton's legislative body, Town Meeting.
4.2 In performing the duties and responsibilities of the legislative body as set forth in
the Community Preservation Act, Town Meeting shall act pursuant to and in accordance
with the requirements of the Community Preservation Act, the Town of Acton Charter
and any applicable Town of Acton Bylaws, as from time to time amended.
4.3 Subject to and without limitation of the foregoing, in performing the duties and
responsibilities of the legislative body as set forth in the Community Preservation Act,
Town Meeting shall, in its sole and absolute discretion, have the power and authority to
accept, reject, or modify, in whole or part, any recommendation of the Community
Preservation Committee.
Section 5: Amendments
5.1 This Chapter may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of the Town
Meeting, provided that such amendments would not cause a conflict to occur with the
Community Preservation Act.
Section 6: Severability
6.1 In case any section, paragraph or part of this chapter be for any reason declared
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or
part shall continue in full force and effect
Section 7: Effective Date
7.1 This chapter shall take effect upon approval by the Attorney General of the
Commonwealth and after all requirements of MGL Chapter 40, §32 and Chapter 44B
Section 3-7 inclusive have been met. Each appointing authority shall have 30 days
after approval by the Attorney General and the town election whichever come later to
make its appointments.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
107
C H A P T E R T
“CARRY-IN” ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES BYLAW
1. Definitions
For purposes of this bylaw, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
“Board” shall mean the Board of Selectmen acting as the Town’s local licensing
authority for common victuallers under chapter 140 of the General Laws.
“Bylaw” shall mean this bylaw applicable to Carry-In Permission for alcoholic
beverages to restaurants operated by common victuallers.
“Carry-In Permission” shall mean permission granted by the Board to a common
victualler under this bylaw to allow alcoholic beverages to be brought by patrons and
customers into and consumed in a restaurant which is owned, operated, leased,
maintained or otherwise controlled by the common victualler.
“Common Victualler” shall mean a person duly licensed under the provisions of
chapter 140 of the General Laws to conduct a restaurant.
“Alcoholic Beverages” shall mean alcoholic beverages as defined in chapter 138,
section 1 of the General Laws.
“Restaurant” shall mean a restaurant as defined in chapter 138, section 1 of the
General Laws.
2. General Rules
No common victualler shall permit alcoholic beverages to be consumed in a restaurant
which is owned, operated, leased, maintained or otherwise controlled by the common
victualler except pursuant to a valid license issued under the provisions of chapter 138
of the General Laws or pursuant to and in strict conformity with this bylaw and
regulations adopted by the Board pursuant to this bylaw.
3. Carry-In Permission for Alcoholic Beverages
The Board may grant Carry-In Permission to a common victualler to allow alcoholic
beverages to be brought by patrons and customers into and consumed in a restaurant
which is owned, operated, leased, maintained or otherwise controlled by the common
victualler provided that:
a. Application for such Carry-In Permission shall be made to the Board at the time of
the initial or renewal application for a common victualler’s license or any time
during a calendar year for the initial application for Carry-In Permission for an
existing establishment having a common victualler’s license.
b. The applicant for such Carry-In Permission shall not be less than twenty-one years
of age and must be a person of good character in the Town.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
108
CHAPTER T “Carry-In” Intoxicating Beverages Bylaw CONTINUED
3. Carry-In Permission for Alcoholic Beverages - continued
c. No Carry-In Permission shall be issued to any applicant who has been convicted of
a violation of a federal or state narcotic drugs law.
d. No Carry-In Permission shall be issued to any fast food restaurant, defined as a
restaurant with seating but no table service.
e. No Carry-In Permission shall be issued to any applicant who has a license for the
restaurant issued under the provisions of chapter 138 of the General Laws.
f. No Carry-In Permission shall be issued to any applicant whose license for the
restaurant issued under the provisions of chapter 138 of the General Laws has
been suspended or revoked, or to any person, firm, corporation, association or
other combination of persons affiliated, directly or indirectly, with such licensee
through any agent, employee, stockholder, officer or other person, or any
subsidiary whatsoever.
g. Before approving or renewing Carry-In Permission, the Board may cause an
examination or examinations to be made of the premises of the applicant or may
otherwise review such evidence as the Board deems credible to determine
whether such premises comply in all respects with the appropriate definitions of
section one and whether activities conducted on the premises comply in all
respects with the provisions of this Bylaw. The Board may deny Carry-In
Permission or renewal of Carry-In Permission to any applicant where the premises
and/or the activities conducted on the premises do not in the Board’s judgment so
comply.
h. The Board may refuse to grant Carry-In Permission in certain geographical areas
of the Town, where the character of the neighborhood may warrant such refusal.
i. The common victualler shall comply with any and all conditions imposed by the
Board with respect to such Carry-In Permission, including without limitation
conditions with respect to hours and days during which such alcoholic beverages
may be consumed in the restaurant and the insurance which shall be carried with
respect to operation of the restaurant having Carry-In Permission.
j. Carry-In Permission under this Bylaw shall be not be transferable between persons
or locations except with the advance permission of the Board and then only if
consistent with the public interest. Carry-In Permission shall be revocable as
provided herein.
k. Approval of Carry-In Permission under this bylaw shall not create any property
rights; rather such permission is authorized solely to serve the public need and in
such a manner as to protect the common good.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
109
CHAPTER T “Carry-In” Intoxicating Beverages Bylaw CONTINUED
3. Carry-In Permission for Alcoholic Beverages - continued
l. Every approval of Carry-In Permission under the provisions of this bylaw shall
expire on December thirty-first of the year of issue, subject, however, to earlier
revocation or cancellation within its term.
4 Obligations of A Common Victualler Granted Carry-In Permission for Alcoholic
Beverages
Any common victualler approved for Carry-In Permission shall at all times comply with
the following requirements:
a. The common victualler shall not permit any person under the age of twenty-one to
consume alcoholic beverages in the restaurant. Any person bringing or
accompanying any person bringing alcoholic beverages into a restaurant having
Carry-In Permission shall, upon request of the common victualler, an Acton police
officer, or an agent of the Board, state his name, age, and address, and produce a
valid identification document. The common victualler shall verify by appropriate
picture identification that any patrons and customers consuming such alcoholic
beverages in the restaurant are twenty-one years of age or older. Any common
victualler, or agent or employee thereof, under this bylaw who reasonably relies on
a valid operator's license issued by the registry of motor vehicles pursuant to
section eight of chapter ninety, a valid liquor purchase identification card issued
pursuant to chapter 138, section 34B, a valid passport issued by the United States
government or by the government of a foreign country recognized by the United
States government, or a valid United States issued military identification card, for
proof of a person's identity and age shall not suffer any modification, suspension,
revocation or cancellation of its Carry-In Permission or common victuallers license
by virtue of that individual’s under-age drinking in the restaurant.
b. The common victualler shall only allow alcoholic beverages to be consumed in the
dining room or dining rooms of the restaurant.
c. The common victualler shall ensure that alcoholic beverages are not consumed in
the restaurant by customers or patrons so as to cause or contribute to their
becoming unruly and/or a danger to themselves or others either in the restaurant or
on the public ways upon leaving the restaurant. The common victualler is hereby
authorized to confiscate all remaining alcoholic beverages from any patrons or
customers who appear to present a danger of becoming unruly and/or becoming a
danger to themselves or others either in the restaurant or on the public ways by
virtue of the consumption of alcoholic beverages. Any customers or patrons of a
restaurant with Carry-In Permission shall be deemed at all times to consent to such
confiscation if deemed necessary by the common victualler.
d. The common victualler shall immediately report to the Acton Police Department any
situation in which customers or patrons consuming alcohol in the restaurant appear
to present a danger to themselves or others either in the restaurant or on the public
ways by virtue of the consumption of alcoholic beverages.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
110
CHAPTER T “Carry-In” Intoxicating Beverages Bylaw CONTINUED
5. Regulations
The board may promulgate rules and regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of
this bylaw for clarifying, carrying out, enforcing, implementing and preventing violations
of, all and any of its provisions. Without limitation, the Board may make regulations (a)
limiting the number of approvals for Carry-In Permission to be issued under this Bylaw,
(b) determining the fee to be charged for Carry-In Permission under this bylaw, which
fee shall not be more than double the license fee for a common victualler’s license, (c)
determining the method and frequency of inspection of the premises and method of
carrying on the business of any common victualler having Carry-In Permission
hereunder, and (d) for the proper and orderly conduct of any business having Carry-In
Permission hereunder.
6. Penalties for Violation
Violation by a common victualler of this Bylaw or any regulation promulgated by the
Board pursuant to this Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of three hundred dollars per
offense. Each day a violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.
Any person bringing alcoholic beverages into or consuming alcoholic beverages in a
restaurant having Carry-In Permission shall be punished by a fine of three hundred
dollars per offense for any of the following violations of this bylaw: (a) refusing, upon
request of the common victualler, an Acton police officer, or an agent of the Board, to
state his name, age, and address, and produce a valid identification document, (b)
stating in response to such request a false name, age, or address, including a name or
address which is not his name or address in ordinary use, (c) producing or displaying in
response to such request a false or fraudulent identification document, (d) refusing to
allow the common victualler to confiscate remaining alcoholic beverages under Section
4(c), or (e) acting in a manner dangerous to himself or others in the restaurant.
Any sums of money collected as fines shall be paid forthwith into the general revenues
of the Town.
7. Suspension, etc., of Carry-In Permission
The Board may suspend, modify, cancel, deny, refuse to renew, or revoke Carry-In
Permission for any violation of this Bylaw or any regulation promulgated by the Board
pursuant to this Bylaw
The Board may suspend, modify, cancel, deny, refuse to renew, or revoke a common
victualler’s license in the event a common victualler has committed multiple, willful, or
repeated violations of this Bylaw or any regulation promulgated by the Board pursuant
to this Bylaw.
In case of suspension, modification, cancellation, denial, refusal to renew, or revocation
of any Carry-In Permission or any license as aforesaid, no abatement or refund of any
part of the fee paid therefor shall be made.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
111
CHAPTER T “Carry-In” Intoxicating Beverages Bylaw CONTINUED
8. Severability
In case any section, paragraph or part of this chapter be for any reason declared invalid
or unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other section, paragraph or part
shall continue in full force and effect.
9. Effective Date
This chapter shall take effect in accordance with M.G.L. c.40, § 32.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
112
C H A P T E R U
DISCHARGES TO THE MUNICIPAL
STORM DRAIN SYSTEM
[Adopted 2010]
U1. Purpose
1.1 Regulation of Illicit Connections, Illicit Discharges, Obstructions and Discharges of
Pollutants to the Municipal Storm Drain System is necessary for the protection of
the Town of Acton’s water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard the public
health, safety, welfare and the environment.
1.2 The objectives of this bylaw are:
1.2.1 To prevent pollutants from entering the Town of Acton’s Municipal Separate
Storm Sewer System (MS4);
1.2.2 To prevent unauthorized flows from entering the MS4 and adding to total
storm water runoff flow volumes;
1.2.3 To prohibit Illicit Connections and Illicit Discharges to the MS4;
1.2.4 To require the removal of all such Illicit Connections and Illicit Discharges;
1.2.5 To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater
discharges; and
1.2.6 To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of
this bylaw through inspection, monitoring, and enforcement.
U2. Definitions
The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this bylaw:
Authorized Enforcement Agency shall mean the Board or any agent or employee of
the Town of Acton designated by the Board to enforce this bylaw.
Board shall mean the Acton Board of Health.
Clean Water Act shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. §
1251 et seq.) as hereafter amended.
Discharge of Pollutants shall mean the addition from any source of any pollutant or
combination of pollutants into the Municipal Storm Drain System or into the waters of
the United States or Commonwealth from any source.
Groundwater shall mean water beneath the surface of the ground.
Illicit Connection shall mean a surface or subsurface drain or conveyance, which
allows an Illicit Discharge into the Municipal Storm Drain System, including without
limitation any discharge of sewage, process wastewater, or wash water and any
connections from indoor drains, sinks, or toilets, regardless of whether said connection
was previously allowed, permitted, or approved before the effective date of this bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
113
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U2. Definitions - continued
Illicit Discharge shall mean a direct or indirect discharge to the Municipal Storm Drain
System that is not composed entirely of storm-water, except as exempted in Section
U9.
Impervious Surface shall mean any natural or manmade material or structure on or
above the ground that prevents water infiltrating the underlying soil. Impervious
surface includes without limitation roads, paved parking lots, sidewalks, and rooftops
and mechanically compacted soil or ground.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or Municipal Storm Drain System
or Municipal Storm Sewer System are used interchangeably and shall mean a
conveyance or system of conveyances designed or used for collecting or conveying
storm water, including any road with a drainage system, municipal street, catch
basins, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention
basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, ditch, reservoir, and other
drainage structure that together comprise the storm drainage system owned or
operated by the Town of Acton.
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Discharge Permit shall mean a permit issued by United States Environmental
Protection Agency or jointly with the State that authorizes the Discharge of Pollutants
to waters of the United States.
Non-Storm Water Discharge shall mean a discharge to the MS4 not composed
entirely of storm water.
Obstruction shall mean materials introduced to the MS4 that impede the design flow
conditions of the MS4. Typical examples include lawn clippings, brush, gravel and
other solid materials.
Person shall mean an individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the
Commonwealth or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any
officer, employee, or agent of such person.
Pollutant shall mean any element or property of sewage, agricultural, industrial or
commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter whether
originating at a point or non-point source, that is or may be introduced into the MS4,
groundwater or surface water of the Town of Acton.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
114
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U2. Definitions - continued
Pollutants shall include but not limited to:
a. paints, varnishes, and solvents;
b. oil and other automotive fluids;
c. non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
d. refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
e. pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers;
f. hazardous materials and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens;
g. dissolved and particulate metals which are not naturally occurring;
h. animal wastes;
i. rock, sand, salt, soils;
j. construction wastes and residues; and
k. noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Process Wastewater shall mean water which, during manufacturing or processing,
comes into direct contact with or results from the production or use of any material,
intermediate product, finished product, or waste product.
Recharge shall mean the process by which groundwater is replenished by
precipitation through the percolation of runoff and surface water through the soil.
Storm water shall mean storm water runoff, snow melt runoff, and surface water
runoff and drainage.
Surface Water Discharge Permit shall mean a permit issued by the Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR 3.00 that authorizes the
Discharge of Pollutants to Waters of the Commonwealth.
Threat of Release shall mean an observed indication of impending danger or
discharge or an unconfirmed indication of loss of a non permitted material into the
MS4
Toxic or Hazardous Material or Waste shall mean any material, which because of its
quantity, concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or
radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or
substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health, safety, welfare,
or to the environment. Toxic or hazardous materials include any synthetic organic
chemical, petroleum product, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious waste, acid and
alkali, and any substance as defined under any State or Federal laws and regulations
regulating hazardous, chemical, biological or waste materials, or any amendments
thereof, shall be considered toxic or hazardous material or waste.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
115
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U2. Definitions - continued
Watercourse shall mean a natural or man-made channel through which water flows
or a stream of water, including a river, brook or underground stream.
Waters of the Commonwealth shall mean all waters within the jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers, streams, lakes, ponds, springs,
impoundments, wetlands, and groundwater.
Wastewater shall mean any sanitary waste, sludge, or septic tank or cesspool
overflow, and water that during manufacturing, cleaning or processing, comes into
direct contact with or results from the production or use of any raw material,
intermediate product, finished product, byproduct or waste product.
U3. Applicability
3.1 This bylaw shall apply to all Illicit Connections, Illicit Discharges, Obstructions and
Discharges of Pollutants to the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer (MS4.)
3.2 This bylaw is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other Bylaw,
rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this
Bylaw should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of
this Bylaw imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other bylaw,
rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more
restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the
environment shall take precedence.
U4. Authority
4.1 This bylaw is adopted under the authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment
of the Massachusetts Constitution and the Home Rule Procedures Act, and
pursuant to the regulations of the federal Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR
122.34.
U5. Responsibility for Administration
5.1 The Board shall administer, implement and enforce this bylaw. Any powers
granted to or duties imposed upon the Board may be delegated in writing by the
Board to agents of the Board or employees of the Town of Acton.
U6. Regulations
6.1 The Board may promulgate rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of
this bylaw. Failure by the Board to promulgate such rules and regulations shall not
have the effect of suspending or invalidating this bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
116
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U7. Permits
7.1 No Person shall discharge any storm water and/or groundwater from any single
family residence by means of any conduit(s), pipe(s) or hose(s) from any sump
pump, crawl space pump or sub-drain (collectively a “Sump Pump”) directly or
indirectly onto a public way or into the MS4 without first obtaining a permit from
the Board and, in the case of a public way, written permission from the Town
Engineer. The permit expires and requires re-issuance upon transfer of title of
property or upon change or increase in flow of the discharge source. The permit
shall become part of the public record for the property that will be maintained in
the Department of Health files.
7.2 No Person shall discharge any storm water and/or groundwater from any multi
family residence or commercial property by means of any conduit(s), pipe(s) or
hose(s) from any Sump Pump as defined in § 7.1 directly or indirectly onto a
public way or into the MS4 without first obtaining a permit from the Board and, in
the case of a public way, written permission from the Town Engineer. Each such
permit must be renewed annually. The permit shall become part of the public
record for the property maintained in the Department of Health files.
7.3 Permit conditions shall take into account potential public health hazards from
freezing on public ways.
7.4 The board may stipulate additional permit conditions as required in order to
protect public and environmental health.
7.5 Fees necessary for issuance of permits or licenses under this bylaw shall be set
by the Board of Selectmen at the recommendation of the Board. Fees shall be
payable at the time of application.
U8. Prohibited Activities
8.1 Illicit Discharges. No Person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow to be
discharged any Illicit Discharge, Discharge of Pollutants or Non-Storm Water
Discharge into the Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or into a
Watercourse, or into the Waters of the Commonwealth, except as exempted in
Section U9.
8.2 Illicit Connections. No Person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any
Illicit Connection to the MS4, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under applicable law, regulation or custom at the time of connection.
8.3 Obstruction of MS4. No Person shall cause an obstruction or otherwise interfere
with the normal flow of storm water into or out of the MS4 without prior written
approval from the Board.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
117
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U9. Exemptions
9.1 Discharge or flow resulting from fire fighting activities is exempt from this bylaw.
9.2 Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of
pollutants to the MS4 and to Waters of the Commonwealth when properly
managed to ensure that no potential pollutants are present, and therefore they
shall not be considered illegal discharges unless determined to cause a violation
of the provisions of the Clean Water Act or this bylaw:
1. Waterline flushing;
2. Flow from potable water sources;
3. Springs;
4. Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands;
5. Diverted stream flow;
6. Rising groundwater;
7. Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20), or
uncontaminated pumped groundwater;
8. Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not including active
groundwater dewatering systems), French drain systems in place and
connected to the MS4 at the time of passage of this by-law, or air conditioning
condensation;
9. Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
10. Indirect discharge of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers to an MS4 from
surface runoff as a result of lawn/crop application, under the condition,
however that such applications are conducted pursuant to the intended use of
the product and within the recommended application concentrations as
indicated by the manufacturer and/or any Federal, State, and local guidelines
for those products;
11. Water from individual residential car washing;
12. Water discharge from street sweeping that occurs during the active sweeping
process;
13. Application of de-icing materials as required for public safety;
14. Dye testing, provided notification is given to the Board prior to the time of the
test;
15. Non-Storm Water Discharge permitted under a NPDES permit, a Surface
Water Discharge Permit or a waiver, or waste discharge order administered
under the authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency or
the Department of Environmental Protection, provided that the discharge is in
full compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and
applicable laws and regulations; and
16. Discharge for which advanced written approval is received from the Board as
necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
118
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U10. Emergency Suspension of Storm Drainage System Access
10.1 The Board may suspend MS4 access to any Person or property without prior
written notice when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened
Discharge of Pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health,
safety, welfare or the environment. In the event any person fails to comply with
an emergency suspension order, the Board may take all reasonable steps to
prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare or the environment.
U11. Notification of Spills
11.1 Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon as a
person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency
response for a facility or operation has information of or suspects a release of
materials at that facility or operation resulting in or which may result in a
Discharge of Pollutants to the MS4 or Waters of the Commonwealth, the Person
shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment, and cleanup of the release.
In the event of a release, or threat of release, of oil, petroleum products or
Pollutants and Hazardous Materials or Waste, the person shall, notify the
municipal fire and police departments and the Board, Water Supply District of
Acton and the Acton Engineering Department within two hours. The reporting
person shall provide to the Board written confirmation of all telephone, facsimile,
electronic in-person notifications within three business days thereafter. If the
discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or industrial facility, the
facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain on-site a written record of the
discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be
retained for at least three years.
11.2 All notifications and records received by the Town shall become part of the public
record for the property maintained in the Health Department files and available
for public review.
11.3 An annual summary of reported releases into the MS4 providing summary of
number and type of reported residential and commercial spills shall be reported
in brief in the Annual Town report to the public in a form which conveys trends
over a five year period.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
119
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U12. Enforcement
12.1 The Authorized Enforcement Agency shall enforce this bylaw, regulations,
orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil and
criminal remedies for such violations.
12.2 Civil Relief. If a Person violates the provisions of this bylaw or any regulations,
permits, notices, or orders issued thereunder, the Authorized Enforcement
Agency may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction restraining
the Person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the
Person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
12.3 Orders. Once a determination of violation has been made, the Authorized
Enforcement Agency may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this
bylaw or the regulations thereunder, which may include but is not limited to the
following requirements:
1. elimination of an Illicit Discharge, Illicit Connection, Obstruction or Discharge
of Pollutants to the MS4;
2. performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
3. that unlawful discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist;
and/or
4. remediation of contamination in connection therewith.
Failure by the Authorized Enforcement Agency to issue a written order shall not
relieve the violator of the Person’s responsibilities under this bylaw.
Copies of all orders shall be made available for public inspection at the Health
Department during normal business hours, beginning the next business day after
issuance. Inspection and copying shall be permitted according to the provisions
of Massachusetts law. These records shall be retained to the extent required by
Massachusetts law.
12.4 If the Board or its designated agent determines that abatement or remediation of
contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline by which such
abatement or remediation must be completed. Said order shall further advise
that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation
within the specified deadline, the Town of Acton may, at its option, undertake
such work, and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
120
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U12. Enforcement - continued
12.5 After completion of all measures necessary to abate the violation or to perform
remediation, the violator and the property owner will be invoiced for the costs
incurred by the Town of Acton, including administrative costs. The violator or
property owner may file a written protest objecting to the invoice amount or
basis of costs with the Board within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notification
of the costs incurred. If the amount due is not received by the expiration of the
time in which to file a protest or within thirty (30) days following a decision of the
Board affirming or reducing the costs, or within thirty (30) days from a final
decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the invoice amounts shall become
a special assessment against the property owner and shall constitute a lien on
the owner's property for the amount of said costs. Interest shall begin to accrue
on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate provided in G.L. Ch. 59, § 57 after the
thirty-first day at which the payment for the invoice first becomes due.
12.6 Criminal Penalty. Any Person who violates any provision of this bylaw,
regulation, order or permit issued thereunder, shall be punished by a fine of not
more than $ 300.00 per day, excluding the cost of damages. Each day or part
thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
12.7 Non-Criminal Disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or civil
action, the Town of Acton may elect to utilize the non-criminal disposition
procedure set forth in G.L. Ch. 40, §21D and the Town of Acton General Bylaws
Chapter E 45 in which case the Board or its authorized agent or employee shall
be the enforcing person. The penalty for the first violation shall be $100.00 per
day. The penalty for the second violation shall be $200.00 per day. The penalty
for the 3rd and subsequent violations shall be $300.00 per day. Each day or part
thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
12.8 Entry to Perform Duties under this Bylaw. To the extent permitted by State law,
or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the property, the Board,
its agents, officers, and employees may enter upon privately owned property for
the purpose of performing their duties under this bylaw and regulations and may
make or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the
Board deems reasonably necessary.
12.9 Appeals. Appeals of orders of an Agent of the Board may be made in writing to
the Board within seven business days from receipt of order and reviewed at the
next regularly scheduled meeting of the Board. The decisions or orders of the
Board may be appealed in writing to the Board of Selectmen within seven
business days of the decision and reviewed at the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the Board of Selectmen. Further relief shall be to a court of
competent jurisdiction.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
121
CHAPTER U Discharges to the Municipal Storm Drain System CONTINUED
U12. Enforcement - continued
12.10 Remedies Not Exclusive. The remedies listed in this bylaw are not exclusive of
any other remedies available under any applicable Federal, state or local law.
U13. Severability
13.1 The provisions of this bylaw are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause, of this bylaw or the application
thereof to any person, establishment, or circumstances shall be held invalid,
such invalidity shall not affect the other provisions or application of this bylaw.
U14. Transitional Provisions
14.1 Persons and property owners shall have 90 days from the effective date of the
bylaw to comply with its provisions unless good cause is shown for the failure to
comply with the bylaw within that period.
U15. Variances
15.1 If and only if permissible under the NPDES Storm Water Discharge Permit for
the Town of Acton’s MS4, the Board may grant a variance from the terms of this
bylaw after notice to abutters and a public hearing, if the Board finds that a
variance would satisfy each of the following conditions:
1. The variance is consistent with the public health and environmental protection
objectives of the Massachusetts General Laws and applicable federal, state
and local regulations.
2. The variance is consistent with the purpose and intent of this bylaw.
3. The variance prevents an undue burden on the permit applicant, and
4. Equivalent protection as envisioned in Section U1 of this bylaw
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
122
C H A P T E R V
STRETCH ENERGY CODE
V-1 Definitions
International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) 2009 - The International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) is a building code created by the International Code
Council. It is a model code adopted by many state and municipal governments in the
United States for the establishment of minimum design and construction
requirements for energy efficiency. Commencing July 1, 2010, the baseline energy
conservation requirements of the MA State Building Code will default to IECC 2009
and MA amendments.
Stretch Energy Code - Codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards
as 780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, the Stretch Energy Code is the International Energy
Conservation Code (IECC) 2009 with amendments contained herein.
V-2 Purpose
The purpose of 780 CMR 120.AA is to provide a more energy efficient alternative to the
base energy code applicable to the relevant sections of the building code for both new
construction and existing buildings.
V-3 Applicability
This code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not included in this
scope shall comply with 780 CMR 13, 34, 61, or 93, as applicable.
V-4 Authority
A municipality seeking to ensure that construction within its boundaries is designed and
built above the energy efficiency requirements of 780 CMR may mandate adherence to
this appendix.
780 CMR 120 AA may be adopted or rescinded by any municipality in the
commonwealth in the manner prescribed by law.
V-5 Stretch Code
The Stretch Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as
780 CMR Appendix 120 AA, including any amendments or modifications, is herein
incorporated by reference into the Town of Acton General Bylaws, Chapter V.
The Stretch Code is enforceable by the building commissioner and by any inspector of
the Town of Acton.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
123
C H A P T E R W
CIVIL FINGERPRINTING FOR
MUNICIPAL LICENSING APPLICANTS
W-1 Definitions
“DCJIS” shall mean the Commonwealth’s Department of Criminal Justice Information
Services.
“FBI” shall mean the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
“Fitness Determination” shall mean the applicable determination made by the Police
Department, following a background check in accordance with this Chapter, regarding
the applicant’s suitability for the applicable license.
“Licensing Authority” shall mean the Town department or agency responsible for issuing
the applicable license listed in Section W-2.
“Police Department” shall mean the Acton Police Department.
“Policy” shall mean the Town of Acton Civil Fingerprinting Policy for Licensing
Applicants established pursuant to Section W-3.6.
“State Police” shall mean the Massachusetts State Police.
W-2 Authority and Purpose
The Town adopts Chapter W of the General Bylaw pursuant to Chapter 256 of the Acts
of 2010, incorporated as M.G.L. c.6, § 172B1/2, to authorize the Town and the Police
Department to conduct State and Federal Fingerprint Based Criminal History checks in
accordance with G.L. c. 6, §§ 168 and 172, 28 U.S.C. § 534, and 28 C.F.R. § 20.33 for
individuals applying for or in possession of certain licenses including, but not limited to,
those engaged in the businesses of:
• Ice Cream Truck Vending pursuant to Bylaw D15; and
• Such other businesses for which the Town may hereafter require applicants to
submit fingerprints in connection with a license application.
W-3 Police Department Procedure for Fingerprinting Background Checks
The Police Department will comply with the following procedures to conduct State and
Federal Fingerprint Based Criminal History checks for individuals applying for or in
possession of certain licenses including, but not limited to, those engaged in the
businesses listed in Section W-2, in addition to those policies and procedures provided
by the Policy.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
124
CHAPTER W Civil Fingerprinting for Municipal Licensing Applicants CONTINUED
W-3 Police Department Procedure for Fingerprinting Background Checks – con’t
3.1 An applicant, employee, or volunteer seeking to engage in employment listed
in Section W-2 shall submit, if required by the licensing authority, fingerprints
taken by the Police Department within the past six (6) months along with a
fee of one hundred ($100.00) dollars.
3.2 A portion of the fee charged to the applicant by the Police Department for the
purpose of enforcing this section, thirty ($30.00) dollars, as specified in M.G.L.
c. 6, § 175B ½, shall be deposited into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity
Verification Trust Fund, and the remainder of the fee may be retained by the
Town for costs associated with the administration of this Chapter.
3.3 Upon receipt of the fingerprints and the appropriate fee, the Police
Department will transmit the fingerprints to the State Police Identification Unit
through the DCJIS and then submit the fingerprints to the FBI for a
comparison with national records. The results of the FBI check will be
returned to the State Police, which will then disseminate the state and national
results back to the Police Department.
3.4 The Police Department shall review the information received from the FBI and
State Police in accordance with this Chapter and provide a Fitness
Determination to the applicable Licensing Authority within the Town. In
rendering a Fitness Determination, the Police Department will decide whether
the record subject has been convicted of (or is pending indictment for) a
crime, which bears upon his or her ability or fitness to serve in that capacity,
any felony or a misdemeanor, which involved force or threat of force,
controlled substances, or was a sex-related offense.
3.5 Prior to the issuance of a negative Fitness Determination pursuant to Section
W-3.4, applicants must be afforded the opportunity to provide additional
information to, or challenge the accuracy of, the information contained in the
fingerprint-based criminal background check, including in the FBI identification
record prior to a decision by the Licensing Authority to deny, revoke, or
suspend any license or permit.
3.6 The Police Department shall establish, by rule or regulation, the Policy as a
civilian fingerprinting policy for the purposes of conducting state and national
criminal history records checks of persons applying for certain licenses within
the Town.
3.7 A person applying for a license who is required to submit a full set of
fingerprints to the licensing authority pursuant to this Chapter may request and
receive a copy of his or her criminal history records from the Police
Department. Should the license applicant seek to amend or correct his or
her record, he or she must contact the DCJIS, the FBI, or their successors,
for records from other jurisdictions maintained in their files.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
125
CHAPTER W Civil Fingerprinting for Municipal Licensing Applicants CONTINUED
W-3 Police Department Procedure for Fingerprinting Background Checks – con’t
3.8 The Licensing Authority is authorized to deny any application for, or to revoke,
or to suspend any license or permit, including renewals and transfers thereof,
for any person who is determined unfit for the license, as determined by the
Licensing Authority in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, or regulations,
due to the information obtained pursuant to this Chapter.
3.9 Nothing herein shall limit the Licensing Authority’s powers to deny, revoke,
suspend, or a condition a license on grounds other than those provided in this
Chapter.
W-4 Unauthorized Dissemination of FBI Criminal History Prohibited
4.1 FBI or other criminal history obtained by the Police Department, the Town, or
any person or department on behalf of the Town pursuant to this Chapter shall
not be disseminated except as permitted by the General Bylaws, the Policy, the
Town’s Identity Theft Prevention & Detection Policy, and any other applicable
law or regulation.
4.2 Agents or employees of the Town that fail to comply with this provision may be
subject to sanctions as provided by law, including, where applicable,
termination or suspension.
W-5 Effective Date
This Chapter shall take effect upon its approval by the Attorney General pursuant to
G.L. c. 40, § 32.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
126
C H A P T E R X
Stormwater Management and
Erosion & Sediment Control
X1. Findings
1.1 The United States Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA) through the
National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit for Small
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer Systems (MS4s) requires that the Town of Acton
must establish an appropriate regulatory framework for stormwater management.
1.2 Land disturbances and developments can alter the hydrology of local watersheds
and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel
erosion, and sediment transport and deposition.
1.3 Stormwater runoff can contain water-borne pollutants.
1.4 Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and
minimized through appropriate stormwater management.
1.5 Regulation of land disturbances and developments that create stormwater runoff is
necessary to protect water bodies and groundwater resources; to control and
minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream
channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff;
to safeguard public health, safety, and welfare; and to protect natural resources.
1.6 This Bylaw is needed to manage stormwater runoff caused by land disturbances or
developments, and to minimize its degrading effects on local water resources and
the resulting threats to public health and safety.
X2. Purpose
2.1 The purpose of this Bylaw is to establish stormwater management requirements
and controls that protect the public health, safety, and welfare through the following
objectives:
2.1.1 require practices that eliminate soil erosion and sedimentation;
2.1.2 control the volume and rate of stormwater runoff resulting from land
disturbances;
2.1.3 minimize flooding;
2.1.4 mimic pre-existing hydrologic conditions during and after land disturbances
or development to the maximum extent practicable;
2.1.5 require the management and treatment of stormwater runoff from land
disturbances and development;
2.1.6 protect groundwater and surface water from degradation or depletion;
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
127
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X2. Purpose continued
2.1.7 maintain the natural infiltration of stormwater on sites and/or promote
recharge to groundwater where appropriately sited and/or treated, with
emphasis on the Zone 1, Zone 2 and Zone 3 recharge areas;
2.1.8 maintain the integrity of stream channels;
2.1.9 minimize stream bank erosion;
2.1.10 minimize impacts to stream temperature;
2.1.11 prevent pollutants from entering the municipal storm drainage system;
2.1.12 ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and
stormwater runoff management practices, including efforts to minimize the
area of land disturbance, are incorporated into the site planning and design
process and are implemented and maintained during and after construction;
2.1.13 ensure adequate long-term operation and maintenance of stormwater best
management practices;
2.1.14 require practices to control construction waste;
2.1.15 prevent or minimize adverse impacts to water quality;
2.1.16 comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater
discharges; and
2.1.17 establish the Town of Acton’s legal authority to ensure compliance with the
provisions of this Bylaw through inspection, monitoring and enforcement.
2.2 This Bylaw is intended to provide design standards for erosion control and
stormwater management and to address gaps in jurisdiction for stormwater
management requirements in the Town of Acton Bylaws and the
Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act.
X3. Definitions
Abutter: Each property owner, determined by the most recent records in the Assessors
Office, of real property that abuts the Site on which the proposed Land Disturbance
activity is to take place.
Alteration of Runoff or Drainage Characteristics: Any activity on a Site that
changes the Water Quality, or the force, quantity, direction, timing or location of Runoff
or Drainage flowing from the Site. Such changes include: change from distributed
Runoff to concentrated, confined or discrete Discharge; change in the volume of Runoff;
change in the peak rate of Runoff; and change in the Recharge to groundwater on the
area.
Applicant: Any Person or Persons requesting a Land Disturbance Permit.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
128
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X3. Definitions continued
Best Management Practice (BMP): An activity, procedure, restraint, or structural
improvement that helps reduce the quantity or improve the quality of stormwater runoff.
Clearing: Any activity that removes vegetation. Clearing generally includes grubbing as
defined below.
Construction Preparation: All activity in preparation for construction.
Construction Waste: Excess or discarded building or construction site materials that
may adversely impact Water Quality, including but not limited to concrete truck washout,
chemicals, litter and sanitary waste.
Development: The modification of land to accommodate a new use or expansion of
use, usually involving construction; and redevelopment, rehabilitation, expansion,
demolition, or phased projects that disturb the ground surface or increase the
Impervious Cover area on previously developed sites.
Drainage: Water, originating from precipitation, flowing over or through man-made
conveyances.
Erosion: The wearing away of the land surface by natural or man-made forces such as
wind, water, ice, gravity, or vehicle traffic and the subsequent detachment and
transportation of soil particles.
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan: A document with narrative, drawings and
details prepared by a qualified professional engineer (PE) or a Certified Professional in
Erosion and Sedimentation Control (CPESC), which includes Best Management
Practices, or equivalent measures designed to control surface Runoff, Erosion and
Sedimentation during construction preparation and construction related Land
Disturbance activities.
Grubbing: The act of clearing land surface by digging up roots and stumps.
Impervious Cover: Material covering the ground with a coefficient of runoff greater than
0.7 (as defined in Data Book for Civil Engineers by Seelye; C = runoff divided by rainfall)
including, but not limited to, macadam, concrete, pavement and buildings.
Implementing Authority: The Board of Selectmen, or the Town Department
designated by the Board of Selectmen to carry out the provisions of this Bylaw and the
Regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen.
Land Disturbance: Any activity, including Clearing and Grubbing, that causes a change
in the position or location of soil, sand, rock, gravel, or similar earth material.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
129
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X3. Definitions continued
Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy: The Policy issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection, as amended, that coordinates state
regulations promulgated under the authority of the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection
Act, MGL c. 131 s. 40, and the Massachusetts Clean Waters Act, MGL c. 21, ss. 23-56.
The Policy regulates stormwater impacts through performance standards aimed to
reduce or prevent pollutants from reaching water bodies and to control the quantity of
site runoff.
Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4) or Municipal Storm Drain System
or Municipal Storm Sewer System: A conveyance or system of conveyances
designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any
road with a drainage system, municipal street, catch basins, manhole, gutter, curb, inlet,
piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or
altered drainage channel, ditch, swale, reservoir, and other drainage structure, that
together comprise the storm drainage system owned or operated by the Town of Acton.
Operation and Maintenance Plan: A plan prepared by a qualified professional
engineer (PE) or a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sedimentation Control
(CPESC) describing the functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the
ongoing operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system to ensure
that it continues to function as designed.
Owner: A Person with a legal or equitable interest in property, including his/her
authorized representative.
Permittee: The Person who holds a Land Disturbance Permit and therefore bears the
responsibilities and enjoys the privileges conferred thereby.
Person or Persons: Any individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust,
corporation, agency, authority, department or political subdivision of the Commonwealth
or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or
agent of such person.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
130
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X3. Definitions continued
Pollutant: Any element or property of: sewage; agricultural, industrial, construction or
commercial waste; runoff; leachate; heated effluent; or other matter whether originating
at a point or non-point source, that is or may be introduced into the MS4, groundwater
or surface water.
Pollutants shall include, but are not limited to:
• Paints, varnishes, and solvents;
• Oil , fuel, and other automotive fluids;
• Non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
• Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects,
ordnances, accumulations and floatables;
• Pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers;
• Hazardous materials and wastes;
• Sewage, fecal coliform, pathogens and animal wastes;
• Dissolved and particulate metals which are not naturally occurring;
• Rock, sand, salt, soils;
• Construction Waste and residues; and
• Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
Recharge: process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation through the
percolation of runoff and surface water through the soil.
Runoff: Water flowing over the ground surface and originating from rainfall, snowmelt,
or irrigation water flowing over the ground surface.
Sediment: Mineral or organic soil material that is transported by wind or water, from its
origin to another location; the product of erosion processes.
Sedimentation: The process or act of deposition of Sediment.
Site: Any lot or parcel of land or area of property where Land Disturbance occurs, has
occurred or will occur.
Slope: The incline of a ground surface expressed as a ratio of horizontal to vertical
distance.
Soil: Earth materials including duff, humic materials, sand, rock and gravel.
Stormwater: Runoff and Drainage.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
131
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X3. Definitions continued
Stormwater Management Plan: A document containing narrative, drawings and
details prepared by a qualified professional engineer (PE), which includes structural and
non-structural Best Management Practices to manage and treat Stormwater generated
from regulated Development activity. A Stormwater Management Plan also includes an
Operation and Maintenance Plan describing the maintenance requirements for
structural Best Management Practices.
Water Quality: The chemical, physical, and biological integrity of Water Resources.
Water Resources: Waters of the Commonwealth as defined by the Massachusetts
Clean Waters Act, G.L. c. 21, § 26A.
Zone 1, Zone 2, Zone 3 and Zone 4: Groundwater Protection zones as defined by the
Town of Acton.
X4. Authority
4.1 This Bylaw is adopted under authority granted by the Home Rule Amendment,
Article LXXXIX (89) of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
the Home Rule statutes, and in accordance with the regulations of the federal
Clean Water Act found at 40 CFR 122.34, the Phase II rule from the
Environmental Protection Agency found in the December 8, 1999 Federal
Register, and the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System General
Permit for Stormwater Discharges from Small Municipal Separate Storm Sewer
Systems issued by EPA Region 1 on April 18, 2003.
X5. Applicability
5.1 This Bylaw shall apply to all Land Disturbances and Development within the
jurisdiction of the Town of Acton. Except in accordance with a Land Disturbance
Permit issued pursuant to this Bylaw, no Person shall perform any Land
Disturbance that results in one or more of the Regulated Activities defined in
Section 6.1 that is not an Exempt Activity listed in Section 7.1
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
132
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X6. Regulated Activities
6.1 Regulated activities subject to a Land Disturbance Permit shall include:
6.1.1 Land Disturbance or Development of greater than or equal to one (1) acre, or
which is part of a common plan for Development that will disturb one or more
acres of land.
6.1.2 Land Disturbance or Development of an area greater than or equal to 5,000
square feet having a 10% or greater Slope, or which is part of a common
plan for Development that will disturb an area greater than or equal to 5,000
square feet having a 10% or greater Slope.
6.1.3 Land Disturbance or Development involving the creation or disturbance of
5,000 square feet or more of Impervious Cover, or which is part of a common
plan for Development that will create or disturb 5,000 square feet or more of
Impervious Cover.
6.1.4 Construction of a new drainage system, or alteration of an existing drainage
system or conveyance, serving a drainage area of (a) one acre or more, or
(b) 5,000 square feet or more of Impervious Cover.
6.1.5 Land Disturbance or Development requiring another Town project approval
process with requirements to meet the design standards of the Chapter X
General Bylaw. These approval processes include but are not limited to: site
plan special permits, comprehensive permits and subdivision approvals.
X7. Exempt Activities
7.1 The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this Bylaw:
7.1.1 Normal maintenance of, or emergency repairs to, Town owned public ways,
drainage systems and appurtenances.
7.1.2 Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use, as defined
by the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and its implementing
regulations.
7.1.3 Maintenance and repair of septic systems.
7.1.4 The construction of fencing that will not result in Alteration of Runoff or
Drainage Characteristics.
7.1.5 Emergency repairs to existing utilities (gas, water, sanitary sewer, electric,
telephone, cable television, etc.).
7.1.6 Normal maintenance of or emergency repairs to any Stormwater treatment
facility deemed necessary by the Implementing Authority or its agents.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
133
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X7. Exempt Activities continued
7.2 The following activities are exempt from the requirements of this Bylaw UNLESS
they exceed the threshold set forth in Section 6.1:
7.2.1 Activities for which all Stormwater management has been reviewed and
approved as part of an order of conditions issued by the Acton Conservation
Commission.
7.2.2 Improvement of Town-owned public ways and appurtenances that will not
result in an expansion of impervious cover of more than 5,000 square feet
and do not exceed thresholds regulated under the EPA MS4 Permit.
7.2.3 Activities on single-family residential lots that are not in Zone 1 or Zone 2,
where the activities are not part of a larger common plan of Development
(including but not limited to a subdivision plan, special permit plan, or plan
showing multiple “ANR” lots).
7.2.4 Construction of utilities other than drainage (e.g., gas, water, sanitary sewer,
electricity, telephone, cable television, etc.) that will not result in a permanent
Alteration of Runoff or Drainage Characteristics and will comply with the
Erosion Control standard in the Massachusetts Stormwater Standards.
X8. Administration
8.1 The Acton Board of Selectmen shall administer this Bylaw. It shall, with the
approval of the Town Manager, designate a Town department or official to be the
Implementing Authority.
8.2 The Board of Selectmen, after public notice and hearing, shall promulgate and
may periodically amend Regulations to effectuate the objectives of this Bylaw.
The date of such hearing shall be advertised in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Town at least seven (7) days before the hearing date.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
134
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X8. Administration continued
8.3 The Regulations shall (without limitation):
8.3.1 Specify the information (including site plans) that must be submitted as
part of a Land Disturbance Permit Application;
8.3.2 Specify the procedures for review of Land Disturbance Permit
Applications, including consideration of potential Water Quality impacts;
and
8.3.3 Specify the performance standards for construction and post-construction
Stormwater management measures, and/or the Best Management
Practices for control of Stormwater, that are reasonable and appropriate to
achieve the objectives listed in Section 2.1 of this Bylaw.
8.4 If the Board of Selectmen determines that another Town project approval
process adequately regulates construction and post-construction Stormwater
management in a manner sufficient to achieve the objectives of this Bylaw, the
Regulations may provide that the approval resulting from that process will serve
as the Land Disturbance Permit for purposes of this Bylaw. The Regulations
may also or in the alternative provide that the Implementing Authority may
determine on a case-by-case basis that approval of the project by another Town
entity will serve as the Land Disturbance Permit, provided that the Implementing
Authority determines that the objectives of this Bylaw will be achieved by that
approval. In any case where approval by another Town entity serves as the
Land Disturbance Permit, the Implementing Authority is empowered to enforce all
Stormwater-related conditions of that approval pursuant to the enforcement
provisions of this Bylaw.
8.5 Failure by the Board of Selectmen to promulgate Regulations shall not have the
effect of suspending or invalidating this Bylaw.
8.6 In the absence of Regulations promulgated pursuant to Section 8.2, the
Implementing Authority shall use the Massachusetts Stormwater Standards, as
elaborated in the latest edition of the Massachusetts Stormwater Management
Handbook, as the performance standards for Land Disturbance Permits.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
135
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X8. Administration continued
8.7 The Implementing Authority and its agents shall review all Applications for a Land
Disturbance Permit, conduct inspections as appropriate, issue or deny a Land
Disturbance Permit, and conduct any necessary enforcement action. Following
receipt of a completed Application, the Implementing Authority shall notify
relevant Town departments, boards and committees (as designated in the
Regulations or as determined by the Implementing Authority in the absence of
Regulations) and the Water Supply District of Acton of receipt of the Application.
8.8 After submitting a Land Disturbance Permit Application to the Implementing
Authority, the Applicant shall publish in the local newspaper and submit to the
Town Clerk to be posted on the Town website a notice that the Implementing
Authority is accepting comments on the Land Disturbance Permit Application.
The Land Disturbance Permit Application shall be available for inspection and
comment by the public during normal business hours at the Town Hall for 5
business days from the date of newspaper publication of the notice. A public
hearing is not required. Members of the public shall submit their comments to
the Implementing Authority during the above-described inspection period. The
Implementing Authority reserves the right to require notification of Abutters
should it be determined by the Implementing Authority to be appropriate.
8.9 Filing an Application for a Land Disturbance Permit grants the Implementing
Authority, or its agent, permission to enter the Site to verify the information in the
Application and to inspect for compliance with permit conditions.
8.10 The Implementing Authority shall:
8.10.1 Approve the Application and issue a Land Disturbance Permit if it finds that
the proposed Stormwater controls will protect Water Resources, meet the
objectives of the Bylaw, and meet the requirements of the Regulations;
8.10.2 Approve the Application and issue a Land Disturbance Permit with conditions
that the Implementing Authority determines are required to ensure that the
project’s Stormwater controls will protect Water Resources, meet the
objectives of the Bylaw, and meet the requirements of the Regulations; or
8.10.3 Disapprove the Application and deny a permit if it finds (a) that the proposed
Stormwater controls are not protective of Water Resources or fail to meet the
objectives of the Bylaw or the requirements of the Regulations, or (b) that the
information submitted with the Application was insufficient to allow the
Implementing Authority to make one of the determinations set forth in (i), (ii),
or (iii)(a).
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
136
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X8. Administration continued
8.11 The Implementing Authority shall take final action on an Application within 30
days of the close of the public comment period. A copy of the final action shall
on the same business day be filed with the Town Clerk. Certification by the
Town Clerk that the allowed time has passed without the action of the
Implementing Authority shall be deemed a grant of the Land Disturbance Permit.
8.12 Appeal of Land Disturbance Permit Decision. A decision of the Implementing
Authority regarding a Land Disturbance Permit Application shall be final. Such a
decision shall be reviewable in the Superior Court in an action pursuant to G.L. c.
249, § 4. The remedies listed in this Bylaw are not exclusive of any other
remedies (if any) available under any applicable federal, state or local law.
X9. Permit Procedures & Requirements
9.1 Permit procedures and permit filing requirements shall be defined in
Regulations promulgated as provided in Section 8 of this Bylaw.
X10. Fees
10.1 The Board of Selectmen, based on recommendations of the Implementing
Authority, may establish and from time to time adjust fees to cover expenses
connected with application administration and review, inspections, monitoring
permit compliance, and enforcement, including the cost of Town administrative
and professional staff and outside consultant support as needed. Applicants must
pay applicable review fees to the Implementing Authority before the review
process may begin.
X11. Performance Guarantee
11.1 The Implementing Authority may require the Permittee to post, before the start of
any Land Disturbance, a surety bond, irrevocable letter of credit, cash, or other
acceptable performance guarantee. The form and substance of the guarantee
must be sufficient to ensure that the work will be completed in accordance with
the Land Disturbance Permit, as determined by the Implementing Authority. If
the project is phased, the Implementing Authority may, in its discretion, release
part of the guarantee as each phase is completed in compliance with the permit,
but the guarantee may not be fully released until the Implementing Authority has
made a determination that the project has been satisfactorily completed. The
Implementing Authority may require a performance guarantee for ongoing
operation and maintenance of a Stormwater management system.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
137
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X12. Waivers
12.1 The Implementing Authority may waive strict compliance with any requirement of
this Bylaw or the Regulations promulgated hereunder, where such action:
12.1.1 is allowed or otherwise not prohibited by federal, state and local statutes
and regulations and the Town’s MS4 Permit,
12.1.2 is in the public interest, and
12.1.3 does not derogate from the purpose and intent of this Bylaw.
12.2 The Implementing Authority may waive compliance with any of the performance
standards set forth in this Bylaw or in the Regulations promulgated hereunder,
where the Applicant demonstrates that the proposed Stormwater controls comply
with the performance standards to the maximum extent practicable given Site
constraints (e.g., lot size).
12.3 Any Applicant may submit a written waiver request. Such a request shall be
accompanied by an explanation or documentation supporting the waiver request.
A waiver request may be submitted with a Land Disturbance Permit Application,
but is not required to be. The notice requirements of Section 8.8 apply in either
case.
12.4 If, in the opinion of the Implementing Authority, additional information is required
for review of a waiver request, the Implementing Authority shall notify the
Applicant.
12.5 A decision on a waiver request shall be made by the Implementing Authority
within 30 days of receiving all requested information (or within 30 days of
receiving the waiver request if no additional information is requested). A copy of
the waiver decision shall on the same business day be filed with the Town Clerk.
A waiver request shall be deemed denied if not acted upon within the
aforementioned time period. Certification by the Town Clerk that the allowed
time has passed without the action of the Implementing Authority shall be
deemed a denial of the waiver for the purpose of review as set forth in Section
12.6.
12.6 A decision of the Implementing Authority regarding a waiver request, including a
deemed denial, shall be final. Such a decision shall be reviewable in the Superior
Court in an action pursuant to G.L. c. 249, § 4. The remedies listed in this Bylaw
are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
138
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X13. Enforcement
13.1 The Implementing Authority shall enforce this Bylaw, its Regulations, orders,
violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all available civil and
criminal remedies for such violations.
13.2 Enforcement Orders
13.2.1 The Implementing Authority may issue a written order to enforce the
provisions of this Bylaw or the Regulations thereunder, which may include,
without limitation:
13.2.1.a A requirement to cease and desist from the Land Disturbance
until there is compliance with the Bylaw, the Regulations, and
the Land Disturbance Permit;
13.2.1.b Maintenance, installation or performance of additional Erosion
and Sediment control measures;
13.2.1.c Monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
13.2.1.d Remediation of Erosion and Sedimentation resulting directly or
indirectly from the Land Disturbance; and/or
13.2.1.e Compliance with the approved Operation and Maintenance
Plan.
13.2.2 If the Implementing Authority determines that corrective action is required,
the order shall set forth a deadline by which such corrective action must
be completed. Said order shall further advise that, should the violator or
property Owner fail to complete the corrective action within the specified
deadline, the Town of Acton may, at its option, undertake such work, and
the property Owner shall reimburse the Town's expenses of doing so. A
performance guarantee may be required as part of any consented-to
enforcement order.
13.2.3 Failure by the Implementing Authority to issue a written order shall not
relieve the Person responsible for the violation of the Person’s
responsibilities under this Bylaw.
13.3 Appeal of Enforcement Order. An appeal of an Enforcement Order of the
Implementing Authority may be made in writing to the Board of Selectmen within
seven (7) business days from receipt of the Order and reviewed at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the Board of Selectmen. Further relief shall be to
a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to G.L. c. 249, § 4.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
139
CHAPTER X Stormwater Management and Erosion & Sediment Control CONTINUED
X13. Enforcement continued
13.4 Penalty. Any Person who violates any provision of this Bylaw, or any regulation,
order or permit issued thereunder, may be punished by a penalty of not more
than $300.00 per offense which shall inure to the Town or to such uses as the
Town may direct. Each day that such violation occurs or continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
13.5 Non-Criminal Disposition. As an alternative to a penalty under Section 13.4 or a
civil action to enforce the Bylaw, the Town of Acton may elect to utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in G.L. Ch. 40, §21D and the Town of
Acton General Bylaws Chapter E 45, in which case the Implementing Authority or
authorized agent shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for the first violation
shall be $100 per day. The penalty for the second violation shall be $200 per
day. The penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300 per day.
Each day or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
13.6 Lien. If the Implementing Authority or its authorized agent undertakes work to
correct or mitigate any violation of this Chapter, the Implementing Authority shall
(within thirty (30) days after completing the work) notify the permit holder and the
Owner(s) of the property (if different) in writing of the costs incurred by the Town
of Acton, including administrative costs, associated with that work. The permit
holder and the property Owner(s) (if different) shall be jointly and severally liable
to pay the Town of Acton those costs within thirty (30) days of the receipt of that
notice. The permit holder and the property Owner(s) (if different) may file a
written protest objecting to the amount or basis of costs with the Implementing
Authority within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice. If the amount due is not
received by the Town of Acton by the expiration of the time in which to file such a
protest, or within sixty (60) after the final decision of the Implementing Authority
or a court of competent jurisdiction resolving that protest, the amount of the
Town’s costs shall be a special assessment against the property and shall
constitute a lien on the property pursuant to G.L. c. 40, § 58. Interest shall
accrue on any unpaid costs at the statutory rate, as provided in G.L. c. 59, § 57.
X14. Severability
14.1 If any provision, paragraph, sentence, or clause of this Bylaw shall be held invalid
for any reason, all other provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
X15. Effective Date
15.1 This Bylaw shall take effect six months after Town Meeting approval or upon
completion of all relevant procedural requirements set forth in G.L. c. 40, § 32,
whichever is later.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
140
C H A P T E R Y
DEPARTMENT REVOLVING FUNDS
1. Purpose. This bylaw establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by specified
Town departments, boards, committees, agencies or officers in connection with the
operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or other receipts to
support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving
funds are established under and governed by Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
44, Section 53E½.
2. Expenditure Limitations. A department or agency head, board, committee or
officer may incur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund
established and authorized by this bylaw without appropriation subject to the
following limitations:
A. Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid from the
fund shall also be paid from the fund.
B. No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the fund.
C. The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year, or any
increased amount of that authorization that is later approved during that fiscal
year by the Board of Selectmen and Finance Committee.
3. Interest. Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
bylaw shall be credited to the General Fund.
4. Procedures and Reports. Except as provided in Massachusetts General Laws
Chapter 44, Section 53E½ and this bylaw, the laws, charter provisions, bylaws, rules,
regulations, policies or procedures that govern the receipt and custody of Town
monies and the expenditure and payment of Town funds shall apply to the use of a
revolving fund established and authorized by this bylaw. The Town Accountant shall
include a statement on the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and
expenditures charged to the fund and the balance available for expenditure in the
regular report the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee,
agency or officer on appropriations made for its use.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
141
CHAPTER Y Department Revolving Funds CONTINUED
5. Authorized Revolving Funds. Each of the following individual revolving funds shall
be authorized and list, where applicable:
A. Each revolving fund authorized for use by a town department, board, committee,
agency or officer;
B. The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized to spend
from each fund;
C. The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the department,
board, committee; agency or officer in connection with the program or activity for
which the fund is established that shall be credited to each fund by the Town
Accountant;
D. The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be used; and
E. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this bylaw.
A
Revolving Fund
B
Entity Authorized
to Spend
C
Receipts Credited to
Fund
D
Expenses Payable
from Fund
E
Fiscal
Years
Historic District
Commission
Historic District
Commission
Receipts from application
fees
Costs to prepare and
distribute rulings and
guidance on historical
issues and incidental
expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
Building Inspector Building
Department
Receipts from permit,
administrative and
archiving fees for gas,
electrical and plumbing
permits
Costs for contractual
inspectors, archiving
services and incidental
expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
Sealer of Weights
and Measures Health Department
Receipts from inspection
fees and fines for scales,
weights and measuring
devices
Costs for supplies,
equipment, services
and incidental
expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
Hazardous
Materials Health Department
Receipts from permits
and fines to store
hazardous materials and
underground storage
tanks
Costs for supplies,
equipment, inspectors
and incidental
expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
Food Service Health Department
Receipts from inspection
fees and fines related to
food service
Costs for supplies,
equipment, inspectors
and incidental
expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
Stormwater Land Use
Department
Receipts from permit and
inspection fees and fines
related to stormwater
management
Costs for compliance,
inspections,
subcontractors and
incidental expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
CrossTown
Connect
Transportation
Department
Receipts from public and
private partners for
transportation services
Costs for dispatching
services and incidental
expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
Fire Alarm
Network Fire Department Receipts from fire alarm
box fees
Costs for maintaining
the fire alarm network
and incidental
expenses
FY 2019,
et seq.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
142
C H A P T E R Z
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS
The operation within the Town of Acton of any marijuana establishment, as defined in
Massachusetts General Laws c. 94G, § 1, including, without limitation, a marijuana
cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer,
or any other type of licensed marijuana-related business, is prohibited. This prohibition
shall not apply to the sale, distribution, or cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes
by a Registered Marijuana Dispensary as defined by and registered under Chapter 369
of the Acts of 2012.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
143
C H A P T E R AA
RIGHT TO FARM
Section 1: Legislative Purpose and Intent
A. The purpose and intent of this bylaw is to state with emphasis the Right to Farm
accorded to all citizens of the Commonwealth under Article 97 of the
Constitution, and all state statutes and regulations thereunder including but not
limited to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40A, Section 3, Paragraph 1;
Chapter 90, Section 9; Chapter 111, Section 125A; and Chapter 128, Section lA.
We the citizens of Acton restate and republish these rights pursuant to the
Towns authority conferred by Article 89 of the Articles of Amendment of the
Massachusetts Constitution ("Home Rule Amendment").
B. This General Bylaw encourages the pursuit of agriculture, promotes
agriculture-based economic opportunities, and protects farmland within the Town
of Acton by allowing agricultural uses and related activities to function with minimal
conflict with abutters and Town agencies. This bylaw shall apply to all jurisdictional
areas within Town of Acton.
Section 2: Definitions
A. “Farming” and “agriculture” shall have the same meaning as in General Laws
Chapter 128, Section lA.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for the purposes of this General Bylaw, “farming”
and “agriculture” shall not include the planting, propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, or containing of
marijuana, as defined in General Laws Chapter 94G, Section 1.
Section 3: Right To Farm Declaration
The Right to Farm is hereby recognized to exist within the Town of Acton. Agricultural
activities may occur on holidays, weekdays, and weekends by night or day and shall
include the attendant incidental noise, odors, dust, and fumes associated with normally
accepted agricultural practices. It is hereby determined that whatever impact may be
caused to others through the normal practice of agriculture is more than offset by the
benefits of farming to the neighborhood, community, and society in general. The
benefits and protections of this bylaw are intended to apply exclusively to those
agricultural and farming operations and activities conducted in accordance with
generally accepted agricultural practices. Moreover, nothing in this Right to Farm Bylaw
shall be deemed as acquiring any interest in land, or as imposing any land use
regulation, which is properly the subject of state statute, regulation, or local zoning law.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
144
CHAPTER AA RIGHT TO FARM CONTINUED
Section 4: Disclosure Notification
Within 30 days after this bylaw becomes effective, the Board of Selectmen shall
prominently post in the Town Hall, Public Libraries, Town Notice Boards, the official
Town website, and make available for distribution the following disclosure: “It is the
policy of this community to conserve, protect and encourage the maintenance and
improvement of agricultural land for the production of food, and other agricultural
products, and also for its natural and ecological value. This disclosure notification is to
inform buyers and occupants that the property they are about to acquire or occupy lies
within a town where farming activities occur. Such farming activities may include, but
are not limited to, activities that cause noise, dust and odors.
In addition to the above, copies of this disclosure notification shall be available in a
public area at the Town Hall.
Section 5: Resolution of Disputes
A. This section shall apply only if the Town of Acton has established an Agricultural
Commission in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 8L.
B. “Comments” shall mean either written comments on behalf of or an appearance by
an agent of the Agricultural Commission at a public hearing.
C. When a dispute within the Zoning Enforcement Officer’s or Zoning Board of
Appeals’ jurisdiction concerns agricultural activities, the Zoning Enforcement
Officer or Zoning Board of Appeals shall obtain comments from the Agricultural
Commission or its agent. The Zoning Enforcement Officer or Zoning Board of
Appeals may require that those comments be given in writing.
D. When a dispute which does not present imminent danger or risk to public health
within the Board of Health’s jurisdiction concerns agricultural activities, the Board
of Health shall obtain comments from the Agricultural Commission or its agent.
The Board of Health may require that those comments be given in writing.
E. All other Town officers and employees may request comments from the Agricultural
Commission in addressing concerns or resolving disputes relating to farming or
agricultural activities. Any officer or employee requesting comments may require
that those comments be given in writing.
Section 6: Severability Clause
If any part of this bylaw is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid, such
decision shall not affect the remainder of this bylaw. The Town of Acton hereby declares
the provisions of this bylaw to be severable.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
145
C H A P T E R AB
PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION
Section 1. Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this bylaw is to regulate the retail use of single-use plastic checkout
bags and promote the use of reusable bags in the Town of Acton. The reduction in the
use of thin-film, single-use plastic checkout bags by retail establishments in the Town of
Acton is a public purpose that has positive impacts on the environment including, but
not limited to reducing solid waste and unnecessary strains on recycling resources;
minimizing litter; reducing the carbon footprint of the Town; protecting local waterways;
avoiding the waste of finite natural resources; protecting the marine environment and
preserving the unique natural beauty of the Town of Acton.
Section 2. Definitions
“Checkout bag” - means a carryout bag provided by a store to a customer at the point
of sale. Checkout bags shall not include bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose
produce or products are placed by the consumer to deliver such items to the point of
sale or check out area of the store.
“Thin-film single-use plastic checkout bag” – means those bags typically with
handles, intended for single-use transport of purchases and made of film less than 4.0
mils (the thickness of four pieces of paper).
“Reusable checkout bag” - means a sewn bag with stitched handles (1) made of cloth
or natural fibers that is machine-washable and designed for multiple use or (2) made of
plastic other than polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride; (3) is durable, non-toxic and
generally considered a food-grade material that is more than 4 mils thick.
“Recyclable paper bag” - means a paper bag that is (1) 100 percent recyclable
including the handles; (2) contains at least 40% post-consumer recycled paper content;
and (3) displays this information re recyclability and content on the bag surface.
“Retail Establishment” — means any business facility (whether for-profit or not-forprofit)
that sells goods directly to the consumer, including, but not limited to, retail
stores, restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, and
seasonal or temporary businesses.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated April 2019
146
CHAPTER AB PLASTIC BAG REDUCTION CONTINUED
Section 3. Regulations
3.1 On or after January 1, 2020, no retail establishment in the Town of Acton shall
provide thin-film single-use plastic checkout bags to customers; If a retail
establishment provides or sells checkout bags to customers, the bags must be one
of the following:(1) a recyclable paper bag, or (2) a reusable checkout bag.
3.2 The Board of Health may adopt and amend rules and regulations to effectuate the
purposes of this bylaw
Section 4. Exemptions
4.1 Thin-film plastic bags typically without handles which are used to contain dry
cleaning, newspapers, produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items, and other similar
merchandise are not prohibited under this bylaw.
Section 5. Enforcement
5.1 Enforcement of this bylaw shall be the responsibility of the Board of Health or
his/her designee. The Board of Health shall determine the monitoring and
enforcement processes to be followed incorporating those processes into other
town duties as appropriate. This bylaw may be enforced by any lawful means in law
or equity including, but not limited to, a non-criminal disposition as provided in the
M.G.L. Ch. 40, §21D and appropriate chapter of the General Bylaws of the Town of
Acton. If non-criminal disposition is elected, then any retail establishment that
violates any provision of this bylaw may be subject to the following penalties:
First Offense: written warning;
Second Offense: $50 penalty;
Third and subsequent offenses: $200 penalty
Section 6. Severability
6.1 Each section of this bylaw shall be construed as separate to the end that if any
section, sentence, clause or phrase thereof shall be invalid for any reason, the
remainder of this bylaw shall continue in force.
Section 7. Effective Date
7.1 This bylaw shall take effect January 1, 2020.
TOWN of ACTON
Amended through April 2019
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page i
THE FOLLOWING TOWN OF ACTON ZONING BYLAW IS REVISED UP TO AND INCLUDING
THE ANNUAL TOWN MEETING OF April 2, 2019.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page
TABLE OF CONTENTS .......................................................................................................... i
INFORMATION RELATIVE TO LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING LAND USE ....................... iv
SECTION 1. AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS AND APPLICABILITY
1.1 Authority ................................................................................................. 1
1.2 Purpose ................................................................................................. 1
1.3 Definitions .............................................................................................. 1
1.4 Applicability ............................................................................................ 3
SECTION 2. ZONING DISTRICTS
2.1 Classification of Districts ........................................................................ 5
2.2 Zoning Map ............................................................................................ 5
2.3 Zoning Map Interpretation ...................................................................... 6
SECTION 3. PRINCIPAL USE TABLE, PRINCIPAL USE DEFINITIONS AND ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
3.1 Provisions for Table of Principal Uses and Principal Use Definitions ..... 7
TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USES ............................................................................. 8
3.2 General Uses ......................................................................................... 11
3.3 Residential Uses .................................................................................... 11
3.4 Governmental, Institutional and Public Service Uses ............................. 12
3.5 Business Uses ....................................................................................... 13
3.6 Industrial Uses ....................................................................................... 18
3.7 Prohibited Uses ...................................................................................... 19
3.8 Accessory Use Regulations ................................................................... 20
3.9 Special Provisions .................................................................................. 28
3.10 Special Requirements for Personal Wireless Facilities .......................... 28
3.11 Special Requirements for Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic
Installations ………………………………………………… ........................................... 36
3.12 Marijuana Establishment Temporary Moratorium ………………...… ...... 37
SECTION 4. OVERLAY DISTRICTS
4.1 Flood Plain District ................................................................................. 39
4.2 Open Space Development ..................................................................... 42
4.3 Groundwater Protection District .............................................................. 47
TABLE OF USE REGULATIONS WITHIN THE GROUNDWATER PROTECTION DISTRICT 54
4.4 Affordable Housing Incentives and Overlay District ................................ 57
SECTION 5. DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.1 Standard Dimensional Provisions ........................................................... 67
5.2 Methods for Calculating Dimensional Requirements .............................. 67
TABLE OF STANDARD DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS.......................................... 68
5.3 Special Provisions and Exceptions to Dimensional Regulations ............. 70
Note: The Table of Contents, “Information Relative to the Laws and Regulations Governing Land Use”, and
notes contained within boxes are included for convenience of reference only and are not part of the
Bylaw.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page ii
5.4 Transfer of Development Rights ............................................................. 74
5.5 Special Provisions for Village Districts .................................................... 79
5.6 Special Provisions for the Kelley’s Corner District .................................. 88
5.7 Special Provisions for the Office Park 2 District ...................................... 92
SECTION 6. PARKING STANDARDS
6.1 Definitions .............................................................................................. 93
6.2 General Provisions ................................................................................. 94
6.3 Minimum Parking Space Requirements by Use ..................................... 95
6.4 Loading Areas ........................................................................................ 97
6.5 Standard Parking Dimensional Regulations ........................................... 97
6.6 Small Car Stalls...................................................................................... 98
6.7 Parking Lot Design Requirements .......................................................... 98
6.8 Structured Parking ................................................................................. 101
6.9 Special Provisions for the Village, Kelley’s Corner and Powder Mill Districts 102
6.10 Parking Lot Bonds and Securities ......................................................... 107
SECTION 7. SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES
7.1 Purpose ................................................................................................. 109
7.2 Definitions .............................................................................................. 109
7.3 Signs Prohibited in all Districts ............................................................... 111
7.4 General Regulations .............................................................................. 112
7.5 Signs Which Do Not Require a Sign Permit ............................................ 113
7.6 Sign Permits ........................................................................................... 116
7.7 Exterior Signs ......................................................................................... 117
7.8 Freestanding Signs ................................................................................ 118
7.9 Off Premises Directional Signs ............................................................... 121
7.10 Temporary or Special Event Signs(s) .................................................... 121
7.11 Signs for Golf Courses and Cross-Country Skiing in Res. Districts........ 122
7.12 Non-Conforming Signs .......................................................................... 122
7.13 Signs Requiring a Special Permit from the Planning Board ................... 122
SECTION 8. NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND PARKING; EXEMPTIONS
8.1 Nonconforming Lots ............................................................................... 125
8.2 Nonconforming Uses .............................................................................. 126
8.3 Nonconforming Structures ...................................................................... 127
8.4 Nonconforming Parking .......................................................................... 128
8.5 Building and Special Permit Exemption .................................................. 128
8.6 Special Provisions to Enhance Access for Handicapped Persons .......... 128
8.7 Special Permit to Reconstruct Nonconforming Multifamily Dwelling ....... 128
8.8 Public Acquisition ................................................................................... 129
8.9 Planned Unit Development (PUD) .......................................................... 129
SECTION 9. PLANNED CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY DISTRICT
9.1 Purpose ................................................................................................. 131
9.2 Special Permit ........................................................................................ 131
9.3 Contents of Application for a PCRC Special Permit ................................ 131
9.4 Procedural Requirements ....................................................................... 131
9.5 Planning Board Action ............................................................................ 131
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page iii
9.6 Standards for PCRCs ............................................................................. 132
9.7 Streets, Utilities and Lighting .................................................................. 135
9.8 Revisions and Amendments of “PCRC Site Plans” ................................. 135
9.9 Previously Approved PCRC Developments ............................................ 135
SECTION 9A. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ....................................................................... 137
Intentionally Deleted (See Appendix)
SECTION 9B. SENIOR RESIDENCE
9B.1 Purpose ............................................................................................... 139
9B.2 Special Permit ..................................................................................... 139
9B.3 Planning Board Action ......................................................................... 139
9B.4 Allowed Uses ....................................................................................... 140
9B.5 Dimensional Regulations ..................................................................... 140
9B.6 Parking Requirements ......................................................................... 141
9B.7 Stormwater Runoff ............................................................................... 141
9B.8 Environmental Protection ..................................................................... 141
9B.9 Common Land Standards .................................................................... 141
9B.10 Accessibility ........................................................................................ 142
9B.11 Age Restriction ................................................................................... 143
9B.12 Affordability ......................................................................................... 143
9B.13 Streets, Utilities, and Lighting .............................................................. 145
9B.14 Performance Guarantee ..................................................................... 145
9B.15 Revisions and Amendments ............................................................... 145
SECTION 10. ADMINISTRATION
10.1 Board of Appeals .................................................................................. 147
10.2 Building Permit ..................................................................................... 147
10.3 Special Permit ...................................................................................... 147
10.4 Site Plan Special Permit ....................................................................... 149
10.5 Variance ............................................................................................... 156
10.6 Outdoor Lighting Regulations for Site Plan Special Permits................... 157
SECTION 11. ENFORCEMENT
11.1 Enforcement ......................................................................................... 167
11.2 Other Laws or Regulations ................................................................... 167
11.3 Validity and Separability ....................................................................... 167
APPENDIX
SECTION 9A. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT....................................................... A 1
SUPPLEMENTAL MAPS (available at Planning Office)
Zoning Districts of the Town of Acton - Zoning Maps
Flood Insurance Rate Map and Flood Boundary and Floodway Map
Groundwater Protection District Map of the Town of Acton
Affordable Housing Overlay District Map of the Town of Acton
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page iv
INFORMATION RELATING TO LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING LAND USE
Land uses in the Town of Acton are subject to various Town rules and bylaws, and statutes of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In addition to the Acton Zoning Bylaw, adopted pursuant to
Chapter 40A - “The Zoning Act” of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, the following rules,
bylaws, and statutes regulate land uses in Acton. This list is intended to serve as a reminder. It is
not necessarily a complete list. Other rules, bylaws, and statutes may apply. Special permits and
variances issued under the Acton Zoning Bylaw do not void the applicability of other rules, bylaws,
and statutes:
TOWN OF ACTON GENERAL BYLAWS set forth the Town's general regulations including pro-visions
pertaining to: street numbering; discharges of firearms; abandoned wells; excavations; registration
of ownership of a building for occupancy by two or more families; historic districts; fire lanes and
traffic regulations.
CONDOMINIUM CONVERSION ACT - CHAPTER 548 OF THE ACTS OF 1987 sets forth the Board of
Selectmen's authority to establish procedures and regulations relative to the protection of tenants
and purchasers of condominiums or cooperative units in the Town of Acton. See also Rules and
Regulations by the Board of Selectmen.
EARTH REMOVAL BYLAW sets forth the Board of Appeals authority to establish regulations and
procedures concerning the removal of earth products (sand, gravel, loam, etc.) from a property.
SUBDIVISION RULES AND REGULATIONS set forth the Planning Board's procedures and standards
to be followed in the subdivision of land and the construction of ways in accordance with the
Subdivision Control Law, M.G.L. Ch. 41,S. 81-A to 81GG.
PLANNED CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY RULES & REGULATIONS (PCRC) set forth the
development standards of the Planning Board for a PCRC Special Permit. This permit provides for
varied housing types in Acton and increases in the amount of permanent open space.
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT RULES & REGULATIONS set forth the development standards of the
Planning Board for Open Space Development Subdivisions. The purpose of this type of
subdivision is to encourage the preservation of open space while better utilizing the land in
harmony with natural features.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT RULES & REGULATIONS (PUD) set forth the development standards
of the Planning Board for a PUD Special Permit. See Appendix.
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL PERMITS FOR SIGNS set forth the procedures and
standards to be followed when seeking a special permit for a sign.
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL PERMITS FOR MAJOR AFFORDABLE HOUSING
DEVELOPMENTS (MAHD) set forth the development standards of the Planning Board for a MAHD
Special Permit. This permit provides density bonuses in certain districts when affordable housing
units are included within the development.
RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR SPECIAL PERMITS in the GROUNDWATER PROTECTION DISTRICT
set forth the rules and regulations, administered by the Planning Board, to be followed for the
development of land within the Groundwater Protection Districts.
COMMON DRIVE SPECIAL PERMIT RULES AND REGULATIONS set forth standards for development
of land utilizing common drives.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page v
INFORMATION RELATING TO LAWS AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING LAND USE (cont.)
SCENIC ROAD BYLAW sets forth the Planning Board's authority to establish procedures and
regulations to be followed if the repair, maintenance, reconstruction or paving of any designated
scenic road involves cutting or removing trees or tearing down or destruction of any part of a stone
wall.
STATE ENVIRONMENTAL CODE - Title 5 sets forth the minimum standards for the protection of
public health and the environment when circumstances require the use of individual systems for
the disposal of sanitary sewage in areas where municipal sewage systems are not available.
STATE BUILDING CODE sets forth the rules and regulations, administered by the Building Commissioner,
relative to the construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, demolition, removal, inspection,
issuance and revocation of permits or licenses, installation of equipment, classification
and definition of buildings and structures and use or occupancy thereof.
RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE ACTON BOARD OF HEALTH set forth the Board of Health's
authority to establish procedures and regulations for human habitation, farm labor camps,
recreational camps for children, septage disposal areas, swimming pools, bathing beaches, camp
grounds, private and semi-public water supply, sanitation for food service establishments and retail
food stores, disposal of sanitary sewage in unsewered areas, keeping farm animals and domestic
pets and practice of massage or conducting vapor bath establishments.
ACTON WETLANDS BYLAW sets forth the Conservation Commission's authority to establish
procedures and regulations relative to the Town's local bylaw controlling activities deemed to have
a significant impact upon wetland values. See also Rules and Regulations by Conservation
Commission.
STATE WETLANDS PROTECTION ACT is administered by the Conservation Commission and
provides for public review of proposed projects which involve construction or other alterations of
land in or near wetlands or land deemed subject to periodic flooding.
HISTORIC BUILDING DEMOLITION BYLAW sets forth standards for the purpose of preserving and
protecting historically or architecturally significant buildings within Acton.
LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT RULES AND REGULATIONS set forth the rules and regulations,
administered by the Acton Historic District Commission, to be followed for development of or
alteration to property in the Local Historic Districts.
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS CONTROL BYLAW protects, preserves and maintains the town's existing
and potential groundwater supplies, surface water and air quality from Contamination by
hazardous materials.
SALE OF TOBACCO BYLAW AND USE OF TOBACCO BYLAW sets forth the Board of Health's
authority to establish procedures and regulations for the sale and use of tobacco in Acton.
SITE PLAN RULES AND REGULATIONS set forth the rules and regulations, administered by the
Board of Selectmen, to be followed for site development where a Site Plan Special Permit is
required.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page vi
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 1
SECTION 1.
AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS AND APPLICABILITY
1.1 Authority - The Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw is adopted under Chapter 40A of the
General Laws (the Zoning Act) and Article 89 of the Amendments to the Constitution
(the Home Rule Amendment).
1.2 Purpose - The purpose of this Bylaw is to implement the zoning powers granted to the
Town of Acton under the Constitution and Statutes of the Commonwealth and includes,
but is not limited to, the following objectives: to lessen congestion in the STREETS; to
conserve health; to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; to provide
adequate light and air; to prevent overcrowding of land; to avoid undue concentration of
population; to encourage housing for persons of all income levels; to facilitate the
adequate provision of transportation, drainage, sewage disposal, schools, parks, OPEN
SPACE and other public requirements; to protect and enhance the quality and quantity
of Acton's surface and groundwater resources; to conserve the value of land and
BUILDINGS, including conservation of natural resources and the prevention of blight and
pollution of the environment; to preserve and increase amenities; and to preserve and
enhance the development of the natural, scenic and aesthetic qualities of the
community.
1.3 Definitions - The words defined in this section shall be capitalized throughout the
Bylaw. Where a defined word has not been capitalized, it is intended that the meaning
of the word be the same as the meaning ascribed to it in this section unless another
meaning is clearly intended by its context. In this Bylaw the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
1.3.1 ACCESS: ACCESS shall mean that (1) there is sufficient right of vehicular passage
onto the LOT from the STREET on which it has FRONTAGE and (2)
vehicular passage is or may be provided between the FRONTAGE and
the STRUCTURE on the LOT. Such ACCESS shall be consistent with
the USE or potential USE of the LOT. Nothing in this definition shall be
construed to require:
1. Actual entry through the LOT’S FRONTAGE if, in the opinion of the
license or permit granting authority, alternate means of entry will
better fulfill the purposes of this Bylaw;
2. Actual or potential ACCESS through the minimum required
FRONTAGE set forth elsewhere in this zoning bylaw; or
3. Actual or potential ACCESS through any portion of the LOT that
meets minimum LOT width requirements set forth elsewhere in this
zoning bylaw.
1.3.2 AFFORDABLE: The term AFFORDABLE shall refer to housing which is restricted for sale,
lease or rental (1) to households within specific income ranges and (2) at
specific prices in accordance with the provisions of Section 4.4 of this
Bylaw.
1.3.3 BUILDING: A STRUCTURE enclosed within exterior walls, built or erected with any
combination of materials, whether portable or fixed, having a roof, to form
a STRUCTURE for the shelter of persons, animals, or property.
1.3.4 DEVELOPABLE
SITE AREA:
That part of the LOT which remains after subtracting land that is not
available and suitable for the construction of a structure or other manmade
improvements, in accordance with Section 10.4.3.7.
1.3.5 DWELLING UNIT: A portion of a BUILDING designed as the residence of one FAMILY.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 2
1.3.6 FAMILY: For the purposes of this Zoning Bylaw a FAMILY shall be a person or
number of persons occupying a DWELLING UNIT and living as a single
household unit.
1.3.7 FLOOR AREA,
GROSS:
The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors of a BUILDING
measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, or from the centerline of
a wall separating two BUILDINGS, but not including interior parking
spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where the floor-toceiling
height is less than six feet.
1.3.8 FLOOR AREA,
NET:
The total of all floor areas of a BUILDING including basement and other
storage areas, but not including stairways, elevator wells, rest rooms,
common hallways and BUILDING service areas, and not including areas
used for a Child Care Facility as defined in Section 3.4.6 of this Bylaw
provided that such Child Care Facility is accessory to a PRINCIPAL USE
located in the same BUILDING or on the same LOT.
1.3.9 FLOOR AREA RATIO: The ratio of the sum of the NET FLOOR AREA of all BUILDINGS on a LOT
to the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA of the LOT.
1.3.10 FRONTAGE:
A continuous LOT line along the sideline of a STREET. The sideline of a
STREET is defined by the front boundary lines of LOTS along a STREET
and not necessarily the pavement edge of a STREET or sidewalk.
1.3.11 OPEN SPACE: Those areas of a LOT on which no BUILDING or STRUCTURE is permitted,
except as otherwise provided by this Bylaw, and which is not to be used
or devoted to STREETS, driveways, sidewalks, off-STREET parking,
storage or display.
1.3.12 LOT: An area of land, undivided by any STREET, in one ownership with
definitive boundaries ascertainable from the most recently recorded deed
or plan which is 1) a deed recorded in Middlesex County South District
Registry of Deeds, or 2) a Certificate of Title issued by the Land Court and
registered in the Land Court section of such Registry, or 3) title of record
disclosed by any and all pertinent public documents.
1.3.13 LOW-INCOME: The term LOW-INCOME shall refer to households having a total household
or FAMILY income less than or equal to eighty (80) percent of the median
income for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as set forth in
regulations promulgated from time to time by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development pursuant to 42 USC 1437 et seq., and
calculated pursuant to said regulations; or a household in a similar income
group which is eligible for housing assistance under a state or federal
subsidy program.
1.3.14 MODERATEINCOME:
The term MODERATE-INCOME shall refer to households having a total
household or FAMILY income less than or equal to one hundred twenty
(120) per cent, but more than eighty (80) per cent of the median income
for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, as set forth in
regulations promulgated from time to time by the U.S. Department of
Housing and Urban Development pursuant to 42 USC 1437 et seq., and
calculated pursuant to said regulations; or a household in a similar income
group which is eligible for housing assistance under a state or federal
subsidy program.
1.3.15 SENIOR: An individual who is 55 years of age or older.
1.3.16 STREET: A STREET shall be 1) an improved public way laid out by the Town of
Acton, or the Middlesex County Commissioners, or the Commonwealth of
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 3
Massachusetts; or 2) a way which the Acton Town Clerk certifies is
maintained by public authority and used as a public way; or 3) a public or
private way, improved in accordance with a plan approved and endorsed
by the Planning Board under the Acton subdivision rules and regulations
and the subdivision control law; or 4) a way in existence as of March 9,
1953 having in the opinion of the Planning Board sufficient width, suitable
grades and adequate construction to accommodate the vehicular traffic
anticipated by reason of the proposed USE of the land abutting thereon or
served thereby and for the installation of municipal services to serve such
land and the BUILDINGS erected or to be erected thereon. A public or
private way shall not be deemed to be a STREET as to any LOT of land
that does not have rights of ACCESS to and passage over said way.
1.3.17 STRUCTURE: A combination of materials assembled to give support or shelter, such as
BUILDINGS, towers, masts, sheds, roofed storage areas, mechanical
equipment, swimming pools, tennis courts, signs, fences; but not including
driveways, walkways and other paved areas, underground storage tanks,
septic tanks and septic systems, and accessory facilities associated with
the provision of utilities such as drains, wells, transformers and telephone
poles.
1.3.18 TRACT OF LAND: An area of land consisting of a single LOT or of several contiguous LOTS.
1.3.19 USE, ACCESSORY: Any use which is incidental and subordinate to a PRINCIPAL USE.
1.3.20 USE, PRINCIPAL: The main or primary use of any land or LOT.
1.4 Applicability - All LOTS and parcels of land in the Town of Acton and all BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES and other improvements thereon shall be subject to the regulations,
restrictions and requirements established in this Bylaw. Except when specifically
referred to or stated otherwise, this Bylaw shall not apply to STREETS and
appurtenances and easements thereto; to railroad rights of way; to public bicycle,
pedestrian, and multi-use paths, and appurtenances and easements thereto, funded,
laid out, or constructed by the Town of Acton, the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or
the Federal Government; or to any BUILDING, STRUCTURE or USE of land, including
grading, filling, and excavating, which is associated with a public sewer collection
system owned or operated by the Town of Acton.
1.4.1 STREETS and railroad rights of way in existence as of January 1, 2000 shall be
reserved for transportation purposes and shall not be built upon, used, or otherwise
obstructed to hinder or prevent their present or future use and service as transportation
facilities, except that STREETS may be discontinued, abandoned or relocated in
accordance with the applicable laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 4
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 5
SECTION 2.
ZONING DISTRICTS
2.1 Classification of Districts – The Town of Acton is hereby divided into the following
zoning districts:
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
RESIDENCE 2 R-2
RESIDENCE 4 R-4
RESIDENCE 8 R-8
RESIDENCE 8/4 R-8/4
RESIDENCE 10 R-10
RESIDENCE 10/8 R-10/8
RESIDENCE A R-A
RESIDENCE AA R-AA
VILLAGE RESIDENTIAL VR
VILLAGE DISTRICTS
EAST ACTON VILLAGE EAV
EAST ACTON VILLAGE 2 EAV-2
NORTH ACTON VILLAGE NAV
SOUTH ACTON VILLAGE SAV
WEST ACTON VILLAGE WAV
OFFICE DISTRICTS
OFFICE PARK 1 OP-1
OFFICE PARK 2 OP-2
BUSINESS DISTRICTS
KELLEY'S CORNER KC
LIMITED BUSINESS LB
POWDER MILL DISTRICT PM
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
GENERAL INDUSTRIAL GI
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL LI
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL 1 LI-1
SMALL MANUFACTURING SM
TECHNOLOGY DISTRICT TD
SPECIAL DISTRICTS
AGRICULTURAL RECREATION CONSERVATION ARC
PLANNED CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY PCRC
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
AFFORDABLE HOUSING OVERLAY DISTRICT
FLOOD PLAIN FP
GROUNDWATER PROTECTION DISTRICT GPD
OPEN SPACE DEVELOPMENT OSD
2.2 Zoning Map – The zoning maps listed below are part of this Bylaw, and are collectively
referred to as “The Zoning Map”. The location and boundaries of the zoning districts are
shown on the Zoning Maps. The Zoning Maps are amended from time to time by action
of Town Meeting. The last amendment dates are noted on the Zoning Maps.
? “Zoning Map of the Town of Acton” as last amended, consisting of a single sheet
designated Map Number 1, and showing the Residential, Village, Office, Business,
Industrial, and Special Districts.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 6
? “Flood Insurance Rate Map” (FIRM) for Middlesex County issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National
Flood Insurance Program (NFIP), dated and effective beginning on July 7, 2014,
Scale l" = 500', consisting of the 14 map panels that are wholly or partially within the
Town of Acton, designated herein as Map Number 2, and enumerated by FEMA as
panels: 25017C0238F, 25017C0239F, 25017C0241F, 25017C0242F,
25017C0243F, 25017C0244F, 25017C0351F, 25017C0352F, 25017C0353F,
25017C0354F, 25017C0356F, 25017C0357F, 25017C0358F and 25017C0366F;
and including the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July
7, 2014.
? “Groundwater Protection District Map of the Town of Acton” as last amended and
most recently adopted by Town Meeting, consisting of a single sheet designated
Map Number 3. See Section 4.3.2 of this Bylaw for a more detailed description of
the Groundwater Protection District and the use of this map.
? “Affordable Housing Overlay District Map of the Town of Acton” as last amended,
consisting of Map Number 4 and shown on the same sheet as Map Number 1.
2.3 Zoning Map Interpretation – For purposes of interpretation of the Zoning Map, the
following shall apply:
2.3.1 Zoning district boundaries which follow STREETS and railroad right of ways shall be
deemed to coincide with the sidelines thereof. Zoning district boundaries which follow
water courses shall be deemed to follow the mean center line thereof.
2.3.2 Zoning district boundaries, whose exact location are not indicated by means of
dimensions, but which appear to follow a property or LOT line, shall be the property or
LOT line that existed at the time the zoning district boundary was established.
2.3.3 Zoning district boundaries which appear to run parallel to the sideline of STREETS shall
be parallel to such sidelines. Dimensions between the zoning district boundary lines and
STREETS shall be measured perpendicular to the sideline of such STREET.
2.3.4 Where a zoning district boundary, other than an overlay district boundary, divides a LOT
which was in single ownership on February 9, 1954, or upon the effective date of any
amendment changing the boundaries of one of the zoning districts in which the LOT or
a portion of the LOT lies, the regulations applicable to either zoning district may be
extended to as much of the LOT as lies within 30 feet of the adjacent zoning district
boundary.
Note: The Zoning Maps are on file at the Office of the Town Clerk and the Planning Department.
Note: Criteria for determining the boundaries of the Flood Plain District may be found in Section 4.1.3.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 7
SECTION 3.
TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USES, PRINCIPAL USE DEFINITIONS
AND ACCESSORY USE REGULATIONS
Note: This Section of the Bylaw has three major parts; the “Table of PRINCIPAL USES”,
“PRINCIPAL USE Definitions”, and the “ACCESSORY USE Regulations” which should
be consulted to determine the PRINCIPAL and ACCESSORY USES or activities which
are allowed on any parcel of land in Acton. The Flood Plain District and Groundwater
Protection District are overlay districts, which are superimposed on all other zoning
districts. The reader is advised to consult the Flood Plain District regulations (see
Section 4.1) or the Groundwater Resource Protection District regulations (see Section
4.3) in all cases because they may also apply to the land in question.
Table of PRINCIPAL USES - The Table of PRINCIPAL USES designates which
PRINCIPAL land USES are allowed in each zoning district. Each PRINCIPAL USE
category listed on the left hand column of the table corresponds to one of the
PRINCIPAL USE definitions found in Sections 3.2 through 3.7.
PRINCIPAL USE Definitions - Sections 3.2 through 3.7 contain the definitions of the
PRINCIPAL land USES classified by the Bylaw.
ACCESSORY USE Regulations - Section 3.8 contains the regulations applicable to
USES which are ACCESSORY to PRINCIPAL land USES permitted in the various
districts.
3.1 Provisions for Table of PRINCIPAL USES and PRINCIPAL USE Definitions – No
land, STRUCTURE, or BUILDING shall be used except for the purposes permitted in
the district as set forth in this section, except where other regulations apply due to
overlay districts or special permit provisions as set forth in this Bylaw. The words used
to describe each PRINCIPAL USE contained in Sections 3.2 through 3.7, inclusive, are
intended to be definitions of such USES.
A USE is permitted by right in any district under which it is denoted by the letter “Y”.
A USE is prohibited in any district under which it is denoted by the letter “N”.
A USE denoted by the letters “SPA” may be permitted by special permit from the Board
of Appeals.
A USE denoted by the letters “SPP” may be permitted by special permit from the
Planning Board.
A USE denoted by the letters “SPS” may be permitted by special permit from the Board
of Selectmen.
Where any USES permitted by right or by special permit are followed by the letter “R” in
the Site Plan Special Permit column, a Site Plan Special Permit is required from the
Board of Selectmen in accordance with Section 10.4 and where the letters “NR” appear
in the Site Plan Special Permit column, a Site Plan Special Permit is not required.
3.1.1 If an activity might be classified under more than one of the PRINCIPAL USE
definitions, the more specific definition shall determine whether the USE is permitted. If
the activity might be classified under equally specific definitions, it shall not be permitted
unless both PRINCIPAL USES are permitted in the district.
Note: See Section 10.3 for requirements applicable to special permits, and Section 10.4 for
requirements applicable to a site plan special permit.
TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USES
PRINCIPAL USES listed in this Table are subject to provisions in corresponding Section 3.
SP.
DIST.
R-2
R-4
R-8
R-8/4
R-10
R-10/8
R-A R-AA VR EAV EAV-2 NAV SAV WAV OP-1 OP-2 KC LB PM GI LI LI-1 SM(1) TD ARC
SITE
PLAN
3.2 GENERAL USES
3.2.1 Agriculture Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
3.2.2 Conservation Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
3.2.3 Recreation SPP SPP SPP SPP N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N NR
3.3 RESIDENTIAL USES
3.3.1 Single FAMILY Dwelling Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y N N N N N N NR
3.3.2 Two-FAMILY Dwelling N Y Y SPA Y Y Y Y Y N N N N N N N N N N N NR
3.3.3 Dwelling Conversions SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA SPA N N SPA SPA N N N N N N N NR
3.3.4 Multifamily Dwelling N SPS Y SPA(2) Y(2) Y(2) N(3) Y(2) Y N N N N N N N N N N N R
3.4 GOVERNMENTAL INSTITUTIONAL & PUBLIC SERVICE USES
3.4.1 Municipal Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
3.4.2 Educational Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
3.4.3 Religious Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
3.4.4 Nursing Home SPS SPS SPS SPS N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N R
3.4.5 Public or Private Utility Facilities N N N N SPS SPS Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.4.6 Child Care Facility Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N NR
3.4.7 Other Public Use (4) SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N R
3.4.8 Full Service Retirement Community SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N R
3.4.9 Assisted Living Residence (5) SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N N SPS SPS SPS N N N N N N R
3.4.10 Wireless Communication Facility (6) SPP SPP N N N SPP N N N SPP SPP N SPP SPP SPP SPP SPP SPP SPP SPP NR
3.4.11 Commercial Education or Instruction N N N N Y Y SPS SPS SPS Y Y SPS Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.4.12 Community Service Organization N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.5 BUSINESS USES
3.5.1 Retail Store N N N Y(7) SPS(10) Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y N N N N N N R
3.5.2 Office N N N Y(7) SPS(10) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.5.3 Health Care Facility N N N N Y SPS(10) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.5.4 Hospital, Medical Center N N N N N N N N N SPS SPS N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N R
3.5.5 Restaurant (8) N N N SPS(7) SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N SPS SPS SPS SPS N N N N SPS N R
3.5.6 Combined Business & Dwelling N N N Y(7) Y Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y N N N N N N R
3.5.7 Hotel, Motel, Inn, Conference Center N N N N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N SPS SPS SPS SPS N N N N SPS N R
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 8
PRINCIPAL USES
BUSINESS
DISTRICTS
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS VILLAGE DISTRICTS INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
OFFICE
DISTRICTS
TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USES
PRINCIPAL USES listed in this Table are subject to provisions in corresponding Section 3.
SP.
DIST.
R-2
R-4
R-8
R-8/4
R-10
R-10/8
R-A R-AA VR EAV EAV-2 NAV SAV WAV OP-1 OP-2 KC LB PM GI LI LI-1 SM(1) TD ARC
SITE
PLAN
3.5.8 Bed & Breakfast SPS SPS SPS SPS Y SPS Y Y Y N N Y Y Y N N N N N N R
3.5.9 Lodge or Club N N N N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N N SPS SPS SPS N N N N N N R
3.5.10 Veterinary Care N N N SPS(7) SPS SPS N SPS SPS N N Y Y Y Y Y Y SPS N N R
3.5.11 Animal Boarding N N N N N N N N N N N N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N N R
3.5.12 Services N N N Y(7) Y Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y N N N N N N R
3.5.13 Repair Shop, Technical Shop, Studio N N N Y(7) Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.5.14 Building Trade Shop N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.5.15 Commercial Recreation (9) N N N N SPS(10) SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N R
3.5.16 Commercial Entertainment N N N N Y Y N SPS SPS N N SPS SPS SPS N N N N N N R
3.5.17 Golf Course in Residential Districts SPP N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N NR
3.5.18
Cross-Country Skiing in
Residential Districts SPP N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N N NR
3.5.19 Vehicle Service Station N N N N N N N N N N N SPS Y Y N N N N N N R
3.5.20 Vehicle Repair N N N N N N N N SPS N N SPS Y Y N Y N Y N N R
3.5.21 Vehicle Body Shop N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y N Y N Y N N R
3.5.22 Vehicle Sale, Rental N N N N N N N N N N N N Y Y N N N N N N R
3.5.23 Parking Facility N N N N N N Y N Y N N Y Y Y N N N N Y N R
3.5.24 Transportation Services N N N N N N N N N N SPS N N Y SPS N N N Y N R
3.5.25 Adult Uses N N N N N N N N N SPS N N N N N N N N SPS N R
3.6 INDUSTRIAL USES
3.6.1 Warehouse N N N N N N N N N Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.6.2 Distribution Plant N N N N N N N N N N SPS N N SPS N N N N SPS N R
3.6.3 Manufacturing N N N N N N N SPS SPS Y Y SPS N Y Y Y Y Y Y N R
3.6.4 Scientific N N N N N N N N N SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS SPS N R
3.6.5
Ground-Mounted Neighborhood
Solar Photovoltaic Installation (11) Y Y Y N N N N N N Y Y N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
3.6.6
Ground-Mounted Industrial Solar
Photovoltaic Installation (11) SPP SPP SPP N N N N N N Y Y N SPP SPP Y Y Y Y Y Y NR
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 9
3.5 BUSINESS USES (continued)
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS VILLAGE DISTRICTS
OFFICE
DISTRICTS
BUSINESS
DISTRICTS
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS
PRINCIPAL USES
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 10
NOTES FOR TABLE OF PRINCIPAL USES
(1) See also Section 10.4.3.12 - Special Provisions Applicable in the SM District, for special
USE restrictions in oversized BUILDINGS.
(2) Not more than four DWELLING UNITS shall be permitted per multifamily dwelling. In the
VR District a Site Plan Special Permit shall not be required. In the SAV district, the Board of
Selectmen may by Special Permit allow more than four DWELLING UNITS per Multifamily
Dwelling.
(3) Multifamily dwellings created under the provisions of Section 5.4 and Section 5.5 shall be
permitted.
(4) If the proposed USE will be located in the Floodway Fringe, as defined in Section 4.1, or
Zones 1, 2 or 3 of the Groundwater Protection District, as defined in Section 4.3, before
granting a special permit under this Section the applicant shall submit the information
required under Sections 4.1 or 4.3 and the Board of Selectmen shall find that the proposed
USE complies with the requirements of Sections 4.1.8.1 and 4.1.9, and 4.3.8 through 4.3.10
respectively.
(5) Assisted Living Residences with 10 or fewer residents shall not require a Special Permit or
Site Plan Special Permit.
(6) Refer to Section 3.10 for specific standards for Wireless Communication Facilities and for
certain categorical exemptions from the requirements set forth in the Table of PRINCIPAL
USES.
(7) Provided that the owner of the property resides on the property, the business USE is limited
to 500 square feet of NET FLOOR AREA, and all parking spaces are provided to the rear or
side of the BUILDING. For purposes of this footnote, the owner shall be defined as one or
more individuals residing in a DWELLING UNIT who hold legal or beneficial title and for
whom the DWELLING UNIT is the primary residence for voting and tax purposes. The
business USE hereunder shall not be deemed a home occupation. Home occupations are
authorized separately under Section 3.8.1.2. Site Plan Special Permit shall not be required.
Hours of business operation shall be limited to 7 AM to 9 PM Monday through Saturday,
except hours of retail sale shall be limited to 7 AM to 7 PM Monday through Saturday.
Exterior lighting fixtures for the business USE shall not be illuminated except during hours
of business operation.
(8) No Special Permit shall be required for a Restaurant with 65 seats or less.
(9) No Special Permit shall be required for Commercial Recreation facilities with a NET FLOOR
AREA of less than 2,000 square feet.
(10) No Special Permit shall be required for this USE if its NET FLOOR AREA is 5000 square
feet or less.
(11) Refer to Section 3.11 for specific standards, requirements, exemptions and special permit
criteria for Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 11
3.2 General USES
3.2.1 Agriculture – Agriculture or farming as defined in MGL Ch. 128, s. 1A; the boarding,
keeping or raising of livestock, including horses, as a commercial enterprise; aquaculture;
silviculture; horticulture; floriculture; or viticulture; the use of BUILDINGS and
STRUCTURES for the primary purpose of these activities; and the sale of farm products.
The aforesaid uses and activities shall be limited to parcels of 2 acres or more, whereby
land divided by a public or private way or a waterway shall be construed as one parcel, and
they shall be subject to and in conformance with the definitions, criteria, thresholds, and
requirements as they pertain to these activities conducted on not less than 2 acres or not
less than 5 acres, respectively, all as set forth in MGL Ch. 40A, s. 3.
3.2.2 Conservation – The USE of land in its natural state or improved with trails or resource
management programs that do not significantly alter its natural state.
3.2.3 Recreation – A pool, tennis or other recreation facility owned and operated by a
neighborhood association or a condominium for the use by the members of the association
or condominium and their guests. The facility may also be used for commercial instruction,
education and training in skills of all kinds for the members of the association or
condominium or the public at large.
3.3 Residential USES – Not more than one BUILDING for dwelling purposes shall be located
upon a LOT, except
a) in the following Districts: Village Districts (EAV, NAV, SAV, WAV); Residence A District
(R-A); Residence AA District (R-AA);
b) for the following USES: Nursing Home; Full Service Retirement Community; Assisted
Living Residence as defined in this Bylaw or in MGL Ch. 19D; and accessory apartment
in a detached BUILDING as provided under Section 3.8.1.6;
c) where a special permit has been granted for the following: a Planned Conservation
Residential Community (PCRC) under Section 9 of this Bylaw; an Independent SENIOR
Residence under Section 9B of this Bylaw; an AFFORDABLE Housing Development
under Section 4.4 of this Bylaw; an Accessory Apartment as provided under Section
3.8.1.6; a golf course under Section 3.5.17 of this bylaw.
3.3.1 Single FAMILY Dwelling – A detached DWELLING UNIT designed as the residence of
one FAMILY.
3.3.2 Two-FAMILY Dwelling - A BUILDING for residential use containing two DWELLING
UNITS or, as permitted under this Bylaw, two Single FAMILY Dwellings on one LOT;
but not a Dwelling Conversion, or an Accessory Apartment under Section 3.8.1.6.
3.3.3 Dwelling Conversions – A single FAMILY dwelling or other residential BUILDING in
existence prior to April 1, 1971 with less than four DWELLING UNITS may be altered
and used for not more than four DWELLING UNITS if the LOT on which the BUILDING
is located contains not less than 10,000 square feet per DWELLING UNIT and if one of
the units is occupied by the owner of the property. In the R-A, R-AA, VR, SAV, WAV,
NAV, EAV and KC Districts the preceding requirement that the LOT on which the
BUILDING is located shall contain not less than 10,000 square feet per DWELLING
UNIT shall not apply.
3.3.4 Multifamily Dwelling – A BUILDING for residential USE, other than a dwelling
conversion, containing more than two DWELLING UNITS. A BUILDING or
STRUCTURE, housing an ACCESSORY USE to a multifamily dwelling USE, owned
and operated by the owner or the residents of a multifamily dwelling USE located on the
same LOT or on an adjacent LOT, such as building and grounds maintenance facilities,
wastewater disposal facilities, recreation facilities, or club houses.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 12
3.4 Governmental, Institutional and Public Service USES
3.4.1 Municipal – USE of land, BUILDINGS, and STRUCTURES by the Town of Acton and
the Water Supply District of Acton.
3.4.2 Educational – USE of land, BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES for providing instruction or
education in a general range of subjects, on land owned or leased by the
Commonwealth or any of its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic, or by a religious
sect or denomination, or by a nonprofit educational entity. Such USE may include
museums, libraries, auditoria, athletic facilities, dormitories, administrative offices, or
similar facilities and activities whose purpose is substantially related to the educational
purposes of the owner.
3.4.3 Religious – USE of land, BUILDINGS, and STRUCTURES for religious purposes by a
religious sect or denomination, which may include religious instruction, maintenance of
a convent, parish house and similar facilities and activities whose purpose is
substantially related to the religious purposes of such sect or denomination.
3.4.4 Nursing Home – An extended or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to
provide full-time convalescent or chronic care.
3.4.5 Public or Private Utility Facilities – Facilities, equipment, and STRUCTURES necessary
for conducting a service by a public service corporation.
3.4.6 Child Care Facility – A day care or school age child care center or program as defined
in MGL, Chapter 40A.
3.4.7 Other Public USE – USE of land, BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES for a public purpose,
other than educational USE, by any town or local agency, except the Town of Acton and
the Water Supply District of Acton.
3.4.8 Full Service Retirement Community – A facility that is designed and operated to provide
its elderly or impaired residents with a broad range of accommodations and services to
meet their needs, including at least two of the following: independent living in single or
multi-unit dwellings; assisted living in single or multi-unit dwellings; a Nursing Home. A
Full Service Retirement Community shall provide a continuum of care by providing its
residents varied levels of care and assistance in daily living on an as needed basis
within the facility. A Full Service Retirement Community may include support services
that are necessary to meet the needs of its residents such as but not limited to skilled
nursing, medical and other health services, recreation and leisure facilities, a
community center, a place of worship, or food services. In addition, a Full Service
Retirement Community may include convenience services for its residents, such as a
Retail Store, a Restaurant, and Services. A Nursing Home by itself, or an Assisted
Living Facility by itself as defined in this Bylaw or in MGL Ch. 19D, or independent living
accommodations by themselves such as single FAMILY residences or apartments shall
not be considered a Full Service Retirement Community.
3.4.9 Assisted Living Residence – Any entity, however organized, which meets all of the
following three criteria: Provides room and board to residents who do not require 24-
hour skilled nursing care; provides assistance with activities of daily living; and collects
payments for the provision of these services; all as further defined in MGL Ch. 19D, s.
1, as amended from time to time. A unit as defined in MGL Ch. 19D, s. 1 shall be a
DWELLING UNIT under this Bylaw.
3.4.10 Personal Wireless Facility – A facility for the reception and transmission of personal
wireless communication signals operated by a public utility or commercial entity
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission. A Personal Wireless Facility
shall include reception and transmission equipment and fixtures, such as antennae and
satellite dishes, and associated electronic and mechanical equipment, any tower or
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 13
other STRUCTURE designed or used primarily to support or elevate such fixtures, and
any accessory STRUCTURE or BUILDING necessary to shelter the equipment.
3.4.11 Commercial Education or Instruction – A private, for-profit business engaged in
providing instruction or training in skills of any kind, including business, data processing,
programming, arts and crafts.
3.4.12 Community Service Organization – An organization, other than religious or educational,
incorporated as a 501(c)(3) non-profit corporation under the Federal tax code and
dedicated to assist individuals or families in need by providing or distributing free goods,
services or other assistance to cover basic needs, such as but not limited to a food
pantry, a provider of free clothing, furniture, appliances and home goods, or a provider
of financial assistance for home heating fuel.
3.5 Business USES
3.5.1 Retail Store – An establishment with not more than 60,000 square feet in NET FLOOR
AREA selling merchandise within a BUILDING to the general public. Said merchandise
is not intended for resale. A Retail Store may have one or more vendors within it and
may occupy one whole BUILDING or a portion of a BUILDING. If a Retail Store
occupies a portion of a BUILDING, its retail space shall be separated from other Retail
Stores by complete walls or partitions, and customers must pay for purchases and exit
the Retail Store before entering another Retail Store. A garden center, florist, or
commercial greenhouse may have open-air display of horticultural products.
3.5.2 Office – A business or professional office such as corporate offices or the offices of an
attorney, doctor, dentist, architect, engineer, real estate agency, loan agency, or similar
professional.
3.5.3 Health Care Facility – A walk-in clinic, rehabilitation center, medical lab, dental lab,
weight loss clinic, or similar facility.
3.5.4 Hospital, Medical Center – A facility providing medical or surgical services to persons,
including ambulatory and emergency services, and accessory facilities and functions
that are an integral part of the facility such as laboratories, out-patient departments,
training, staff offices, and similar adjunct facilities and functions.
3.5.5 Restaurant – Establishment where food and beverages are sold within a BUILDING to
customers for consumption 1) at a table or counter, or 2) in an adjacent outdoor space
that does not obstruct a public way, sidewalk, walkway, vehicular parking, or a
driveway, or 3) off the premises as carry-out orders, except that drive-up service shall
not be allowed, or 4) any combination of the above. In the OP-2 and the TD District, the
minimum square footage for an individual restaurant shall be 5,000 square feet
measured in NET FLOOR AREA.
3.5.6 Combined Business and Dwelling – A LOT used for business USES and for not more
than four DWELLING UNITS. Business USES and DWELLING UNITS may be in the
same BUILDING or in separate BUILDINGS. In the EAV District, the limit of four
DWELLING UNITS shall not apply provided that the DWELLING UNITS are in the same
BUILDING as business USES, or that not more than four DWELLING UNITS are within
a multifamily dwelling. In the NAV District the limit of four DWELLING UNITS shall not
apply where dwelling units are created through the application of Sections 5.4 and 5.5.
3.5.7 Hotel, Motel, Inn, Conference Center – A facility providing transient lodging
accommodations to the general public or a facility for corporate meetings and
conferences, which may include restaurants, swimming pool, exercise rooms, and
banquet halls. Such a facility may also include small retail stores, and financial and
other services that shall serve primarily the guests of the facility, and that shall not
exceed a combined total of 1000 square feet in NET FLOOR AREA. In the NAV, EAV,
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 14
and WAV Districts, the number of guestrooms shall not exceed five, and in the SAV
District, the number of guestrooms shall not exceed eight.
3.5.8 Bed and Breakfast – A private owner-occupied dwelling where not more than eight
rooms are let and a breakfast is included in the rent.
3.5.9 Lodge or Club – A private organization such as a fraternal, civic, alumni, or sports club,
to which membership is limited or controlled.
3.5.10 Veterinary Care – A facility where animals are given medical or surgical treatment, and
short term boarding of animals within a fully enclosed BUILDING when incidental to the
medical or surgical treatment.
3.5.11 Animal Boarding – Indoor or outdoor establishment where dogs, cats, or other pets are
kept for the purpose of sale, training, breeding, or boarding care, including an animal
shelter, and other activities related thereto.
3.5.12 Services – Establishments providing services directly to the consumer such as a bank,
credit union, barber shop, beauty salon, laundry, dry-cleaning, diaper service, building
cleaning service, funeral home, shoe repair, tailor, clothing rental shop, equipment
rental or leasing, food catering, photocopying, secretarial service, or similar USES or
establishments.
3.5.13 Repair Shop, Technical Shop, Studio – Repair and service of appliances, computers,
office equipment, bicycles, lawn mowers, or similar small equipment; photography or
film studio; art studio; artisan's studio; music instruction or practice room; or similar
USES or establishments.
3.5.14 Building Trade Shop – An establishment for use by the practitioner of a building trade
such as a carpenter, welder, plumber, electrician, builder, mason, landscaping
contractor, lawn care service, building cleaning service, or similar occupation.
3.5.15 Commercial Recreation – A facility operated as a business, open to the public for a pervisit
or membership fee, and designed and equipped for the conduct and instruction of
sports and recreation such as ice skating, roller skating, racquet ball, tennis, swimming,
body building, fitness training, steam baths, sauna, aerobics, yoga, dancing, martial
arts, bowling, horseback riding, skiing, ball games, golf course, country club, miniature
golf, golf driving range, or similar customary and usual sports and recreational activities.
3.5.16 Commercial Entertainment – An indoor facility such as a theatre, cinema, performing
arts center, or video arcade. In the SAV District, only cinemas, theaters, or performing
arts center shall be allowed.
3.5.17 Golf Course in Residential Districts - In the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8, and R-10
Districts the Planning Board may approve by special permit a golf course with at least
18-holes that is designed and managed consistent with "Environmental Principles for
Golf Courses in the United States" published by The Center for Resource Management;
Salt Lake City, Utah; amended through 1996:
3.5.17.1 The Planning Board may approve ACCESSORY USES and BUILDINGS that are
customarily incidental to a golf course, such as but not limited to:
a) Clubhouse, pro-shop, locker rooms, administrative offices, restaurant, bar, snack
bar, or on-course shelters.
b) Function rooms and banquet facilities for members and guests.
c) A practice area, tees, or greens.
d) Accessory recreational facilities such as tennis courts or a pool.
e) Maintenance and storage BUILDING.
f) Up to 10 guestrooms.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 15
g) Up to two DWELLING UNITS solely for occupancy by the golf course staff.
3.5.17.2 The combined NET FLOOR AREA of all BUILDINGS shall not exceed 60,000 square
feet.
3.5.17.3 The following setback standards shall apply to BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, parking
lots, and accessory recreation facilities:
a) Minimum front yard: • 45 feet;
b) Minimum side and rear yard: • 30 feet where the abutting land is in a Business,
Office, or Industrial District;
• 100 feet where the abutting land is in a Residential
District;
• The Planning Board may exempt fences and other
screening and protection devices from the minimum
side and rear yard requirement.
3.5.17.4 The Planning Board may require larger setbacks, and may require suitable buffers and
screening to protect abutting residences and businesses.
3.5.17.5 Except as otherwise set forth in Section 3.5.17.3, LOTS, BUILDINGS and
STRUCTURES of a golf course shall comply with the applicable dimensional standards
in the Table of Dimensional Regulations for the zoning district in which the portion of the
golf course is located.
3.5.17.6 Parking spaces shall be provided in the quantity required under Section 6.3. Parking lot
design and landscaping shall at a minimum comply with the standards of Section 6.7 of
this bylaw. The Planning Board may allow a set-aside of a portion of the required
number of parking spaces as reserve parking to be built if and when needed at a later
time. In addition, it may require on-site overflow parking areas not in compliance with
this bylaw to be used solely during special events or tournaments.
3.5.17.7 The Planning Board may require suitable setbacks, buffers, and screening for tees,
greens, and fairways to protect abutting residences and businesses, including to block
flying balls.
3.5.17.8 The Planning Board may require monitoring and subsequent retrofit of additional
landscaping and buffers to address repeated hazards from off-track golf balls.
3.5.17.9 Illumination of tees, greens, and fairways for night golfing shall not be allowed. The
Planning Board may approve non-glare, low intensity, low level outdoor lights used to
illuminate ways and paths within the course, BUILDINGS, parking lots, and accessory
recreation facilities.
3.5.17.10 The primary ACCESS to the golf course shall be over its own FRONTAGE. The primary
ACCESS shall be from an ARTERIAL STREET as defined in the Acton Subdivision
Rules and Regulations, unless the Planning Board finds that:
a) residential neighborhoods are not materially affected; or
b) overall and peak hour traffic volumes resulting from the golf course are not
substantially different from volumes generated by potential residential development
on the same land.
3.5.17.11 The Planning Board may require public access to or over the golf course land for
pedestrian and bicycle trails, and access to and connection with adjoining or nearby
public lands.
3.5.17.12 An application for a golf course special permit shall contain a site development plan,
prepared and certified by a professional practicing member of the American Society of
Golf Course Architects. It shall show the details and information as further specified in
rules and regulations adopted by the Planning Board. The information submitted with
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 16
the application shall include, but not be limited to: A staking or routing plan; plans for
drainage, erosion control, and storm water management; planting and landscaping plan;
a turf management and irrigation plan; a business plan including special events and
services to the community at large; an environmental impact report detailing project
related impacts on wetlands and other natural resource areas, water supply, surface
water and groundwater resources, historic resources, transportation and access,
adjacent land, neighborhoods, and businesses; and assessment of impacts on Town
finances and services.
3.5.17.13 The Planning Board may impose reasonable conditions on the proposed golf course
layout and design; regulate turf management practices; limit irrigation and water
consumption; limit the hours of operation; restrict the size of BUILDINGS and other
facilities; limit the number and size of special events; and impose any other limitations
and requirements it deems necessary to protect the natural, water, historic and other
resources of the Town, minimize adverse impacts on abutting properties, provide
general benefits to the Town and its residents, and prevent traffic congestion.
3.5.17.14 The Planning Board may require ongoing monitoring of turf management practices,
groundwater resources, surface and groundwater quality, and general business
development, and may impose additional conditions in the special permit to prevent
unanticipated environmental damage resulting from the operation of the golf course.
3.5.17.15 A golf course located in part within the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8, or R-10 Districts
and in part in other zoning districts where Commercial Recreation is allowed as defined
in Section 3.5.15 shall comply with the requirements for golf courses in residential
districts. However, the dimensional requirements of the other zoning districts may be
applied to the portion of the golf course located there. In such cases, the Special Permit
Granting Authority shall be the Planning Board and no special permit for Commercial
Recreation and no Site Plan Special Permit shall be required.
3.5.17.16 If a special permit is sought for a golf course partially located in a residential district in
Acton and partially in an adjacent town, the requirements for a golf course in residential
districts shall apply to the portion in Acton including the requirement for a special permit.
In such cases, the Planning Board may waive the requirement that the golf course shall
have at least 18 holes.
3.5.17.17 Where the requirements of this Section 3.5.17 are in direct conflict with the standard
requirements of the underlying zoning district, Section 3.5.17 shall prevail for any golf
course approved under this section.
3.5.18 Cross-Country Skiing in Residential Districts – In the R-2, R-4, R-8, R-8/4, R-10/8, and
R-10 Districts, commercial cross-country ski courses on at least 25 acres of land with
customary and incidental ACCESSORY USES including vehicular parking, a clubhouse,
a store for the rental and sale of ski related items only, an administrative office, and a
restaurant. The total NET FLOOR AREA for such ACCESSORY USES shall not exceed
2,500 square feet unless entirely within a STRUCTURE in existence at the time of
adoption of this Bylaw, but in no case shall the total NET FLOOR AREA devoted to
such ACCESSORY USES exceed 5,000 square feet. In addition, one DWELLING UNIT
may be located on the premises of the cross-country ski courses. Such USE shall
comply with the following requirements:
3.5.18.1 The operation of the cross-country skiing facility, including ACCESSORY USES, trail
grooming and maintenance equipment, shall be limited to the hours between one-half
hour before sunrise and one-half hour after sunset.
3.5.18.2 New BUILDINGS, including improvements to existing BUILDINGS for ski-related
activities and new parking areas shall be screened year round from the adjacent
property by evergreens and other vegetative growth of mixed variety.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 17
3.5.18.3 No trail or new BUILDING including improvements to existing BUILDINGS for ski
related activities and new parking area shall be located within fifty feet of any property
line.
3.5.18.4 No so-called snowmobiles shall be permitted except for emergency or maintenance
purposes.
3.5.19 Vehicle Service Station – Sale of motor vehicle fuel and related products and services,
including a convenience store if an integral part of the motor vehicle service station; or a
car wash. All maintenance and service, other than minor service and emergency
repairs, shall be conducted entirely within a building. No vehicle service station or car
wash shall be located within 1,300 feet of another vehicle service station or car wash.
3.5.20 Vehicle Repair – Establishment where the principal service is the mechanical repair,
excluding body work, of automobiles, trucks, boats, motorcycles, trailers, recreational
vehicles, farm equipment or similar motor vehicles, having a maximum gross vehicle
weight of 14,000 pounds, provided that all but minor repairs shall be conducted entirely
within a BUILDING.
3.5.21 Vehicle Body Shop – Establishment where the principal service is the repair and
painting of automobiles, trucks, boats, motorcycles, trailers, recreational vehicles, farm
equipment or similar motor vehicles having a maximum gross vehicle weight of 14,000
pounds, provided that all but minor repairs shall be conducted entirely within a
BUILDING.
3.5.22 Vehicle Sale, Rental – Facility for the rental, leasing or sale of automobiles, trucks,
boats, motorcycles, trailers, recreational vehicles, farm equipment or similar motor
vehicles having a maximum gross vehicle weight of 14,000 pounds; including open-air
display. The open-air display area shall comply with the standards of Section 6.7 of this
Bylaw.
3.5.23 Parking Facility – Commercial parking open to the public for automobiles and similar
light motor vehicles.
3.5.24 Transportation Services – The parking or storage of ground transportation vehicles
including buses, ambulances, limousines, taxies, liveries, wagons, or carriages. The
primary purpose of the business shall be to provide transportation services to
passengers. All vehicles stored or parked upon the premises shall be registered or
licensed.
3.5.25 Adult USES – An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade or other materials for sale, rental or display, which are distinguished or
characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to sexual
conduct as defined in MGL Ch. 272, s. 31, such as but not limited to an adult bookstore,
adult paraphernalia store, adult video store, or adult motion picture theater. Also, adult
entertainment, which shall be an establishment in which workers or performers appear
in a state of nudity or in a manner intended to arouse sexual excitement, as defined in
MGL Ch. 272, s.31, for a substantial or significant portion of the time the establishment
is open for business, or which derives a substantial or significant portion of its revenues
from such occasions. The terms “substantial or significant portion” as used herein shall
mean either ten percent or more of the business inventory or stock of merchandise for
sale or rental at any point in time; or ten percent or more of the annual number of sales,
rentals or other business transactions; or ten percent or more of the annual business
revenue; or ten percent or more of the hours during which the establishment is open to
the public. No Special Permit for an Adult USE shall be issued to any person convicted
of violating the provisions of MGL, Ch. 119, s. 63 or Ch. 272, s. 28.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 18
3.6 Industrial USES
3.6.1 Warehouse – A BUILDING used primarily for the enclosed storage of goods, and
materials for any length of time; including receiving, repackaging, and/or reshipping;
and including office, administrative, and support facilities related to the foregoing, but
not a Distribution Center as defined in Section 3.6.2; a personal self-storage facility or
mini-warehouse.
3.6.2 Distribution Center – An establishment with a BUILDING NET FLOOR AREA larger
than 50,000 square feet used primarily for the receiving, short-term enclosed storage,
repackaging, and/or reshipping or distribution of goods and materials to retail stores and
other market outlets, or directly to the consumer via telephone or internet remote sales;
including office, administrative, and support facilities related to the foregoing.
3.6.3 Manufacturing –
? An establishment engaged in the creation, fabrication or assembly of products;
? The physical, mechanical or chemical transformation, processing, blending or
assembly of materials, substances or components into products;
? The development and manufacturing of renewable energy or alternative energy
(RE/AE) equipment and systems;
? The research or testing of new and emerging technologies and technological
devices; or
? Similar USES and activities; but, excluding Scientific USE as defined in Section
3.6.4.
The foregoing may include related support facilities and operations including but not
limited to office, administration, laboratory, warehouse, and wholesale distribution of the
manufactured products. All operations shall confine harmful, noxious or unpermitted
smoke, fumes, dust, noise, pollution, contamination and other emissions and nuisances
within the premises. No manufacturing, research or testing shall be conducted outside
of a BUILDING, except where a special permit for such outdoor manufacturing,
research or testing has been issued by the Board of Selectmen. In the KC District, the
maximum NET FLOOR AREA of an establishment that is classified as a Manufacturing
USE shall not exceed 10,000 square feet.
3.6.4 Scientific – Research and development in the fields of biotechnology, medical,
pharmaceutical, physical, environmental, biological, or behavioral sciences and
technology; wildlife medicine; genetic engineering; comparative medicine;
bioengineering; cell biology; human and animal nutrition; and veterinary medicine;
including the production of equipment, apparatus, machines or other devices for
research, development, manufacturing advance, and practical application in any such
field or area, and including offices, administrative, laboratory, and support facilities
related to any of the foregoing activities. In the KC District, the maximum NET FLOOR
AREA of an establishment that is classified as a Scientific USE shall not exceed 10,000
square feet.
3.6.5 Ground-Mounted Neighborhood Solar Photovoltaic Installation - A solar photovoltaic
installation with a layout that is not more than one (1) acre in size and that is primarily
designed to benefit the energy needs of USES in the immediately surrounding area or
neighborhood. Layout shall mean the total area of the vertical projection on the ground
of all panels in the installation’s most horizontal tilt position and shall include all spaces
between the panels. Ground-Mounted shall mean that installations are structurally
mounted to the ground in any manner, including but not limited to ground anchored
pole, rack, or rail installations, or non-ground penetrating ballasted installations; not
roof-mounted installations or canopy installations above parking lots or driveways.
3.6.6 Ground-Mounted Industrial Solar Photovoltaic Installation - A solar photovoltaic
installation with a layout that is of any size and that is primarily designed to benefit all
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 19
energy users regardless of location or vicinity to the installation. The words ‘layout’ and
‘ground-mounted’ shall have the same meaning as in Section 3.6.5 above.
3.7 Prohibited USES – All USES that pose a present or potential hazard to human health,
safety, welfare, or the environment through the emission of smoke, particulate matter,
noise or vibration, or through fire or explosive hazard, or glare are expressly prohibited
in all zoning districts. In addition, the following USES are prohibited in all zoning
districts, unless otherwise specifically permitted in this Bylaw.
Aircraft assembly; landing or takeoff of motorized aircraft Amusement park
Asphalt, block, or concrete plant Billboard
Bottling plant Chemical storage and production facility
Commercial extraction of earth products such as sand,
gravel, soil, loam, rock, ore, or minerals, except when
connected with the construction of BUILDINGS,
STREETS, ways or other improvements to land in
accordance with applicable laws and regulations.
Commercial or private dump, landfill, refuse
incinerator, or other commercial or private
solid waste disposal or processing facility
Commercial or private sludge storage or disposal facility Drive-in or outdoor cinema
Fertilizer plant Commercial storage of heating oils;
commercial storage of natural gas in LNG
tanks, gas holders or pressure vessels; except
that the storage of liquefied petroleum (LP)
gas shall be allowed for retail purposes as
follows:
(a) up to 20 pound capacity cylinders in
quantities that are customary for retail
businesses, and
(b) in a tank with up to 1,000-gallon capacity
for customer refills not exceeding one tank per
retail location
Manufacture, use, storage, transport or treatment,
disposal and/or processing of explosive, toxic or
hazardous materials as a principal activity
Lumber Yard
Mobile home; mobile home park; mobile home sales Meat packing and pet food plants,
slaughterhouses
Nuclear power generation Motor vehicle assembly
Paper or pulp mill Privately owned cemetery
Radioactive waste disposal or reprocessing of
radioactive materials
Refinery
Repair facility for trucks, buses, construction and
industrial equipment
Reclamation and Reprocessing of asphalt
and/or concrete
Retail Store larger than 60,000 sq. ft. Sale of heavy vehicles, equipment or buses
Salvage yard and all open air storage of salvage
materials and debris
Stadium, coliseum, sports arena, race track
Storage or reprocessing of waste products and salvage
materials such as non-operable vehicles or appliances
Storage yard, contractor’s yard or other open
air establishment for storage, distribution, or
sale of materials, merchandise, products or
equipment
Tanneries, smelting or rendering plants, gelatin factory Trailer camp
Truck or trailer cleaning, washing facility or terminal Water resources development for private
commercial sale
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 20
3.8 ACCESSORY USE Regulations – ACCESSORY USES shall be permitted in all
districts on the same LOT with the PRINCIPAL USE. The ACCESSORY USES listed
below are subject to the conditions and requirements stated in the respective Sections.
3.8.1 ACCESSORY USES Permitted in the Residential Districts and dwellings in the Non-
Residential Districts:
3.8.1.1 Private garages or carports; greenhouses; tool sheds; barns; swimming pools or tennis
courts provided that such recreational facilities are used only by the residents and their
guests.
3.8.1.2 A home occupation, other than retail sales, conducted entirely within the DWELLING
UNIT or an accessory BUILDING by a resident and employing no persons other than
the residents. In the Village Residential District, the portion of the DWELLING UNIT or
accessory BUILDING used for a home occupation shall be limited to 500 square feet of
NET FLOOR AREA. The Board of Appeals may authorize by special permit a home
occupation which 1) conducts retail sales, or 2) employs non-residents provided that no
more than two such non-resident employees shall be present on the premises at any
one time.
3.8.1.3 The renting of rooms or boarding for not more than three persons; except that by
Special Permit from the Board of Appeals the renting of rooms or boarding to more than
three persons may be allowed. In either case, the service shall be operated by a
resident owner of the premises.
3.8.1.4 Breeding for sale of dogs, cats or other pets, provided that not more than four such
animals more than one year old shall be permitted.
3.8.1.5 Common Drives for vehicular and non-vehicular ACCESS by way of rights-of-way or
easements serving more than one LOT. Common Drives are not STREETS and do not
provide FRONTAGE for LOTS. Common Drives shall not serve more than 12 LOTS.
Common Drives serving 6 or more LOTS shall require a special permit by the Planning
Board. Common Drives serving more than two LOTS but less than six LOTS shall also
require a special permit by the Planning Board unless they are in compliance with the
requirements a) through q) below. All Common Drives shall be completed prior to the
occupancy of any DWELLING UNIT served by the Common Drive.
a) All curb radii and radii of pavement edges shall be designed to accommodate SU-30
design vehicles (fire engine). In determining the adequacy of the radii at the
Common Drive intersection with a STREET, it shall be assumed that on all streets a
turn shall be possible without obstructing oncoming traffic.
b) There shall be a turn around for fire and other emergency vehicles (SU-30 design
vehicle) for Common Drives that are 600 feet or longer, and there shall be one
additional turn around for each additional 600 feet of driveway length beyond the
first 600 feet.
c) The maximum grade within 50 feet of the intersection with a STREET shall be 5%.
d) The intersection angle between the Common Drive centerline and the STREET
centerline shall be not less than 60 degrees.
e) The maximum grade shall be 10%. The minimum grade shall be 1%.
f) The Common Drive shall be laid out entirely within an ACCESS and utility easement
that is at least 24 feet wide.
g) The minimum centerline radius shall be 80 feet.
h) The stopping sight distance along the Common Drive shall be not less than 125
feet.
i) The design shall be for a maximum design speed of 25 miles per hour.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 21
j) The minimum sight distance at the intersection of the Common Drive with a
STREET shall be 275 feet, and 450 feet where the STREET is an arterial STREET
(arterial STREET as defined in the Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations).
k) An adequate drainage design shall be provided meeting the design standards and
submission requirements of Acton General Bylaw Chapter X and the Rules and
Regulations adopted thereunder.
l) The paved wear surface shall be at least 12 feet wide and consist of a minimum of 3
inches of Type I bituminous concrete, applied in two courses over a minimum base
of 12 inches of properly prepared and compacted gravel, graded to drain from the
crown.
m) There shall be a minimum 4 foot wide shoulder on each side that is free of
obstructions such as trees or utility poles. The shoulder shall be prepared with a
minimum of 2 inches of topsoil over the same gravel base as the wear surface, and
seeded.
n) There shall be a sign posted at the Common Drive intersection with the STREET
displaying the name of the Common Drive and indicating “private way”.
o) A sidewalk shall be constructed along the arterial and collector STREET (arterial
and collector STREET as defined in the Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations)
FRONTAGE of all LOTS served by the Common Drive, except where a sidewalk
already exists. The sidewalk shall be constructed with a paved surface consisting of
a minimum of 2.5 inches of Type 1 bituminous concrete over 3 inches processed
gravel and 6 inches of bank run gravel (or equivalent). It shall be at least five feet
wide and shall follow in general the grade of the STREET. Where the sidewalk
crosses driveways it shall have wheelchair ramps. Where the sidewalk does not
connect with another sidewalk it shall be connected to the STREET pavement with
wheelchair ramps. Easements or additional width in the STREET layout shall be
provided as necessary to accommodate the sidewalk.
p) An agreement providing ACCESS over the Common Drive to all the LOTS and
making all the LOTS served by the Common Drive jointly and severally responsible
for its maintenance and repair, including snow plowing, shall be recorded. Evidence
of recording shall be given to the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to the issuance
of a building permit on any LOT served by the Common Drive.
q) Compliance with the Common Drive construction and design requirements shall be
demonstrated to the Zoning Enforcement Officer by means of proposed plans and
as-built plans for the Common Drive and sidewalk, prepared by a registered
professional engineer. Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the power to establish
requirements as to the form and contents of such plans.
3.8.1.6 Accessory apartments subject to the following standards and requirements.
a) There shall be not more than one accessory apartment on a LOT.
b) Any BUILDING extensions or alterations shall maintain the appearance of a Single
FAMILY Dwelling when viewed from a STREET.
c) The GROSS FLOOR AREA of the accessory apartment shall not exceed the lesser
of fifty percent of the GROSS FLOOR AREA of the Principal Unit or 800 square feet.
d) There shall be no more than two bedrooms in the apartment.
e) Ground floor apartments shall be designed and constructed to be adaptable with
only minor structural changes to meet the requirements for Group 2B residences as
set forth in the Massachusetts Building Code, 521 CMR (Architectural Access
Board), as amended.
f) The apartment shall be clearly and distinctly separated from the Principal Unit by
separate entrances either from the exterior of the BUILDING or from a common
hallway located within the BUILDING.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 22
g) Any stairways to an apartment located above the ground floor of a BUILDING shall
be enclosed within the exterior walls of the BUILDING.
h) There shall be not more than one driveway or curb cut providing ACCESS to the
DWELLING UNITS, except for half circular or horseshoe driveways located in the
front of the BUILDING.
i) A minimum of one additional parking space shall be provided for the apartment.
j) The owner of the property shall occupy either the principal DWELLING UNIT or the
apartment. For the purposes of this section, the “owner” shall be one or more
individuals residing in a dwelling who hold legal or beneficial title and for whom the
dwelling is the primary residence for voting and tax purposes.
k) The apartment shall not be held in, or transferred into separate ownership from the
Principal Unit under a condominium form of ownership, or otherwise.
l) The apartment may be located within a detached BUILDING that is located on the
same LOT as the BUILDING with the Principal DWELLING UNIT.
m) If a detached BUILDING on a LOT has been continuously in existence since before
April 2, 2019 and its foot print and floor area, including the area of interior garage or
parking spaces, is not expanded or enlarged thereafter, an apartment in such a
detached BUILDING may have a GROSS FLOOR AREA of up to 2000 square feet,
not including attic or basement areas, and up to three bedrooms.
n) However, in the R-2, R-4, R-8, R-8/4, R-10, and R-10/8 Districts an apartment in
such a detached BUILDING shall only be allowed with a Special Permit from the
Planning Board.
o) An apartment in a detached BUILDING constructed after April 2, 2019 may have a
GROSS FLOOR AREA of up to 500 square feet.
p) A LOT containing a BUILDING with a Principal Unit and an Apartment within a
detached BUILDING shall not be further divided resulting in the separation of the
Principal Unit and the Apartment, unless both resulting LOTS and the BUILDINGS
thereon meet all minimum area, FRONTAGE, width and yard requirements of the
applicable zoning district.
q) The apartment in a detached BUILDING shall be installed on a permanent
foundation.
r) The apartment in a detached BUILDING shall only be located in the side and rear
yard.
s) No apartment permitted under this Section shall be constructed and occupied
without Building and Occupancy Permits issued by the Building Commissioner.
3.8.2 ACCESSORY USES permitted in the Office, Business, and Industrial Districts.
3.8.2.1 Truck or trailer cleaning and washing provided that the trucks or trailers are necessary
for the conduct of the PRINCIPAL USE.
3.8.2.2 Drive-up facilities in a bank.
3.8.2.3 An employee food service area established exclusively to serve employees of the
PRINCIPAL USE.
3.8.2.4 Facilities for training employees of the PRINCIPAL USE.
3.8.2.5 The following ACCESSORY USES, provided that their combined NET FLOOR AREA
does not exceed 5% of the total NET FLOOR AREA that is occupied by the PRINCIPAL
USE, and that they are conducted primarily as a service for employees, customers and
clients of the PRINCIPAL USE:
a) The retail sale of goods and merchandise.
b) Services as listed in Section 3.5.12.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 23
c) The sale of food and beverages, other than an employee food service area under
Section 3.8.2.3.
3.8.2.6 In the Industrial Districts only, outdoor storage of materials, goods, and equipment
provided that all outdoor storage areas are surrounded by landscaping or architectural
screening that reduces, to the extent feasible and reasonable, their visual impact when
viewed from adjacent and nearby STREETS and dwellings in existence as of January 1,
2013.
3.8.2.7 In the Light Industrial District and on contiguous adjacent land for which the Board of
Appeals has previously granted a USE variance permitting a USE allowed in the Light
Industrial District, the purchase of new vehicles; the wholesale, but not retail sale, of
used vehicles; and the temporary outdoor storage of such new and used vehicles
provided that:
3.8.2.7.1 The LOT, or the property consisting of two or more contiguous LOTS in single
ownership, contains at least 15 acres.
3.8.2.7.2 Such USE is accessory to an operations center and offices of a vehicle rental or leasing
company.
3.8.2.7.3 Such vehicles are at all times registered with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Registry of Motor Vehicles while on the premises.
3.8.2.7.4 No such vehicle exceeds a gross vehicle weight of 10,000 pounds and a wheel base of
135 inches.
3.8.2.7.5 All such vehicles are stored in the rear yard out of sight and fully screened from view
from any STREET.
3.8.2.7.6 All such vehicles are stored at least 200 feet away and fully screened from view from
any pre-existing dwelling that is not on the same LOT or property.
3.8.2.7.7 The transport and loading/unloading of such vehicles to and from the LOT or property
occurs only on weekdays between the hours of 6:00 AM and 9:00 PM.
3.8.2.7.8 The storage of such vehicles may use vacant or excess parking capacity that,
regardless of the requirements of Section 6 of this bylaw, is not needed for employees
and customers of the businesses on the LOT or property.
3.8.2.8 In the Light Industrial District, the rental of trucks with a gross vehicle weight not greater
than 26,000 pounds, provided that not more than five trucks for rental use shall be
parked on site at any one time and that no such truck shall be parked on site for more
than 72 consecutive hours.
3.8.3 ACCESSORY USES permitted in the Business and Village Districts.
3.8.3.1 The on-premises outdoor display and sale of merchandise by Retail PRINCIPAL USES
on private property, subject to the following requirements:
a) The outdoor display and sale of merchandise shall be conducted only by a
PRINCIPAL Retail USE located on the same LOT, and shall only include
merchandise that is regularly offered for sale inside that business establishment.
The outdoor display of seasonal merchandise that is not typically offered for sale
indoors, such as but not limited to winter tools, flowers, and beach or pool
accessories shall be allowed.
b) The outdoor display and sale shall be confined to an area that is directly contiguous
to the BUILDING space that the PRINCIPAL Retail USE occupies.
c) Each outdoor display and sale area shall meet the minimum side, and rear yard
setback requirements for BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES of the zoning district in
which it is located.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 24
d) Outdoor display and sale areas shall not be placed on lawns and other landscaped
areas.
e) Outdoor display and sale areas shall not be placed or located so as to block or
obstruct the following: pedestrian or building access or egress; the minimum number
of vehicle parking and handicap parking spaces required under this Bylaw and
under the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (AAB); ACCESS driveways;
interior driveways; maneuvering aisles; loading areas; public or private utilities,
services, or drainage systems; fire lanes, alarms, hydrants, or other fire protection
equipment; or emergency access or egress.
f) Outdoor display and sale areas shall be operated and maintained so that all
sidewalks and walkways continuously meet minimum Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) and Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (AAB) standards.
3.8.3.2 The Zoning Enforcement Officer may issue up to two permits per calendar year for
each private property where Retail is a PRINCIPAL USE allowing temporary outdoor
sale events, such as a bazaar, festival, fair or similar event, that includes the outdoor
display and sale of merchandise, subject to the following requirements:
a) The property owner shall submit a permit application to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer sixty (60) days prior to the start of the event.
b) Prior to issuance of the permit, the property owner shall have obtained all other
applicable permits and licenses for the event that may be required under other local,
State or Federal law.
c) Prior to issuance of the permit, the property owner shall have obtained written notice
from the Acton Police Department to proceed with the event.
d) Only the retailers that are permanent tenants on the property may participate in the
outdoor sales event. The owner shall not allow off-site or traveling retailers or
vendors to participate.
e) Each outdoor display and sale area shall meet the minimum side, and rear yard
setback requirements for BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES of the zoning district in
which it is located.
f) Outdoor display and sale areas shall not be placed or located so as to block or
obstruct the following: pedestrian or building access or egress; the minimum number
of handicap parking spaces under the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board
(AAB); ACCESS driveways; fire lanes, alarms, hydrants, or other fire protection
equipment; and emergency access or egress.
g) Outdoor display and sale areas shall be operated and maintained so that all
sidewalks and walkways continuously meet minimum Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) and Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (AAB) standards.
h) The event shall last a maximum of three days.
i) The event’s hours of operation shall be limited to 7 AM to 8 PM on Monday through
Friday and to 9 AM to 8 PM on Saturday and Sunday, unless otherwise specified by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
j) Signs displayed during the event shall not be subject to the zoning regulations for
signs set forth in section 7 of this bylaw.
k) All signs, trash and debris shall be removed from the event site immediately upon
the termination of the activity.
l) The Zoning Enforcement Officer when issuing the zoning permit shall require
documents and information sufficient to determine compliance with this section.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 25
3.8.3.3 On-premises outdoor self-service conveniences such as rental movie kiosks, vending
machines, propane tank dispensers or similar conveniences on private property where
Retail is a PRINCIPAL USE, subject to the following requirements:
a) Outdoor self service conveniences shall be confined to an area immediately
contiguous to the BUILDING space that the PRINCIPAL Retail USE occupies.
b) Outdoor self service conveniences shall not be placed on lawns and other
landscaped areas.
c) Outdoor self service conveniences shall meet the minimum front, side, and rear yard
setback requirements for BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES of the zoning district in
which it is located.
d) Outdoor self service conveniences shall not be placed or located so as to interfere
with the following: pedestrian or building access or egress; the minimum number of
vehicle parking and handicap parking spaces required under this Bylaw and under
the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (AAB); ACCESS driveways; interior
driveways; maneuvering aisles; loading areas; public or private utilities, services, or
drainage systems; fire lanes, alarms, hydrants, or other fire protection equipment; or
emergency access or egress.
e) The outdoor self service conveniences shall be maintained so that all sidewalks and
walkways continuously meet minimum Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and
Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (AAB) standards.
3.8.4 ACCESSORY USES permitted in any Zoning District.
3.8.4.1 Wind machines designed to serve a PRINCIPAL USE on a LOT may be authorized by
special permit from the Board of Appeals provided the Board of Appeals finds that the
wind machine is set back from all LOT lines at least the distance equal to the height of
the tower from its base on the ground to the highest extension of any part of the wind
machine. The Board of Appeals may allow the wind machine to exceed the maximum
height limitations established by this Bylaw provided that the setback requirement
stated above is met.
3.8.4.2 A mobile home may be placed on the site of a residence which has been rendered
uninhabitable by accident provided it is used for a period not to exceed 12 months as
the primary residence of the owners of the residence which has been rendered
uninhabitable.
3.8.4.3 Farm products grown on the premises may be sold on the premises.
3.8.4.4 Where not otherwise permitted, a greenhouse where the PRINCIPAL USE of the
property is agriculture.
3.8.4.5 A Family Day Care Home as defined in the Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A,
if such Family Day Care Home is accessory to a residential USE.
3.8.4.6 Not more than one Amateur Radio Tower, or in the case of a licensed amateur radio
operator utilizing a long wire horizontal antenna system not more than two Amateur
Radio Towers, on a LOT, inclusive of all antennas, appurtenances, support
STRUCTURES, anchors, and guys, subject to the following requirements:
a) The Tower(s) shall be owned and operated by an amateur radio operator who is
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
b) The operator of the Tower(s) or the owner of the LOT shall dismantle and remove
the Tower(s) within one year after the cessation of the FCC-licensed operator’s
ownership or tenancy, or the expiration or rescission of the operator’s FCC license.
c) Tower height shall not exceed 100 feet from ground level when fully extended,
including all antennas and appurtenances.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 26
d) A Tower is prohibited in the front yard of the principal BUILDING or BUILDINGS on
the LOT as defined in Section 5.2.4.
e) In Residential Districts, any Tower shall be set back at least 30 feet from all side and
rear LOT lines regardless of the otherwise applicable yard requirements, except
when:
i. The Tower, even when extended, does not exceed the maximum height limit for
STRUCTURES; or
ii. The tower is directly attached to the side or rear of the principal BUILDING or
BUILDINGS on the LOT and complies with the minimum side and rear yard
requirements for STRUCTURES.
Anchors and guys must in all cases only comply with the minimum side and rear
yard requirements that are otherwise applicable to STRUCTURES.
f) The base of any Tower shall be surrounded by a fence with a locked gate or shall
be equipped with an effective anti-climb device.
g) No portion of any Tower shall be utilized as a sign or have signage attached to it.
h) No portion of any Tower shall be illuminated or have lights attached to it unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration.
i) The Board of Appeals may, by special permit, on a case-by-case basis, allow more
than one Amateur Radio Tower or in the case of a long wire horizontal antenna
system more than two Amateur Radio Towers on a LOT (Section 3.8.3.6 – first
paragraph), an Amateur Radio Tower height higher than 100’ (Section 3.8.3.6.c), an
Amateur Radio Tower or Towers in the front yard of the LOT provided that an
alternate location on the LOT is not feasible (Section 3.8.3.6.d), and/or a set back of
less than 30 feet from side and/or rear LOT lines (Section 3.8.3.6.e) where (1) such
relief is demonstrated by the applicant to be necessary to reasonably and effectively
accommodate amateur radio communications by the federally licensed amateur
radio owner/operator of the Amateur Radio Tower(s) and such relief would not result
in a substantial adverse health, safety, or aesthetic impact upon the neighborhood in
the vicinity of the Amateur Radio Tower(s), or (2) denial of such relief would
otherwise result in a demonstrated violation of applicable Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) regulations and/or Massachusetts General Law Ch. 40A, s. 3.
In acting on petitions under this section, the Board of Appeals shall apply this bylaw
in a manner that reasonably allows for sufficient height of an Amateur Radio Tower
or Towers so as to effectively accommodate amateur radio communications by
federally licensed amateur radio operators and constitute the minimum practicable
regulation necessary to accomplish the legitimate purposes of the bylaw for the
protection of health, safety, and aesthetics.
3.8.4.7 In any zoning district where, pursuant to the Table of PRINCIPAL USES, Vehicle Repair
is a USE allowed by right (Y) or by special permit (SPS), the sale of used motor
vehicles as an ACCESSORY USE to Vehicle Repair, provided that:
a) Any motor vehicle that is for sale does not exceed a maximum gross vehicle weight
of 14,000 pounds;
b) Not more than 10 used motor vehicles shall be for sale at any one time;
c) Where Vehicle Repair requires a special permit, such special permit has been
issued and the Vehicle Repair USE is in compliance with said special permit; and
d) Where Vehicle Repair requires a special permit, not more than 5 motor vehicles that
are for sale shall be placed for open-air display between the STREET and any
BUILDING on the LOT. Where such open-air display occurs, the open air display
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 27
area shall comply with the standards of Section 6.7 or 6.9 of this Bylaw as
applicable for the zoning district in which the Vehicle Repair USE is located.
3.8.4.8 In Village, Office, Business and Industrial Districts only, the Zoning Enforcement Officer
may issue a permit for the recurring outdoor seasonal sales of New England farm
products (farmers’ market) on private property, subject to the following requirements:
a) Such permit shall be limited to one calendar year per LOT.
b) The owner of the property upon which the event will be held shall submit a permit
application to the Zoning Enforcement Officer sixty (60) days prior to the start of the
first farmers’ market of the calendar year.
c) Prior to issuance of the permit, the property owner shall have obtained all other
applicable permits and licenses for the farmers’ market that may be required under
other local, State or Federal law.
d) Prior to issuance of the permit, the property owner shall have obtained written notice
from the Acton Police Department to proceed with the farmers’ market.
e) The farmers’ market shall not recur more than one day per week, with the exception
of sales of holiday trees and related items within the months of November and
December.
f) The event’s hours of operation shall be limited to 7 AM to 8 PM on Monday through
Friday and to 9 AM to 8 PM on Saturday and Sunday, unless otherwise specified by
the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
g) When applying for the permit, the property owner must specify the proposed hours,
and the dates and/or regularity of the farmers’ market.
h) Each outdoor display and sale area shall meet the minimum side, and rear yard
setback requirements for BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES of the zoning district in
which it is located.
i) Outdoor display and sale areas shall not be placed or located so as to block or
obstruct the following: the minimum required number of handicap parking spaces
and their associated interior driveways and maneuvering aisles as required under
this Bylaw for PRINCIPAL USES on the property, and under the Massachusetts
Architectural Access Board (AAB); Parking spaces for PRINCIPAL USES on the
property remaining open during the event; ACCESS driveways; loading areas; fire
lanes, alarms, hydrants, or other fire protection equipment; and emergency access
or egress.
j) Outdoor display and sale areas shall be operated and maintained so that all
sidewalks and walkways continuously meet minimum Americans with Disabilities
Act (ADA) and Massachusetts Architectural Access Board (AAB) standards.
k) At all times adequate ingress and egress and sufficient parking shall be maintained
as determined by the Zoning Enforcement Officer.
l) Products sold at the farmers’ markets must be produced or made on farms in the
New England region, with the exception of seasonal Christmas tree sales.
m) Signs displayed during the hours of operation of the farmer’s market shall not be
subject to the zoning regulations for signs set forth in section 7 of this bylaw.
n) All signs, trash and debris shall be removed from the event site immediately upon
the termination of the activity.
o) The Zoning Enforcement Officer when issuing the zoning permit for a farmers’
market shall require documents and information sufficient to determine compliance
with this section.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 28
3.8.4.9 Temporary yard or garage sales limited to a total of not more than 3 days for each
calendar year on a LOT with Residential USE on it.
3.8.4.10 Solar photovoltaic and thermal energy systems and devices that primarily benefit and
support the PRINCIPAL USE(S) on the same LOT, including but not limited to roof -,
wall -, ground -, and pole-mounted installations, and canopy installations above parking
lots or driveways.
3.8.4.11 Solar photovoltaic and thermal energy systems and devices that, without limitation, may
benefit all energy users provided such systems are roof mounted or wall mounted
installations, or canopy installations above parking lots or driveways.
3.9 Special Provisions Applicable to Nonresidential USES
3.9.1 High Traffic Generators – No PRINCIPAL USE which would have an anticipated
average peak hour generation in excess of 1,000 vehicle trip ends or an average
weekday or Saturday generation in excess of 7,500 vehicle trip ends shall be allowed.
Any PRINCIPAL USE which would have an anticipated average peak hour generation
in excess of 500 vehicle trip ends or an average weekday or Saturday generation in
excess of 4,000 vehicle trip ends shall be required to receive a special permit from the
Board of Selectmen. In predicting traffic generation under this regulation, reference
shall be made to the most recent edition of the Institute of Transportation Engineers'
publication “Trip Generation”. If a proposed PRINCIPAL USE or relevant data thereto
are not listed in said publication, the Building Commissioner may, after consultation with
the Town Planner, approve the use of trip generation rates for another listed use that is
similar, in terms of traffic generation, to the proposed PRINCIPAL USE. If no such listed
use is sufficiently similar, a detailed traffic generation estimate (along with the
methodology used), prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer experienced and
qualified in traffic engineering, shall be submitted. In granting such special permit, the
Board of Selectmen shall require suitable mitigation measures such as trip reduction
measures and off-site improvements to roadways and STREETS.
3.9.2 Nonresidential USES in the KC District – On LOTS in the KC District where the FLOOR
AREA RATIO exceeds 0.20, only the following USES may be located on the ground
floor side of the BUILDING that is facing a STREET: Retail Store; Restaurant; Hotel,
Motel Inn, Conference Center; Bed & Breakfast; Lodge or Club; Services; Commercial
Entertainment; real estate agency; insurance agency; travel agency; law office; medical
and dental offices; walk-in clinic; small equipment repair service; tailor; and photography
studio. All other USES shall be located on BUILDING floors other than the ground level
floor, on the ground level floor in a rear portion of a BUILDING, or in a BUILDING
situated in the rear of other BUILDINGS that face one or more STREETS, and be
hidden or screened so as to be unobtrusive when viewed from a STREET.
3.9.3 Nonresidential USES in the EAV District – In the EAV District, only the following USES
shall be allowed on the ground floor of commercial or mixed use BUILDINGS: Retail
Stores; Restaurants; Hotel, Motel, Inn, Conference Center; Bed & Breakfast; Lodge or
Club; Veterinary Care; Services; Commercial Entertainment; Commercial Recreation;
real estate agency; insurance agency; travel agency; law office; medical and dental
offices; walk-in clinic; and Repair Shop, Technical Shop, Studio.
3.10 Special Requirements for Personal Wireless Facilities
3.10.1 Purposes
3.10.1.1 To allow Personal Wireless Facilities in accordance with and as required by the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 and in acknowledgment of M.G.L. Chapter 40A,
Section 3.
3.10.1.2 To minimize their adverse impacts on adjacent properties, local historic districts,
residential neighborhoods, and scenic vistas.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 29
3.10.1.3 To establish requirements for their approval, and standards for their design, placement,
safety, monitoring, modification, and removal.
3.10.1.4 To limit the overall number and height of Personal Wireless Towers to what is essential
to serve the public convenience and necessity.
3.10.1.5 To promote shared USE of Facilities to reduce the need for new Facilities.
3.10.2 Applicability
3.10.2.1 This Section 3.10 shall apply to all reception and transmission Facilities that aid,
facilitate, and assist with the provision of Personal Wireless Services.
3.10.2.2 No such Facility shall be erected or installed except in compliance with the provisions of
this Section 3.10.
3.10.2.3 Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to regulate or prohibit customary installations
for the reception of radio communication signals at home or business locations.
3.10.2.4 Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to regulate or prohibit a tower or antenna
installed solely for use by a federally licensed amateur radio operator. For regulations
on amateur radio towers see Section 3.8.3.6 of this Bylaw.
3.10.3 Definitions
3.10.3.1 Antenna – A transducer device designed to transmit and/or receive radio frequency
signals.
3.10.3.2 Co-locator – One of two or more Carriers who occupy space on a common Facility to
locate Antennas and other equipment for the provision of Personal Wireless Services.
3.10.3.3 Concealed-Antenna Monopole (CAM) – A Monopole with internally mounted Antennas
that are not visible from the outside of the Monopole.
3.10.3.4 Coverage Gap or Service Gap – a “Coverage Gap” or “Service Gap” is considered to
exist within a specific geographic area if a remote user of a Compatible User Service
Device, while located within such geographic area, is highly likely to be unable to
reliably connect to and communicate with the compatible Carrier’s Personal Wireless
Services network, which gap is defined as less than -90 dBm received signal power,
unless the Carrier in question demonstrates a different received signal power level or an
alternative QoS metric reasonably applies.
3.10.3.5 Equipment Compound – A BUILDING, room, or fenced compound at the base of a
Tower or elsewhere that encloses necessary equipment and installations to support
Personal Wireless Services.
3.10.3.6 FCC – The Federal Communications Commission.
3.10.3.7 Flush Mounted Antennas – Antennas whose mounting brackets are attached directly on
the outside surface of a Monopole that extend typically no more than 18 inches from the
Monopole surface.
3.10.3.8 Monopole – A single self-supporting Tower, tubular in design, enclosing cables invisibly
within the tubular structure and designed so it does not require braces or guy wires for
support and stability.
3.10.3.9 Personal Wireless Services – Commercial Mobile Radio Services (CMRS), common
Carrier wireless exchange access services, and unlicensed wireless services as
identified and defined in the Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 and pertinent
FCC regulations.
3.10.3.10 Personal Wireless Service Device – A portable, fixed, or mobile Personal Wireless
Service communications device, such as, without limitation, a car phone, cell phone,
personal digital assistant, or smart phone used by a subscriber or remote user to
connect to a Carrier’s Personal Wireless Service network.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 30
3.10.3.11 Personal Wireless Service Provider or Personal Wireless Service Carrier (Provider or
Carrier) – An entity, licensed by the FCC to provide Personal Wireless Services or an
entity offering unlicensed Personal Wireless Services as a common carrier.
3.10.3.12 Personal Wireless Facility (Facility) – An installation that contains the equipment and
support STRUCTURES necessary to provide Personal Wireless Services, including but
not limited to an Equipment Compound, Tower and Antennas. In context, Facility may
refer individually to one Provider’s installation supporting one Personal Wireless Service
at a Site, or collectively to the aggregate of all installations of all Personal Wireless
Service Providers providing all Personal Wireless Services at a common Site.
3.10.3.13 Personal Wireless Facility Site (Site) – A LOT as defined in this Bylaw; or one or more
contiguous LOTS in single ownership; or one or more contiguous LOTS whose
individual owners have entered into a partnership, corporation, trust, or other legal entity
with the purpose of jointly hosting a Facility.
3.10.3.14 Personal Wireless Tower (Tower) – A STRUCTURE greater than 12 feet in height
mounted on the ground or on another STRUCTURE erected with the primary purpose
of supporting one or more Personal Wireless Service Antennas.
3.10.3.15 Service Coverage – Service Coverage refers to a geographic area where a remote user
of a properly installed and operated Personal Wireless Service Device compatible with
a Carrier’s Personal Wireless Services network (a “Compatible User Service Device”)
has a high probability of being able to connect to and communicate with such network
with a reasonable quality of service (“QoS”). There are various measures of QoS,
including without limitation, received signal strength, various signal to noise and signal
to interference ratio metrics, call reliability (as indicated by dropped call ratios, blocked
calls and the like), and bit error rates.
For purposes of this Section 3.10, there shall be the presumption that Service Coverage
shall be deemed to exist within a specific geographic area if the predicted or measured
received signal power on a standards-compliant Personal Wireless Services Device
placed outdoors within such geographic area is highly likely to be -90 dBm or greater,
unless the Carrier in question demonstrates, by clear and convincing evidence prepared
by qualified radio frequency engineer or other qualified professional, that higher signal
strengths or alternative QoS metrics are required to enable such Carrier to provide
Service Coverage within the specific geographic area in question.
3.10.3.16 Significant Gap – A Coverage Gap in a Carrier’s Personal Wireless Service network
within a specific geographic area shall be considered to be a “Significant Gap” if such
specific identified geographic area is so large in physical size and/or affects or is
predicted to affect such a large number of remote users of Compatible User Service
Devices as to fairly and reasonably be considered “significant” as opposed to merely
being a small “dead spot”. In determining whether or not a particular Carrier’s
Coverage Gap is significant, a relatively small or modest geographic area may be
considered a “Significant Gap” if such geographic area is densely populated or is
frequently used by a large number of persons for active recreational or similar purposes
who are, or are predicted to be, remote users of Compatible User Service Devices,
and/or such geographic area straddles one or more public highways or commuter rail
lines regularly traveled, or predicted to be traveled, by remote users of Compatible User
Service Devices, while a larger geographic area may be considered not to be a
“Significant Gap” if such geographic area does not straddle any public highways or rail
lines and/or is sparsely populated. Whether or not a Significant Gap exists is to be
determined separately for each Carrier’s Personal Wireless Services network,
regardless of whether or not any other Carrier(s) have Service Coverage in such
geographic area.
3.10.4 General Prohibitions and Requirements
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 31
3.10.4.1 Lattice style Towers and similar facilities requiring more than one leg or guy wires for
support are prohibited. However, additional equipment may be mounted on an existing
lattice Tower.
3.10.4.2 A Personal Wireless Tower shall not be erected in a Local Historic District or within one
thousand feet (1000’) of the boundary of a Local Historic District measured from the
center point of a Tower at its base.
3.10.4.3 All STRUCTURES, equipment, utilities and other improvements associated with
Personal Wireless Facilities shall be removed within one year after cessation of USE.
3.10.4.4 Night lighting of Personal Wireless Facilities is prohibited except for low intensity lights
installed at or near ground level in or on the Equipment Compound and in compliance
with the Outdoor Lighting Regulations of this Bylaw, Section 10.6.
3.10.4.5 At least one sign shall be installed in a visible location at the Equipment Compound that
provides the telephone number where the operator in charge can be reached at all
times.
3.10.4.6 Section 6 (Parking Standards) of the Acton Zoning Bylaw shall not apply to Wireless
Communication Facilities.
3.10.4.7 Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to regulate or prohibit a Personal Wireless
Facility on the basis of the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, provided
the Facility complies with regulations of the Federal Communications Commission
concerning such emissions.
3.10.5 Personal Wireless Facilities Allowed by Right
3.10.5.1 In all zoning districts, a Personal Wireless Facility shall be allowed and no special
permit shall be required,
a) if the Antenna(s) and Antenna mounting apparatus or STRUCTURE does not
exceed 3 feet in diameter and 12 feet in height and is otherwise in compliance with
applicable dimensional requirements of this Bylaw as they relate to the Personal
Wireless Facility Site, or
b) if the Facility is located entirely within, or mounted on, a BUILDING or STRUCTURE
that is occupied or used primarily for other purposes, provided that the BUILDING or
STRUCTURE, including the Facility, meets all dimensional requirements of this
Bylaw for the zoning district in which the Site is located. A cupola or other
appurtenance, that is consistent with the general characteristics of the zoning district
within which the Facility is located, that is otherwise allowed by right, and that fully
conceals all Antennas, cables, and other related hardware may be added to a
BUILDING when the supporting equipment belonging to the Facility is installed
within the BUILDING.
3.10.5.2 In the Office Districts (OP-1, OP-2), the Industrial Districts (LI, GI, LI-1, IP, SM), the
Powder Mill District (PM), and the Limited Business District (LB), a Monopole Tower
shall be allowed and no special permit shall be required, if its height does not exceed
applicable height limitations for STRUCTURES and BUILDINGS in the zoning district in
which it is located, and if its setback, measured from its center point at its base to all
Site boundary lines, is at least the distance equal to its height, but not less than the
otherwise applicable minimum yard requirement for BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES in
the zoning district.
3.10.5.3 Any new Antennas or other equipment owned by a Personal Wireless Service Provider
may be mounted on a previously approved Tower without a special permit, if there is no
increase in height above the maximum height specified in the special permit for the
Tower and if the installation does not deviate from the approved appearance of the
Tower. For example, an approved CAM may not be converted to a Flush Mount
Monopole by any subsequent Antenna installations.
3.10.6 Special Permit for Facilities
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 32
3.10.6.1 Any Personal Wireless Facility, and any increase in height or size, or reconstruction or
replacement of an existing Facility that does not meet the criteria under Section 3.10.5
above, may only be allowed by special permit from the Planning Board in accordance
with M.G.L. Ch. 40A, S. 9, subject to the following statements, regulations,
requirements, conditions and limitations.
3.10.6.2 For the purpose of this Section 3.10, public hearing notices shall be sent to parties in
interest and to all LOT owners within one thousand feet of the property line of the Site
where the Facility is proposed.
3.10.6.3 A Personal Wireless Tower shall not exceed a height of 175 feet from ground level, or a
height that is allowed without illumination at night under Federal Aviation Administration
or Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission regulations, whichever is less. For purposes
of determining the height of a Tower, the height shall be the higher of the two vertical
distances measured as follows:
a) The elevation of the top of the Tower STRUCTURE including any Antennas or other
appurtenances above the pre-construction mean ground elevation directly at the
base of the pole; or
b) The elevation of the Tower STRUCTURE including any Antennas or other
appurtenances above the mean ground elevation within 500 feet of the base of the
pole.
3.10.6.4 Personal Wireless Towers shall be CAMs. On a case by case basis, generally when
aesthetic considerations are less important, the Planning Board may allow Monopoles
with external Flush Mounted Antennas, or external standard Antenna mounting frames
that extend laterally from the Monopole.
3.10.6.5 Personal Wireless Towers shall be located, designed, and constructed as Monopoles
that are extended to or structurally extendable to the maximum height allowed under
Section 3.10.6.3 above, capable of accommodating the maximum number of technically
feasible Co-locator Antennas on the portion of the Monopole above the trees as well as
an Equipment Compound physically able to, or capable of being enlarged to, fully
accommodate the maximum number of Personal Wireless Service Carriers and other
equipment necessary for the maximum number of technically feasible Co-locators at the
Site.
3.10.6.6 In all Residential Districts, the setback of a Tower, measured from the center point of
the Tower at its base to the boundary lines of the Site, shall be at least one hundred
and seventy five feet (175').
3.10.6.7 The center point of any Personal Wireless Tower at its base shall be separated from
any existing residential BUILDING by a horizontal distance that is at least three hundred
and fifty feet (350'), unless the residential BUILDING and the Facility are located on the
same LOT.
3.10.6.8 An Equipment Compound, if employed, shall be located in the immediate vicinity of the
base of a Tower. The Equipment Compound, including fencing, shall not extend more
than 100 feet from the center point of the Tower in the direction of any residential
BUILDING on a neighboring LOT.
3.10.6.9 Any Tower shall be designed to accommodate the maximum feasible number of
Carriers.
a) The Planning Board may require the employment of all available technologies and
Antenna arrangements to minimize vertical space consumption, and require
sufficient room and structural capacity for all necessary cables and Antennas.
b) The Planning Board may require the owner of such Tower to permit other Providers
to Co-locate at such Facility upon payment of a reasonable charge, which shall be
determined by the Planning Board if the parties cannot agree.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 33
c) The Planning Board may require that the equipment of all users of a Tower shall be
subject to rearrangement on the Tower or in the Equipment Compound if so directed
by the Planning Board at a later time in its effort to maximize Co-location of Carriers.
This may result in different vertical Antenna locations, reduced vertical separation of
Antennas, and changes of Antenna arrangements, to the extent feasible without
causing technically unacceptable radio frequency signal interference between the
Antennas of the Co-locators and without creating new Significant Gap in the existing
coverage of incumbent Providers on the Tower.
d) The Planning Board may require that the equipment of all Carriers on a Tower shall
be subject to relocation to another nearby Facility if such relocation, when
considered individually or in concert with existing or potential new Facilities, does
not create a Significant Gap in the Carrier’s coverage when so directed by the
Planning Board at a later time in its effort to maximize Co-location of Carriers. It may
then order the removal of a Tower after the relocation is completed.
e) The Planning Board may require long-term easements, leases, licenses, or other
enforceable legal instruments that fully support a Facility at its maximum potential
technical capacity, including sufficient space on the Tower and for Facility base
equipment to accommodate the maximum number of technically feasible Colocators
at the Site, adequate ACCESS and utility easements to the Facility from a
public STREET, and the right for the maximum number of technically feasible Colocators
to Co-locate on the Tower and to upgrade the utilities and equipment as
needed for maintaining and improving service and capacity.
3.10.6.10 Unauthorized entry into an Equipment Compound shall be prevented by the installation
of security measures such as fencing (for outdoor Equipment Compounds) or locked
rooms or buildings. Towers shall be secured against unauthorized climbing. The
Planning Board shall require suitable fencing and landscape screening or other
mitigation means to shield the installation from the view of nearby residences or ways.
3.10.6.11 The Planning Board may require that all ground equipment must be placed inside a
BUILDING where the Planning Board finds that a fenced-in compound does not
adequately address reasonable and legitimate aesthetic concerns. In such cases, the
Planning Board shall have the power under the special permit to regulate the size,
shape, and exterior appearance of the BUILDING.
3.10.6.12 A Tower approved hereunder shall be used only for the transmission of signals for
Personal Wireless Services, except with the specific authorization of the Planning
Board.
a) The Planning Board may approve or require the installation of transmission devices
owned, operated, or used by the Town of Acton or any of its agencies, and may
allow such devices to extend above the otherwise applicable maximum Tower
height. The Planning Board may waive or modify the approved appearance
provision of Subsection 3.10.5.3 for such devices.
b) The Planning Board may also approve the installation of communication devices by
entities other than Personal Wireless Service Carriers as secondary occupants of a
Facility that are subject to Planning Board termination upon six months notice of the
Planning Board, provided that they do not interfere with the Personal Wireless
Services and that the intent of this Bylaw to maximize Co-location of Personal
Wireless Service Providers is not compromised.
3.10.6.13 The Planning Board shall in its special permit make adequate provisions for the removal
of the Tower and Equipment Compound after its USE for Personal Wireless Services
has ended. It shall require that the Facility location shall be restored to pre-existing
conditions as much as is reasonably possible so that no traces of the Facility, including
foundation, gravel pads, and driveways, remain visible above ground, and that the
location be otherwise stabilized and naturalized as appropriate for the particular Site.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 34
3.10.6.14 The Planning Board may, as a condition of any special permit, require all Carriers at a
Facility, upon the written request of the Planning Board from time to time, to file with the
Planning Board and Town Clerk a report, prepared and stamped by a Massachusetts
Registered Professional Engineer, that certifies that such Carrier’s Facility is, and such
Co-locator’s Facilities are, in compliance with the terms and conditions of the special
permit and the Acton Zoning Bylaw. The Planning Board may also require the Carriers
to file with the Planning Board certifications from other independent, qualified engineers
or other appropriate professionals that the Facility is in compliance with applicable state
and federal laws, such as those regarding radio frequency emissions, noise, or
aeronautical navigation safety. The Planning Board may make such requests not more
frequently than once every two years, unless the Planning Board has reasonable
grounds to believe that the Facility is not in compliance in any substantial or material
respect with the terms and conditions of the special permit or any applicable FCC or
other State or Federal laws.
3.10.6.15 The Planning Board may limit the number of Towers on a Site to one, or to any other
number it deems necessary and appropriate for the Site. Multiple Towers on a single
Site shall be separated by such reasonable distance that prevents excessive
interference (mechanical or electromagnetic) between Carriers’ services and that
creates the most harmonious appearance to the general public, but by not less than 40
feet measured between the center points at the Towers’ respective bases.
3.10.6.16 The Special Permit application for a Personal Wireless Facility shall be accompanied by
a plan showing the Facility location in relation to the boundary lines of the Facility Site
and all BUILDINGS within 500 feet, and plans for the installation or construction of the
Facility adequate to show compliance with the provisions of this Bylaw, and such
supplemental information as may be required by the Planning Board in the Rules and
Regulations for a Special Permit for Personal Wireless Facilities. The application shall
also include maps showing areas where the proposed Facility will be visible when there
is foliage and when there is not.
3.10.6.17 Mandatory Findings – The Planning Board shall not issue a special permit for a
Personal Wireless Facility unless it finds that the Facility:
a) is designed to minimize any adverse visual or economic impacts on abutters and
other parties in interest, as defined in M.G.L. Ch. 40A, S. 11;
b) is designed to provide, in the most community-compatible method practicable,
Service Coverage to a Significant Gap within the Town. The applicant shall bear the
burden of demonstrating, by clear and convincing evidence, the existence of such
Significant Gap;
c) is designed in the most community-compatible method practicable and is necessary
to satisfy a Significant Gap in service. The applicant shall bear the burden of
demonstrating that other methods preferred by the Town are not feasible for
providing Service Coverage to satisfy such Significant Gap;
d) cannot for technical or physical reasons be located on an existing Personal Wireless
Facility or Tower that would be expected to provide comparable Service Coverage.
Such alternative existing location or locations need not provide full service to the
entire Significant Gap if, in the determination of the Planning Board, the remaining
Gap to have been served by the proposed Facility is not Significant and/or if
remaining portions of the Significant Gap can be served by new Facilities preferred
by the Planning Board;
e) cannot be located at any other practicably available site that is less objectionable to
the general public due to technical requirements, topography, or other unique
circumstances. The applicant shall have the burden of showing what alternative
sites and technologies it considered and why such sites and technologies are not
practicably available;
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 35
f) is sited in such a manner that it is suitably screened;
g) is colored so that it will as much as possible blend with or be compatible with its
surroundings;
h) is designed to accommodate the maximum number of users technologically
feasible;
i) is necessary because there is no other existing Facility or Facilities with available
space or capacity available to satisfy the Significant Gap;
j) is in compliance with applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission, and
the Massachusetts Department of Public Health regulations; and
k) complies with all applicable requirements of this Bylaw, including Section 10.3.
3.10.6.18 The Planning Board under its special permit authority may waive one or more
requirements of this Section 3.10.6 and its subsections, including dimensional
requirements, and it may grant a waiver from the use restrictions contained in Section
3.4.10 of the Table of Principal Uses, where the Board finds that the relief is necessary
to avoid an effective prohibition of Personal Wireless Services in the Town or avoid
unreasonable discrimination among Providers of functionally equivalent services.
a) Any request for such waivers shall be supported by a study prepared by a qualified
radio frequency engineer or other qualified professional consultant demonstrating to
the Planning Board’s satisfaction that there exists a Significant Gap in coverage
within the specific geographic area proposed, and clear and convincing evidence
that no alternative locations, technologies, and/or configurations are available that
meet the otherwise applicable requirements.
b) In granting such a waiver or waivers, the Planning Board must find that the extent of
the granted relief is mitigated by showing that any alternative for serving the
Significant Gap that is feasible is no less objectionable in its impact on the
community, that all practicable mitigation of the proposed Facility’s impact is
incorporated in the design and conditions, and that the desired relief may be granted
without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and without denigrating from the
intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
c) However, the Board shall not grant relief from the maximum height limitation in
Subsection 3.10.6.3.
d) The Board shall be empowered hereunder to grant relief from any setback
requirements in Subsections 3.10.6.6 or 3.10.6.7 provided that the Facility as
proposed with such non-conforming setbacks is demonstrated to be necessary to
serve the Significant Gap or that such relief will produce a better result for the
community than without such relief, consistent with Section 3.10.1 – Purposes, and
its subsections.
e) The applicant shall provide the Board with a written statement describing how the
requested relief meets the objectives of the preceding paragraph (d) and is in the
best interest of the Town with reference to Section 3.10.1 – Purposes, and its
subsections.
3.10.6.19 At the applicant’s expense a full transcription or recording of the oral hearings shall be
made.
3.10.7 Nothing contained in this Section 3.10 shall, or is intended to, waive, restrict, modify, or
limit any other of the Bylaws of the Town of Acton, or any rule or regulation made there
under.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 36
3.11 Special Requirements for Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations
3.11.1 Purposes – To provide reasonable regulations pertaining to public health, safety and
welfare for Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations in accordance with
Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40A, Section 3.
3.11.2 Applicability – This Section 3.11 shall apply to all Ground-Mounted Neighborhood and
Industrial Solar Photovoltaic Installations, including related BUILDINGS,
STRUCTURES, and equipment, and to physical modifications of such installations that
materially alter their type, configuration, or size. For regulations on solar energy
systems as ACCESSORY USES, see Section 3.8.3 of this bylaw.
3.11.3 Standards and Requirements – Except where specifically stated otherwise, the
following provisions shall apply to all Ground-Mounted Neighborhood and Industrial
Solar Photovoltaic Installations in all zoning districts. They shall not apply to solar
energy systems as ACCESSORY USES under Section 3.8.3.
3.11.3.1 Setbacks – The layout of an installation and all related STRUCTURES, BUILDINGS
and equipment shall comply with the front, side and rear yard requirements of the
zoning district in which they are located, except for power feed and distribution lines and
equipment where underground installation is not possible.
3.11.3.2 Landscaping, Screening, and Panel Orientation and Tilt – Landscaping or architectural
screening shall be provided to reduce the visual impact of installations and specifically
to protect nearby receptors from danger, harm, or nuisance that may result from
reflective solar glare of photovoltaic panels. Where necessary, panels shall be oriented
or tilted in a manner to prevent such glare upon receptors.
3.11.3.3 Lighting – Night Lighting is prohibited except for security lighting controlled by motion
detectors or infrared sensors with an on-time of no more than ten (10) minutes per
activation.
3.11.3.4 Utility Connections - All utility connections, conduits, cables, power lines transformers
and inverters shall be placed underground, except (a) where otherwise required by the
Massachusetts State Building Code or the utility provider; (b) in adverse ground
conditions such as ledge or excess water; or (c) for connection to existing above ground
utility lines. Wiring within the installation’s layout shall follow industry standards.
3.11.3.5 SIGNS – SIGNS shall comply with the requirements of Section 7 of this Bylaw.
However, in Residential Districts not more than one (1) sign up to six (6) square feet in
display area may be installed with the names, current telephone numbers, websites and
trademarks of the installer, manufacturer, owner, and operator of the installation. In
addition, pedestrian scale educational displays are permitted, which may include the
names and contact information of the display sponsors, and directions and contacts for
additional information.
3.11.3.6 Water Management and Conservation – To the largest extent possible, the ground shall
remain pervious to rain water. For the purposes of stormwater management, the Solar
Photovoltaics themselves shall be considered a pervious surface. In the event that
additional impervious areas are installed such as but not limited to asphalt or other
paved areas, an adequate drainage design shall be provided meeting the design
standards and submission requirements of Acton General Bylaw Chapter X and the
Rules and Regulations adopted thereunder.
3.11.3.7 Protection of Forest Land – Not more than 1 acre of land shall be deforested for any
one Ground-Mounted Industrial Solar Photovoltaic Installation, and no such installation
shall be placed on such land that was deforested within the prior 5 years.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 37
3.11.3.8 Exemptions from Zoning Requirements – Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic
Installations shall be exempt from requirements of this Bylaw pertaining to LOT area,
FLOOR AREA RATIO, Impervious Cover, OPEN SPACE, and vehicular parking.
3.11.3.9 Solar Access - The owners and operators of Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic
Installations are advised to acquire solar access easements from abutters where
access to sunlight could be impacted from an allowed use on an abutting parcel.
3.11.4 Special Permit for Certain Ground-Mounted Industrial Solar Photovoltaic Installations
where required in the Table of Principal USES – The Planning Board may grant Special
Permits for Ground-Mounted Industrial Solar Photovoltaic Installations in certain zoning
districts as indicated in the Table of Principal USES. When granting such special permit,
the Planning Board shall vote in the affirmative the Mandatory Findings for special
permits required in Section 10.3 of this Bylaw, and, in addition, find that:
3.11.4.1 In the case of a Residential District location, the visual impact of the installation on its
immediate abutters and on the nearby neighborhood has been effectively neutralized
through appropriate designs, landscaping, or structural screening; or
3.11.4.2 In the case of a Business District location, the specific site of the installation does not
detract from or interrupt the vitality of the business district, or impede its further
business development; and that the visual impact of the installation has been
sufficiently mitigated through appropriate designs, landscaping, or structural screening.
3.11.5 Special Permit for Certain Other Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic Installations – The
Planning Board may grant Special Permits for Ground-Mounted Solar Photovoltaic
Installations that do not meet the standards set forth in Section 3.11.3 above, or any of
its subsections. When granting such special permit, the Planning Board shall vote in the
affirmative the Mandatory Findings for special permits required in Section 10.3 of this
Bylaw, and, in addition, find that:
3.11.5.1 The benefit of installing solar photovoltaic power at the installation site as proposed by
the application substantially outweighs the public health, safety, and welfare concerns
that Section 3.11.3 requirements are intended to protect; or
3.11.5.2 That the particular design, mitigation measures, offsets, agreements, or other provisions
for the proposed installation address such concerns in an alternative and satisfactory
manner.
3.12 Marijuana Establishment Temporary Moratorium
3.12.1 Definition – MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT shall mean a marijuana cultivator,
marijuana testing facility, marijuana product manufacturer, marijuana retailer or any
other type of licensed marijuana-related business; provided, however, that a
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT shall not include a medical marijuana treatment center
defined by and registered under Chapter 369 of the Acts of 2012.
3.12.2 Purposes – By vote at the State election on November 8, 2016, the voters of the
Commonwealth approved a law entitled the Regulation and Taxation of Marijuana Act
(the “Act”), regulating the control and production and distribution of marijuana under a
system of licenses and regulations. Currently under the Zoning Bylaw, a Marijuana
Retailer or Establishment is not a permitted use in the Town and any regulations
promulgated by the Cannabis Control Commission are expected to provide guidance to
the Town in regulating marijuana sales and distribution. The regulation of marijuana
raises novel and complex legal, planning, and public safety issues and the Town needs
time to study and consider the regulation of Marijuana Retail or Distribution centers and
address such novel and complex issues, as well as to address the potential impact of
the State regulations on local zoning and to undertake a planning process to consider
amending the Zoning Bylaw regarding regulation of Marijuana Retail sales and
distribution and other uses related to the regulation of marijuana. The Town intends to
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 38
adopt a temporary moratorium on the use of land and structures in the Town for
Marijuana Retail and Distribution so as to allow the Town sufficient time to engage in a
planning process to address the effects of such structures and uses in the Town and to
enact bylaws in a manner consistent with sound land use planning goals and objectives.
3.12.3 Temporary Moratorium – Consistent with the purposes set forth in Section 3.12.2 and
notwithstanding any other provision of the Zoning Bylaw to the contrary, the Town
hereby adopts a temporary moratorium on the use of any TRACT OF LAND, LOT,
BUILDING, or STRUCTURE for a MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT. The temporary
moratorium shall be in effect through the earliest of (1) the Attorney General’s approval
of the Town’s General Bylaw banning recreational marijuana establishments, (2) the
Town’s approval of a Zoning Bylaw regulating the time, place, and manner of the sale of
recreational marijuana, or (3) June 30, 2019. During the moratorium period, the Town
shall undertake a planning process to address the potential impacts of marijuana in the
Town, consider the Cannabis Control Commission regulations regarding MARIJUANA
ESTABLISHMENTS and related uses to be promulgated pursuant to General Laws
Chapter 94G, and consider adopting new Zoning Bylaws to address the impact and
operation of MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENTS and related uses.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 39
SECTION 4
OVERLAY DISTRICTS
4.1 Flood Plain District – The Flood Plain District is an overlay district whose boundaries
and regulations are superimposed on all districts established by this Bylaw. The Flood
Plain District includes all special flood hazard areas in Acton designated as Zones A
and AE shown on Zoning Map Number 2, which are the Acton Panels of the Middlesex
County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated July 7, 2014.
4.1.1 Definitions – For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meaning:
4.1.1.1 Base Flood or 100-Year Flood – The flood having a 1 percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year.
4.1.1.2 Flood Plain – Any land susceptible to being inundated by the Base Flood. The Flood
Plain includes the Floodway and Floodway Fringe.
4.1.1.3 Floodway – The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas
that must be reserved in order to discharge the Base Flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot above the Base Flood
elevation.
4.1.1.4 Floodway Fringe – The area between the Floodway and the boundary of the Base
Flood.
4.1.1.5 Lowest Floor – The Lowest Floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, BUILDING
access, or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a
BUILDING’S Lowest Floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the
STRUCTURE in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this
ordinance.
4.1.1.6 Natural Flood Storage Volume – The volume of water which could be stored between
the elevation(s) of the property as it existed on June 14, 1978 and the elevation(s) of
the Base Flood.
4.1.1.7 Substantial Improvement – Any repair, reconstruction or improvement of a
STRUCTURE, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the fair market value of the
STRUCTURE either, 1) before the improvement or repair is started, or 2) if the
STRUCTURE has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred.
Substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the STRUCTURE commences, whether or not
that alteration affects the external dimensions of the STRUCTURE. However,
Substantial Improvement shall not include either 1) any project for improvement of a
STRUCTURE to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe occupancy conditions, or 2)
any alteration of a STRUCTURE listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the
State Inventory of Historic Places.
4.1.2 Purpose – The purpose of the Flood Plain District is to protect persons and property
against the hazards of the Base Flood, to maintain the flood storage capacity and flow
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 40
pattern of the Flood Plain for the Base Flood and to provide long-term control over the
extent of land subject to inundation by the Base Flood. Further, the purpose of the
Flood Plain District is to maintain the Town’s eligibility in the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP) by adopting floodplain management regulations that meet the
applicable standards of the NFIP regulations set forth in 44 CFR 60.3. In the event of a
conflict between the NFIP regulations at 44 CFR 60.3 and the Flood Plain District
regulations set forth in the Bylaw, the more stringent requirement shall control.
4.1.3 Methods for Determining Flood Plain District Boundaries – The exact boundaries of the
Flood Plain District shall be as shown by the 100-year Base Flood elevation(s) shown
on the FIRM and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
report dated July 7, 2014, as determined by an actual field survey of the Base Flood
elevation(s).
4.1.3.1 The Base Flood elevations for AE-Zones shall be the regulatory elevations from Table 8
and the cross section locations from the Flood Profiles contained in the “Middlesex
County, Massachusetts, Flood Insurance Study, July 7, 2014” published by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
4.1.3.2 The Base Flood elevations and Floodway data for A-Zones shall be determined based
on hydrologic and hydraulic analyses of the development area by a Registered
Professional Engineer. However, Base Flood elevations and Floodway data for AZones
may also be based, when available, upon information from a federal or state
source, or from the Office of the Town Engineer.
4.1.4 Prohibited USES Within the Limits of the Floodway – Except as provided in Section
4.1.5, all new construction and encroachments including, grading, filling, excavating,
Substantial Improvements and other development is prohibited unless:
a) a technical evaluation by a Registered Professional Engineer demonstrates that the
new construction or encroachment will not result in any increase in flood levels
during the occurrence of the Base Flood discharge;
b) and it is otherwise allowed by a special permit from the Board of Appeals under
Section 4.1.8;
4.1.5 Permitted USES Within the Limits of the Floodway – The following USES are permitted
within the limits of the Floodway:
4.1.5.1 Maintenance and repair of existing STRUCTURES and improvement of existing
STRUCTURES provided that any such improvement is either within the existing
STRUCTURE or above the Base Flood elevation;
4.1.5.2 Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing STRUCTURES in a driveway or
private way or in an associated easement. Structures referred to herein are banks,
walls, culverts, bridges or similar structures;
4.1.5.3 Any activity, construction or installation conducted solely for the purpose of
environmental clean-up or remediation, and required or approved by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
4.1.6 Prohibited USES within the Limits of the Floodway Fringe – Except as provided in
Section 4.1.7 and Section 4.1.8, all new construction including grading, filling or
excavating is prohibited within the limits of the Floodway Fringe.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 41
4.1.7 Permitted USES Within the Limits of the Floodway Fringe – The following USES are
permitted within the limits of the Floodway Fringe in accordance with the underlying
district:
4.1.7.1 Any USE otherwise permitted by this Bylaw subject to the provisions of this Section;
4.1.7.2 Any USE permitted in the underlying district in which the land is located subject to the
same USE and development restrictions as may otherwise apply provided that, based
upon properly documented engineering data, the land is found by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer not to be subject to flooding during the Base Flood;
4.1.7.3 Construction, maintenance and repair of municipal and private water supply
STRUCTURES;
4.1.7.4 Maintenance and repair of existing STRUCTURES and improvement of existing
STRUCTURES provided that any such improvement is either within the existing
STRUCTURE or above the Base Flood elevation;
4.1.7.5 Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing STRUCTURES in a driveway or
private way or in an associated easement. Structures referred to herein are banks,
walls, culverts, bridges or similar structures;
4.1.7.6 Any activity, construction or installation conducted solely for the purpose of
environmental clean-up or remediation, and required or approved by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
4.1.8 USES Permitted by Special Permit Within the Limits of the Floodway Fringe – The
following USES may be permitted within the limits of the Floodway Fringe upon the
issuance of a special permit by the Board of Appeals:
4.1.8.1 Any USE permitted in the underlying district in which the land is located, including
grading, filling or excavating, subject to the same USE and development regulations as
may otherwise apply thereto provided the Board of Appeals finds that:
a) the proposed USE does not significantly conflict with the purposes of this Section;
b) at least 98 percent of the Natural Flood Storage Volume of the Flood Plain on the
site is preserved without the use of compensatory storage techniques and
disturbance of the natural characteristics of the Flood Plain on the site is kept to a
minimum;
c) the elevation of the Lowest Floor level including basement of any new or
substantially improved residential STRUCTURE is at or above the Base Flood;
d) the elevation of the Lowest Floor including basement of any new or substantially
improved non-residential STRUCTURE is at or above the Base Flood or
floodproofed to above the Base Flood;
e) the elevation of the lowest point of any new vehicular or pedestrian ACCESS from a
STREET to any BUILDING, including garages, used for human occupancy is at or
above the Base Flood;
f) any new construction or Substantial Improvements are constructed with flood
resistant materials and methods and anchored to prevent flotation and lateral
movement;
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 42
g) any new or reconstructed utilities, such as water or sewer mains, septic and
drainage systems, fuel storage facilities, gas electric or other utilities, are anchored
to prevent flotation and designed to avoid impairment during the Base Flood.
4.1.9 Procedures for Review by the Board of Appeals – Any person who desires to erect any
STRUCTURE or excavate, fill, grade or otherwise develop land in accordance with
Section 4.1.4 or Section 4.1.8 shall submit a written application to the Board of Appeals.
Each such application shall be accompanied by the following;
a) A written statement indicating any special permits previously granted under this
Section for the subject LOT, for any portion of the subject LOT or for any larger LOT
which formerly included the subject LOT;
b) Proposed site plan for the entire area to be developed showing existing and
proposed BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, signs, parking spaces, driveway openings
and driveways; the Flood Plain District boundary; existing and proposed topography
at one foot intervals within the Flood Plain District and two foot intervals outside the
District; the Floodway boundary; all facilities for surface and subsurface water
drainage and sewage disposal; and all existing and proposed landscape features;
c) Detailed calculations and supporting materials prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer showing the existing and proposed flood storage volume of
the site between the elevation(s) of the property as it existed on June 14, 1978 and
the elevation(s) of the Base Flood. In A-Zones, the supporting materials shall
include the methods and all data used in determining the location of the Floodway
and the elevation of the Base Flood;
d) Where floodproofing is used, certification by a Registered Professional Engineer or
a Registered Professional Architect that the new construction is adequate to
withstand the forces associated with the Base Flood and that the methods used are
adequate to withstand flood depths, pressures and velocities, impact and uplift
forces and other factors associated with the Base Flood.
4.1.9.1 If a special permit is granted, the Board of Appeals shall impose such conditions and
safeguards as public safety, welfare and convenience, and the NFIP regulations at 44
CFR 60.3 may require. Upon completion of any authorized work an "as-built" plan,
prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer or a Registered Land Surveyor, as
appropriate to the data, of all improvements in the Flood Plain District shall be
submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer and shall specify the elevation of the
Lowest Floor including basement, the elevation to and method by which any
STRUCTURE has been floodproofed and the finished grades of all disturbed areas.
4.1.9.2 All structural and non-structural activities and development in the Flood Plain District,
whether allowed under this Bylaw by right or by special permit must be in compliance
with applicable State laws and regulations as amended from time to time, including, but
not limited to M.G.L. Ch. 131, s. 40 (Wetlands Protection Act); 780 CMR
(Massachusetts State Building Code applicable to Flood Resistant Construction); 310
CMR 10.00 & 13.00 (Wetlands Protection and Inland Wetlands Regulations); and 310
CMR 15.00 (Title 5, Minimum Requirements for the Subsurface Disposal of Sanitary
Sewage).
4.2 Open Space Development – Open Space Development shall be the preferred method
of land development in the Residential Districts. Open Space Development as set forth
in this Section is authorized by The Zoning Act, M.G.L. Ch. 40A, Section 9, and is
based on the general concept of "Cluster Development" described therein.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 43
4.2.1 Purpose – The purpose of Open Space Development is to enhance the preservation of
common land for conservation, OPEN SPACE, recreation, agriculture and forestry; to
preserve unique and significant natural, historical and archeological resources, and to
promote development in harmony with those resources; to protect scenic vistas from
Acton's roadways and other places; to preserve and foster the rural character of the
Town of Acton; to promote development of land that creates clusters and villages and,
thereby, is in greater harmony with the historic and traditional landscape of the Town of
Acton and New England as a whole; to protect existing and potential municipal water
supplies; to promote better overall site planning and optimal siting of BUILDINGS,
accessory STRUCTURES and wastewater disposal systems in relation to the resources
of the development site; to reduce roadway maintenance cost and the cost of providing
municipal services; and to enhance the general purpose of this Bylaw.
4.2.2 Special Permit from the Planning Board – The Planning Board shall grant a Special
Permit for an Open Space Development in the R-2, R-4, R-8, R-8/4, R-10 and R-10/8
Districts, for single FAMILY detached dwellings and accessory STRUCTURES, subject to
the following:
4.2.2.1 Contents of Applications for an Open Space Development Special Permit – The
application for an Open Space Development Special Permit shall be accompanied by
an "Open Space Development Site Plan", showing the information required by the
Rules and Regulations for Open Space Development. The information shall include but
not be limited to: the topography; soil characteristics as shown on the Soil Conservation
Service Maps; wetlands as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40; Flood Plain
boundary lines; existing types of vegetation; any other unique natural, historical,
archeological, and aesthetic resources; the approximate layout of the LOTS without the
benefit of Open Space Development standards and under given site limitations; the
proposed layout of the LOTS and the Common Land in the Open Space Development;
the proposed location of the dwellings, setback lines, garages, driveways, wells, septic
systems; the proposed finished grades of the land; the proposed vegetation and
landscaping including where existing vegetation is retained; the Land Use Plan for the
Common Land; the proposed form of ownership of the Common Land including any
improvements proposed thereon.
4.2.2.2 Procedural Requirements – If the Open Space Development requires approval under
the Subdivision Control Law, M.G.L., Ch. 41, the "Open Space Development Site Plan"
shall contain a plan in the form and with the contents required of a Definitive
Subdivision Plan by the Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The applications for
an Open Space Development Special Permit and for approval of a Definitive
Subdivision Plan shall be filed concurrently. To the extent permitted by law, the
Planning Board shall consider both applications at the same time. If the Open Space
Development contains a Common Driveway subject to Section 3.8.1.5 of the Bylaw, the
applications for an Open Space Development Special Permit and a Common Driveway
Special Permit shall be filed concurrently and the Planning Board shall, to the extent
permitted by law, consider both applications at the same time.
4.2.2.3 Planning Board Action – In evaluating the proposed Open Space Development the
Planning Board shall consider the general objectives of this Bylaw and of Open Space
Development in particular; the existing and probable future development of surrounding
areas; the appropriateness of the proposed layout of the LOTS and the proposed layout
and USE of the Common Land in relation to the topography, soils and other
characteristics and resources of the TRACT OF LAND in question. The Planning Board
shall grant a Special Permit for Open Space Development if it finds that the Open
Space Development and the proposed USES:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 44
a) comply in all respects to the requirements of the Bylaw and enhance the purpose
and intent of Open Space Development,
b) are in harmony with the existing and probable future USES of the area and with the
character of the surrounding area and neighborhood, and
c) comply with the requirements of Section 10.3.5.
The Planning Board may require changes to the "Open Space Development Site Plan"
and impose additional conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems necessary to
secure the objectives of this Bylaw, including without limitation, any conditions,
safeguards or limitations listed in Section 10.3.6.
4.2.2.4 Revisions and Amendments of "Open Space Development Site Plans" – Any change in
the layout of STREETS; in the configuration of the Common Land; in the ownership or
USE of the Common Land; or any other change which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, would significantly alter the character of the Open Space
Development, shall require the written approval of the Planning Board. The Planning
Board may, upon its own determination, require a new special permit and hold a public
hearing pursuant to Section 10.3 of this Bylaw, if it finds that the proposed changes are
substantial in nature and of public concern.
4.2.3 Open Space Development Standards – The following standards shall apply to all Open
Space Developments:
4.2.3.1 Minimum Tract Size – Open Space Developments shall be located upon a TRACT OF
LAND which has an area within the Town of Acton of at least 6 acres in the R-2 District,
or 8 acres in the R-4, R-8, R-8/4, R-10, and R-10/8 Districts.
a) The Planning Board may permit LOTS on directly opposite sides of a STREET to
qualify as a single TRACT OF LAND. To permit such division of a TRACT OF
LAND by a STREET, the Planning Board must find that this would enhance the
purposes of Open Space Development and not result in any more DWELLING
UNITS than would be possible in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw if the
LOTS on either side of the STREET were developed separately. If the Board
approves a TRACT OF LAND divided by a STREET, it may permit the total number
of permitted DWELLING UNITS to be constructed on either side of the STREET.
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS generated on the TRACT OF LAND under the
provisions of Section 4.4.3 may be sited along with the other DWELLING UNITS
whether or not the location of the AFFORDABLE DWELLINGS UNITS is within the
AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District. The DWELLING UNITS shall be
constructed in accordance with the applicable dimensional requirements in Open
Space Developments, and the required Common Land may consist of land located
on either side of the STREET.
b) Where a TRACT OF LAND is divided by a zoning district boundary between any of
the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-10 or R-10/8 districts and the TRACT OF LAND meets the
largest of the size requirements for any of the involved districts, the total number of
DWELLING UNITS permitted shall not exceed the number permitted in each district
considered separately. AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS generated on the
TRACT OF LAND under the provisions of Section 4.4.3 may be sited along with the
other DWELLING UNITS whether or not the location of the AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS is within the AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District. The
DWELLING UNITS may be located in either district but shall be constructed in
accordance with the dimensional requirements for LOTS and BUILDINGS in Open
Space Developments for the district in which the DWELLINGS UNITS are located.
The required Common Land shall be large enough to meet the largest of the
requirements of the involved zoning districts.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 45
4.2.3.2 Maximum Number of BUILDING LOTS Permitted – The total number of BUILDING
LOTS in an Open Space Development shall not exceed the number of BUILDING LOTS
that could be developed without the benefit of Open Space Development standards in
the District in which the TRACT OF LAND is located. Provided however, that the
number of allowable BUILDING LOTS in the R-8/4 District shall be based on the
dimensional requirements applicable in the R-4 District, and the number of allowable
BUILDING LOTS in the R-10/8 District shall be based on the dimensional requirements
applicable in the R-8 District. In making the determination of the number of allowable
BUILDING LOTS, the Planning Board shall require that the applicant provide a plan
demonstrating evidence that, if such TRACT OF LAND were to be developed under the
standard requirements applicable for the underlying or otherwise applicable zoning
district,
a) the development would comply with all requirements of Bylaw;
b) the development would comply with the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection Act and
the Acton Wetlands Bylaw.
The Planning Board shall consider the recommendations of the Board of Health, the
Conservation Commission and the Engineering Department of the Town of Acton in
making said determination.
4.2.3.3 Dimensional Requirements for LOTS and BUILDINGS – Where the requirements of the
Open Space Development differ from or conflict with the requirement of Section 5 of this
Bylaw, the requirements established for Open Space Developments shall prevail. The
following requirements shall be observed in all Open Space Developments. Where
appropriate, the Planning Board may impose additional requirements upon the TRACT
OF LAND or on any parts thereof as a condition to the granting of a special permit:
a) Average LOT Area: The minimum average LOT area for all BUILDING LOTS in an
Open Space Development in the R-2 District shall not be less than 10,000 square
feet; in the R-4 and R-8/4 Districts not less than 20,000 square feet; and in the R-8,
R-10, and R-10/8 Districts not less than 30,000 square feet.
b) Minimum LOT Area: In the R-2 District not less than 8,000 square feet; in the R-4
and R-8/4 Districts not less than 10,000 square feet; and in the R-8, R-10 and R-
10/8 Districts not less than 20,000 square feet.
c) Minimum FRONTAGE: Not less than 50 feet.
d) Minimum LOT Width: Not less than 50 feet.
e) Minimum Front Yard: 45 feet from a pre-existing STREET. The minimum front yard
measured from a new STREET within the Open Space Development shall be 15
feet in the R-2 District and 20 feet in the R-4, R-8, R-8/4, R-10 and R-10/8 Districts.
f) Minimum Side and Rear Yard: In the R-2 District not less than 10 feet. In the R-4,
R-8, R-8/4, R-10, and R-10/8 Districts not less than 20 feet.
g) Minimum Yard Area: Not less than 70% of the LOT.
4.2.3.4 Dimensional Requirements for the Common Land - Not less than 30% in the R-2
District, 40% in the R-4 and R-8/4 Districts, and 50% in the R-8, R-10, and R-10/8
Districts of the total area of the TRACT OF LAND within Acton to be developed as an
Open Space Development shall be dedicated as Common Land within Acton. The
following additional requirements shall apply:
a) The minimum required area of the Common Land shall not contain a greater
percentage of wetlands, as defined in M.G.L. Ch. 131, Section 40, than the
percentage of wetlands found in the overall TRACT OF LAND.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 46
b) The minimum Common Land shall be laid out as one or more large, contiguous
parcels that are distinct from parcels dedicated for other purposes and USES. Each
Common Land parcel shall contain at least one access corridor to a STREET or way
that shall be not less than 40 feet wide.
c) If the TRACT OF LAND of the Open Space Development abuts adjacent Common
Land or undeveloped LOTS, the Common Land shall be laid out to abut the
adjacent Common Land or undeveloped LOTS.
4.2.3.5 USE of the Common Land –- The Common Land shall be dedicated and used for
conservation, historic preservation and education, outdoor education, recreation, park
purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or for a combination of those USES. No
other USES shall be allowed in the Common Land, except as provided for herein:
a) The proposed USE of the Common Land shall be specified on a Land Use Plan and
appropriate dedications and restrictions shall be part of the deed to the Common
Land. The Planning Board shall have the authority to approve or disapprove
particular USES proposed for the Common Land in order to enhance the specific
purposes of Open Space Development.
b) The Common Land shall remain unbuilt upon, provided that an overall maximum of
five (5) percent of such land may be subject to pavement and STRUCTURES
accessory to the dedicated USE or USES of the Common Land, and provided that
the Common Land may be subject to temporary easements for the construction,
maintenance, and repair of roads, utilities, and sewer or drainage facilities serving
the Open Space Development or adjacent land.
c) In addition, a portion of the Common Land may also be used the construction of
leaching areas, if associated with septic disposal systems serving the Open Space
Development, and if such USE, in the opinion of the Planning Board, enhances the
specific purpose of Open Space Development to promote better overall site
planning.
Septic disposal easements shall be no larger than reasonably necessary. If any
portion of the Common Land is used for the purpose of such leaching areas, the
Planning Board shall require adequate assurances and covenants that such
facilities shall be maintained by the LOT owners within the Open Space
Development.
d) In addition, a portion of the Common Land may also be used for ways serving as
pedestrian walks, bicycle paths, and ACCESS or egress to the Open Space
Development or adjacent land, if such a USE, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
enhances the general purpose of this Bylaw and enhances better site and
community planning, and if the Planning Board finds that adequate assurances and
covenants exist, to ensure proper maintenance of such facilities by the owner of the
Common Land.
e) Portions of the Common Land that are in excess of the minimum Common Land
total area and upland area as calculated in accordance with Section 4.2.3.4,
including its subsection a), may be used for storm water detention and retention
facilities serving the LOTS, STREETS and ways in the Open Space Development,
including infrastructure such as pipes, swales, catch basins, and manholes, and
parcels and easements associated with such facilities.
4.2.3.6 Ownership of the Common Land – The Common Land shall be conveyed in whole or in
part to the Town of Acton and accepted by it, or to a non-profit organization, the
principal purpose of which is the conservation of OPEN SPACE and/or any of the
purposes and USES to which the Common Land may be dedicated. The Common
Land may also be conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 47
owners of LOTS within the Open Space Development. If the Common Land or any
portion thereof is not conveyed to the Town of Acton, a perpetual restriction, approved
by the Planning Board and enforceable by the Town of Acton, shall be imposed on the
USE such land, providing in substance that the land be kept in its open or natural state
and that the land shall not be built upon or developed or used except in accordance with
the provisions of Open Space Development as set forth herein and, if applicable, further
specified in the decision of the Planning Board governing the individual Open Space
Development. The proposed ownership of all Common Land shall be shown on the
Land Use Plan for the Open Space Development. At the time of its conveyance, the
Common Land shall be free of all encumbrances, mortgages or other claims, except as
to easements, restrictions and encumbrances required permitted by this Bylaw.
4.3 GROUNDWATER Protection District
4.3.1 Purpose – GROUNDWATER is the sole source of drinking water available to the
residents, businesses and industries of the Town of Acton. The purpose of the
GROUNDWATER Protection District is to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
by protecting the Town's limited present and future drinking water supply, to ensure a
sufficient quantity of potable pure drinking water for the present and future residents of
Acton, to prevent temporary and permanent contamination of GROUNDWATER and
SURFACE WATER, and to limit the adverse effects of the USE and development of
land on the quality and quantity of the GROUNDWATER and SURFACE WATER
resources of the Town of Acton.
The GROUNDWATER Protection District is an overlay district whose boundaries are
superimposed on all districts established by this Bylaw and whose regulations are in
addition to any other regulations established by this Bylaw. The regulations in this
district are not intended to supersede or limit the protections contained in state or
federal GROUNDWATER protection programs, but to supplement protections contained
in other statutes and regulations. The GROUNDWATER Protection District
encompasses the entire Town, but it is divided into four separate protection zones, the
regulations for which vary depending on their proximity to the Town's present and future
drinking WATER SUPPLY wells.
4.3.2 District Boundaries – The GROUNDWATER Protection District is divided into four
protection zones, as follows:
4.3.2.1 ZONE 1 - Well Protection Area –The area from which GROUNDWATER will travel to a
pumping municipal well within a one year time period, based on average recharge
conditions and anticipated pumping, as established in the "Groundwater Protection
District Map of the Town of Acton, January 1989", prepared by Goldberg, Zoino and
Associates (GZA) in the "Final Report - Aquifer Protection Zones, Town of Acton,
Massachusetts, January 1989".
4.3.2.2 ZONE 2 - The Recharge Protection Area – The area within which GROUNDWATER will
move toward a pumping municipal well at the end of a 180 day period of no surficial
recharge and full design capacity pumping of the well (as more fully defined by the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection in 310 CMR 22.02),
established in the "Groundwater Protection District Map of the Town of Acton, January
1989", as last amended and most recently adopted by Town Meeting. For the
Clapp/Whitcomb and the School Street well fields, the Zone 2 delineation was prepared
by Goldberg, Zoino and Associates (GZA) in the “Final Report - Aquifer Protection
Zones, Town of Acton, Massachusetts, January 1989”. For the Conant I and II well
fields, the ZONE 2 delineation was prepared by Dufresne-Henry, Inc. for the Acton
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 48
Water District in the “Report on Conant II Pumping Test”, dated January 1993. For the
Kennedy/Marshall well fields, the ZONE 2 delineation was prepared by Dufresne-Henry,
Inc. for the Acton Water District in the “Report on Kennedy No.1 and Marshall Wellfields
Zone II Delineation”, dated October 1996. For the Assabet well fields, the ZONE 2
delineation was prepared by Stantec Consulting for the Acton Water District in the
report “Prolonged Pumping Test Assabet Well No. 3”, dated May 2008 and revised by
Stantec Consulting in a letter report dated January 2009. All ZONES 2 have been
approved by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) as the
State approved Zones II, and all ZONES 2 described and referred to herein shall be
deemed identical to the DEP approved Zones II.
4.3.2.3 ZONE 3 - The AQUIFER Protection Area – The Area of the TOWN underlain with the
geologic formation of STRATIFIED DRIFT, based on the U.S. Soil Conservation
Service's (SCS) soil map field sheets 1988 and Interim Soil Survey Report, 1986; and
based on the United States Geologic Survey's (USGS) Surficial Geology Maps for the
Hudson Maynard Quadrangle, 1956, and the Assabet River Basin, Hydrologic
Investigations Atlas, 1969.
4.3.2.4 ZONE 4 - The Watershed Protection Area – Consists of the entire TOWN including
ZONES 1-3 and separates the TOWN into watershed areas along the existing
GROUNDWATER divides. The areas of ZONE 4 outside from the boundaries of
ZONES 1, 2 and 3 consist primarily of bedrock, glacial till and small isolated sand and
gravel deposits. Water from these areas will eventually recharge into the areas of
ZONES 1, 2 and 3, although at a rather slow rate. Recharge from these areas into
ZONES 1, 2 and 3 occurs through movement of GROUNDWATER and SURFACE
WATER. The purpose of ZONE 4 is to promote public awareness that all
GROUNDWATER areas in the Town are interconnected and to prevent contamination
of the GROUNDWATER from any source.
4.3.2.5 Boundary Determination – The locations of the various ZONES are shown on the
"Groundwater Protection District Map of the Town of Acton, January 1989", as last
amended, consisting of Map Number 3A showing all ZONES at a scale of 1"=1200', and
of Map Number 3B. Map Number 3B consists of sheets 3B-1 through 3B-18 showing
ZONE 1 and ZONE 2 at a scale of 1"=200'. The sheets 3B-1 through 3B-18 correspond
to the matching town atlas pages, which are also indicated on these sheets, and the
ZONE delineations are either traced on these corresponding town atlas pages or on
matching overlays to these pages. The "Groundwater Protection District Map of the
Town of Acton, January 1989", as last amended, is available at the office of the Town
Clerk and the Engineering and Planning Departments. Actual site locations of the
ZONE 1 and ZONE 2 boundary lines shall be determined by scaling from the Map
Number 3B. Actual site location of the boundary line between ZONE 3 and ZONE 4
shall be located by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or in the case of a Special Permit
under Section 4.3.8, by the Planning Board, based on information from Map Number
3A. Locating the boundary between ZONE 3 and ZONE 4 may be assisted through
field investigations conducted by a Certified Professional Soil Scientist (CPSS) certified
by the Soil Science Society of America (SSSA), by a soil scientist who is certified as a
Professional Member of the Society of Soil Scientists of Southern New England
(SSSSNE), by a Certified Professional Geologist (CPG) certified by the American
Institute of Professional Geologists (AIPG), or by a Massachusetts Registered
Professional Engineer versed in soil identification and classification.
4.3.2.6 Split ZONE LOTS – Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Bylaw, whenever a
GROUNDWATER Protection District ZONE boundary line divides a LOT, each portion
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 49
of the LOT shall comply with the requirements of this Bylaw applicable to its respective
ZONE, subject to the provisions set forth in section 4.3.6.5.
4.3.3 Definitions – For the purpose of the GROUNDWATER Protection District the following
terms shall have the following meaning. The terms defined below are capitalized in this
Section 4.3 in addition to the terms defined in Section 1.
4.3.3.1 AQUIFER – A geologic formation composed of FRACTURED BEDROCK, sand or
gravel that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable groundwater.
4.3.3.2 DIVERSION BOX – A precast concrete box or similar STRUCTURE, designed and
positioned to direct a defined initial portion of runoff from a storm event in one direction
and to direct remainder of the runoff water in another direction.
4.3.3.3 PRIMARY, SECONDARY, TERTIARY TREATED EFFLUENT – As defined from time to
time in the applicable regulations of the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection.
4.3.3.4 FILL – Any material taken from on-site or off-site used for the purpose of augmenting or
altering existing on-site topography, including but not limited to, landscaping, grading, or
leveling of naturally occurring depressions in the land or of man-made excavations.
4.3.3.5. FRACTURED BEDROCK – is a geological formation (e.g. crystalline rock, marble,
schist) where groundwater flows through cracks and fractures. Flow through fractures
is typically relatively fast. FRACTURED BEDROCK is an alternative AQUIFER to
STRATIFIED DRIFT AQUIFERS. FRACTURED BEDROCK typically underlies the
overlying sand and gravel and glacial till deposits. Recharge to the FRACTURED
BEDROCK is typically from these overlying deposits. Although the Town of Acton has
not yet utilized FRACTURED BEDROCK AQUIFERS as a source of drinking water,
protection of them is vital as GROUNDWATER from a FRACTURED BEDROCK
AQUIFER can recharge the overlying sand and gravel deposits and other surface water
bodies.
4.3.3.6 GENERATOR OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR WASTE – Any individual or business
that produces, uses or stores (stores: within the meaning of STORAGE) on site
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE, as a PRINCIPAL or ACCESSORY USE and in
quantities exceeding normal household or BUILDING maintenance needs.
4.3.3.7 GROUNDWATER – Water beneath the ground surface in the zone of saturation where
every pore space between sediment particles or all open fractures in FRACTURED
BEDROCK is saturated with water.
4.3.3.8 HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE – Any substance, including PETROLEUM
PRODUCTS, coal, or derivatives thereof, or combination of substances which because
of their quantity, concentration, physical, chemical, infectious, flammable, combustible,
radioactive, or toxic characteristics, may cause or significantly contribute to a present or
potential risk to human health, safety or welfare; to the GROUNDWATER resources; or
to the natural environment. Any substance, including but not limited to those regulated
under the applicable Acton Board of Health regulations and under any of the following
State and Federal laws and regulations, or any amendments thereof, shall be
considered HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE:
M.G.L., Chapter 21C, 315 C.M.R. 2.04;
M.G.L., Chapter 21E, 310 C.M.R. 40.00;
M.G.L., Chapter 111F, 105 C.M.R. 670.00;
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 50
M.G.L., Chapter 148, Section 13;
Toxic Substances Control Act - 15 U.S.C s.2601 et seq.;
Federal Insecticide, Fungicide and Rodenticide Act -7 U.S.C s.136 et seq.;
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act - 42 U.S.C s.6901 et seq.;
Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability
Act of 1980 - 42 U.S.C s. 9601 et seq.;
Federal Clean Water Act - 33 U.S.C s.1251 et seq..
For the purposes of this Section, sanitary domestic wastes from residential sources
shall not be considered a HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE.
4.3.3.9 IMPERVIOUS COVER – Refers to material covering the ground, with a coefficient of
runoff greater than 0.7 (as defined in Data Book for Civil Engineers by Seelye; C =
runoff/rainfall) including, but not limited to, macadam, concrete, pavement and
BUILDINGS.
4.3.3.10 LEACHABLE WASTES – Waste materials including SOLID WASTE, sludge,
agricultural wastes, and composts that are capable of releasing water borne
contaminants to the surrounding environment including the AQUIFERS of the Town.
4.3.3.11 MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION – The height of the GROUNDWATER table
when it is at its maximum level or elevation. This level is usually reached during the
months of December through April. Determination of the MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER
ELEVATION shall be made based upon the historical high GROUNDWATER table as
most recently determined by the United States Geological Survey (USGS), Acton Board
of Health records, data from monitoring wells or other adequate field testing, whichever
indicates the highest elevation. Where applicable, the determination of the MAXIMUM
GROUNDWATER ELEVATION shall be made with the additional assumption that any
well, which during pumping would draw down the GROUNDWATER table at the site, is
not operating and that the GROUNDWATER table is leveled off to its natural state.
4.3.3.12 PETROLEUM PRODUCT – PETROLEUM PRODUCT means oils of any kind or origin
or in any form and includes, but is not limited to, fuel oil; gasoline; diesel fuel; kerosene;
aviation jet fuel; aviation gasoline; lubricating oils; oily sludge; waste oil; oil refuse; oil
mixed with other wastes; crude oils; coal tar emulsions, driveway sealers, or other liquid
hydrocarbons regardless of specific gravity. PETROLEUM PRODUCT shall not include
liquefied petroleum gas including, but not limited to, liquefied natural gas, propane or
butane.
4.3.3.13 SOLID WASTE – For the purpose of this Section, SOLID WASTE shall mean any
unwanted or discarded solid material, as defined in 310 C.M.R. 19, with the exception of
brush, yard trimmings and grass clippings.
4.3.3.14 SPECIAL WASTE – SPECIAL WASTE means any solid waste that is determined not to
be a hazardous waste pursuant to 310 CMR 30.000 and that exists in such quantity or
in such chemical or physical state, or any combination thereof, so that particular
management controls are required to prevent an adverse impact from the collection,
transport, transfer, storage, processing, treatment or disposal of the solid waste.
Without limitation, SPECIAL WASTE includes waste that will require special
management to ensure protection of public health, safety, or the environment based
upon the physical, biological, or chemical properties of the waste. SPECIAL WASTES
include but are not limited to: asbestos waste, infectious wastes except as specified in
310 C.M.R. 19.061(2)(b), sludges including wastewater treatment sludges and industrial
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 51
process wastewater treatment sludges. For purposes of this Bylaw, SPECIAL WASTE
does not include drinking water treatment sludges.
4.3.3.15 STRATIFIED DRIFT – Permeable, porous deposits of glacial outwash, consisting
primarily of sand and gravel. The particular deposits referred to herein are those
occurring in glacial river valleys in which the town's drinking WATER SUPPLIES are
located. These deposits are defined in the United States Geologic Survey's (USGS)
Surficial Geology Maps for the Hudson Maynard Quadrangle, 1956, and the Assabet
River Basin, Hydrologic Investigations Atlas, 1969, and in the U.S. Soil Conservation
Service's (SCS) soil map field sheets, 1988, and Interim Soil Survey Report, 1986; soil
types associated with STRATIFIED DRIFT listed in the Interim Soil Survey Report are:
Agawam series, Amostown series, Birdsall series, Carver series, Deerfield series,
Freetown series, Freetown-ponded, Hadley series, Haven series, Hinkley series,
Hinkley series-bouldery, Limerick series, Merrimac series, Merrimac-urban land
complex, Ninigret series, Occum series, Pipestone series, Pootatuck series, Quonset
series, Raynham series, Rippowam series, Saco series, Scarboro series, Scio series,
Sudbury series, Suncook series, Swansea series, Tisbury series, Walpole series,
Windsor series, Winooski series; also Udorthents, Gravel Pits, Landfills, and Urban
Land Complexes when surrounded by or primarily associated with soil types listed
above. The above referenced soil types are associated with STRATIFIED DRIFT in
general, however, not necessarily every listed soil type does occur within the
boundaries of the Town of Acton.
4.3.3.16 STORAGE – On-site containment or retention of materials (liquid, gas, solid) for
PRINCIPAL or ACCESSORY USE for a period of more than 24 hours and occurring
with a frequency of more than once a month.
4.3.3.17 SURFACE WATER – All surface water bodies and wetlands protected under
Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 131, Section 40.
4.3.3.18 UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE – An area within the OPEN SPACE that lies outside of
any disturbances due to clearing, grading, paving, building, landscaping or other site
development activities. It may be subject to limited and selected cutting of trees,
removal of dead wood, or yearly mowing of grass and brush.
4.3.3.19 WATER SUPPLY –- A GROUNDWATER AQUIFER and SURFACE WATER recharge
to a GROUNDWATER AQUIFER, which is a present or potential future drinking
WATER SUPPLY source for the Town of Acton.
4.3.4 OPEN SPACE and LOT cover – The following requirements shall apply for OPEN
SPACE, UNDISTURBED OPEN SPACE and IMPERVIOUS COVER:
4.3.4.1 ZONE 1 – In the Well Protection Area (ZONE 1) a minimum of 90% of every LOT shall
remain OPEN SPACE, 50% of every LOT shall remain as UNDISTURBED OPEN
SPACE. No more than 10% of every LOT shall be covered with IMPERVIOUS COVER.
4.3.4.2 ZONE 2 – In the Recharge Protection Area (ZONE 2) a minimum of 70% of every LOT
shall remain OPEN SPACE, 40% of every LOT shall remain as UNDISTURBED OPEN
SPACE. No more than 30% of a LOT shall be covered with IMPERVIOUS COVER.
4.3.4.3 ZONE 3, ZONE 4 – In the Aquifer Protection Area (ZONE 3) and in the Watershed
Protection Area (ZONE 4) the OPEN SPACE requirements of the underlying Zoning
District shall apply.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 52
4.3.4.4 Outdoor STORAGE – Outdoor STORAGE areas shall not be considered a part of the
OPEN SPACE of any LOT.
4.3.5 Depth to GROUNDWATER – Except for single FAMILY residential USES or
BUILDINGS, no land within ZONES 1, 2 and 3 of the GROUNDWATER Protection
District shall be developed or used except in accordance with the following
requirements:
4.3.5.1 Minimum Distance to GROUNDWATER – The vertical distance between the existing or
pre-development land surface and the MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION shall
generally not be reduced, except when necessary to properly grade and construct
STREETS, driveways, parking facilities and BUILDING sites, in order to comply with
applicable regulations and to meet generally accepted ACCESS and safety standards.
1) The minimum distance between the finished or post-development grade from the
MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION shall be not less than ten (10) feet,
except as provided in Section 4.3.5.2.
2) If the distance between the existing or pre-development land surface and the
MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION is less than ten (10) feet, the distance
may be reduced in accordance with Section 4.3.5.2.
4.3.5.2 Maximum Allowed Reduction within 10 ft. of GROUNDWATER – Where the existing or
pre-development land surface is less than 10 feet above the MAXIMUM
GROUNDWATER ELEVATION, the vertical distance between the finished or postdevelopment
grade to the MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION may be not less
than ninety (90) percent of the pre-development distance.
4.3.5.3 GROUNDWATER Recharge Facilities – The bottom elevation of a leaching pond, or the
bottom elevation of the stone layer in a leaching galley or trench shall be not less than
two (2) feet above the MAXIMUM GROUNDWATER ELEVATION. This Section shall
apply to STRUCTURES associated with surface drainage only.
4.3.6 Other Design and Operation Requirements – Except for single FAMILY residential
USES or BUILDINGS, no land within ZONES 1, 2 and 3 of the GROUNDWATER
Protection District, and with respect to Sections 4.3.6.1 and 4.3.6.2 no land within the
entire GROUNDWATER Protection District, shall be developed or used except in
accordance with the following requirements:
4.3.6.1 FILL – FILL material shall not contain HAZARDOUS MATERIAL OR WASTE, SPECIAL
WASTE, SOLID WASTE or LEACHABLE WASTE. This Section shall also apply in
ZONE 4.
4.3.6.2 Watershed Recharge – The amount of annual precipitation being captured and
recharged to the GROUNDWATER on site shall not be reduced due to development
related surface runoff from the site when compared to pre-development conditions.
Documentation of compliance with Standard 3 of the Massachusetts Stormwater
Handbook Volume 3, as amended, prepared by a Massachusetts Registered
Professional Engineer experienced in hydrogeology shall be required. Where a Special
Permit or Subdivision Approval is required the Special Permit Granting Authority or the
Planning Board, or the Zoning Enforcement officer if no Special Permit is required, shall
require documentation of compliance with Standard 3. This Section shall also apply in
ZONE 4.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 53
An alternative hydrologic budget or water balance calculation for the site, showing preand
post-development conditions, may be prepared by a Certified Professional Soil
Scientist (CPSS) certified by the Soil Science Society of America (SSSA), or by a soil
scientist who is certified as a Professional Member of the Society of Soil Scientists of
Southern New England (SSSSNE) in-lieu of the required documentation.
4.3.6.3 Treatment and Renovation of Runoff – All stormwater runoff from IMPERVIOUS
COVERS shall be treated to meet water quality standards for the first inch of runoff in
areas within Zones 1-3. Runoff within Zone 4 shall be treated to meet water quality
standards for new and redeveloped areas as defined by the Massachusetts Stormwater
Handbook. Runoff shall be treated for the first inch of rainfall for new developments and
for the first 0.8 inches of rainfall for redeveloped areas within Zone 4.
4.3.6.4 Pollution Safeguards – (1) Drainage facilities shall be designed to prevent leaks and
shall be equipped with emergency slide gates or similar provisions to be closed in the
event of an emergency. (2) Loading and unloading areas for HAZARDOUS
MATERIALS OR WASTE, including fuel and heating oils, shall be equipped with a
containment dike. (3) Compliance with the Acton Hazardous Materials Control Bylaw
shall be required.
4.3.6.5 Location – Where a LOT is divided into two or more protection ZONES, potential
pollution sources, such as HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR WASTE processing,
remediation, storage and disposal systems, septic systems, or wastewater treatment
plants, shall be located and contained on that portion of the LOT which is in the ZONE
farthest away from the public wells. Where the ZONE boundary in question is one
between ZONE 3 and ZONE 4, septic systems and waste-water treatment plants may
be located in either ZONE, subject to certain restrictions contained in Section 4.3.7 of
this Bylaw.
Where a LOT is partly in ZONE 4 and partly in another ZONE of the
GROUNDWATER Protection District, IMPERVIOUS COVER runoff, generated in
the ZONE 4 portion of the LOT but infiltrated, or discharged from the LOT, in a
ZONE 1, 2 or 3 portion of the LOT, shall meet the same quality standard at the
point of infiltration or discharge as if the runoff had been generated in ZONES 1,
2 and 3.
4.3.7 GROUNDWATER Protection District USE Regulations - No land which lies in ZONE 1,
2, and 3 of the GROUNDWATER Protection District shall be used and no activity shall
be conducted on any land within these ZONES of the GROUNDWATER Protection
District except in conformance with the following regulations:
4.3.7.1 Permitted USES all ZONES – All USES allowed in the underlying zoning district except
those which are prohibited or regulated in Section 4.3.7.2 are permitted.
4.3.7.2 Prohibited USES – In the following table of USE regulations "N" indicates that the USE
is prohibited. "Y" indicates that a USE is permitted.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 54
TABLE 4.3.7.2
USE Regulations within the GROUNDWATER Protection District
ZONE 1
Well
Protection
Area
ZONE 2
Recharge
Protection
Area
ZONE 3
Aquifer
Protection
Area
1. Sanitary landfill/solid waste disposal site, refuse treatment
and disposal facility, landfilling of sludge and septage, storage
of sludge and septage except for municipal USES as defined
in Section 3.4.1 of this Bylaw associated with the provision of
public sewer services
N N N
2. GENERATOR OF HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR WASTE,
except for municipal USES as defined in Section 3.4.1 of this
Bylaw associated with the provision of public water and sewer
services
N N Y
3. Vehicle Repair or Vehicle Body Shop N N Y
4. Vehicle STORAGE for the purposes of leasing, rental, sale,
resale, parts recovery, or similar USES
N N Y
5. Car, truck and equipment washing facility N N Y
6. Aboveground STORAGE of PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
for purposes other than heating the premises on which it
is located****
N N Y***
7. Underground STORAGE of PETROLEUM PRODUCTS
or other HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR WASTES
N N N
8. Underground STORAGE of PETROLEUM PRODUCTS,
or other HAZARDOUS MATERIALS OR WASTES
associated with residential USE
N N N
9. Commercial Laundries N N Y
10. Dry cleaners with on-site cleaning facilities N N Y
11. Furniture/wood stripping, painting & refinishing N N Y
12. Disposal of snow contaminated with deicing chemicals and
originating from a protection ZONE further distant from a
public well than the location of disposal
N N N
13. STORAGE outside of a BUILDING of fertilizers,
pesticides, herbicides, deicing chemicals; and
STORAGE outside of a BUILDING of LEACHABLE
WASTE except as provided in line 14. below
N N N
14. STORAGE outside of a BUILDING of animal manure,
soil conditioner, or compost in aggregate quantities
larger than ten (10) cubic yards
N N Y
15. Chemical, bacteriological, biological or radiological laboratory
or production facility
N N N
16. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent at a rate of less
than 3.5gpd/1000sf of land area
Y Y Y
17. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent at a rate of 3.5gpd
or more per 1000sf of land area but at a rate of less than
6gpd/1000sf of land area
N Y Y
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 55
TABLE 4.3.7.2
USE Regulations within the GROUNDWATER Protection District
ZONE 1
Well
Protection
Area
ZONE 2
Recharge
Protection
Area
ZONE 3
Aquifer
Protection
Area
18. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent at a rate of 6gpd
or more per 1000sf of land area
N N Y
19. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent on a parcel of land
which is not a buildable LOT as defined in footnote (**)
N N N
20. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent at a rate of less
than 750gpd per buildable LOT(**)
Y Y Y
21. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent at a rate of
750gpd or more per buildable LOT(**) but at a rate of less
than 2,000gpd per buildable LOT(**)
N Y Y
22. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent at a rate of
2,000gpd or more per buildable LOT(**) but at a rate of less
than 6,000gpd per buildable LOT(**)
N N Y
23. Subsurface disposal of wastewater effluent at a rate of
6,000gpd or more per buildable LOT(**)
N N N
24. Subsurface disposal of TERTIARY TREATED wastewater
EFFLUENT
Y Y Y
25. Any activity, construction or installation conducted solely for
the purpose of environmental clean-up or remediation, and
required or approved by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency or the Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection
Y Y Y
26. Treatment or disposal works for non-sanitary wastewater that
are subject to 310 CMR 22.21 (2)(a)6 as amended, except
the treatment and discharge of surface water runoff in
compliance with section 4.3.6.3 of this bylaw
N N Y
NOTES:
(*) A USE may fall under one or more categories listed in this Table. Any USE must be able to qualify for a
Y or a SP in every applicable category , in order to be considered allowed (Y) or in order to be
considered eligible for consideration of a special permit (SP), as the case may be.
(**) For the purpose of this table, buildable LOT shall mean: a) A LOT that is shown on a plan recorded in the
Middlesex County Registry of Deeds or the Land Court, and that complies with all requirements of this
bylaw pertaining to the LOT and the STRUCTURES thereon; and b) Common Land as provided for in
sections 4.2, 4.4, 9, and 9B of this bylaw.
(***) See Hazardous Materials Control Bylaw.
(****) Aboveground storage of quantities greater than 1,320 gallons requires compliance with Federal SPCC
regulations (Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasures Plan; 40 C.F.R. part 112)
gpd - Gallons per day
sf - Square feet
4.3.8 Special Permit for the change or extension of nonconforming USES in the Groundwater
Protection District.
4.3.8.1 The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for any change or substantial extension
of any PRINCIPAL or ACCESSORY USE designated with “N” in Table 4.3.7.2 that is in
existence as of April 7, 1997. Change or substantial extension as referred to herein
shall include but not be limited to: Any change or increase in HAZARDOUS
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 56
MATERIALS OR WASTE produced, used or stored; any change or increase in the
outdoor STORAGE of fertilizers, animal manure, soil conditioners, pesticides,
herbicides or deicing chemicals; any increase in wastewater effluent flow other than
TERTIARY TREATED EFFLUENT; any change in the grade of the land or the drainage
system for the LOT, which affects the flow of GROUNDWATER or SURFACE WATER;
any expansion in ground area by 500 square feet or more of impervious material or any
area devoted to the conduct of the PRINCIPAL or ACCESSORY USE.
4.3.8.2 Action by the Planning Board, Criteria for Special Permit – After notice and public
hearing, and after due consideration of all reports and recommendations submitted to
the Planning Board regarding the Special Permit application, the Planning Board may
grant such a Special Permit provided that it shall make the following findings:
a) Maintain GROUNDWATER Quality – That the change or extension of the USE will
not cause the GROUNDWATER quality at the down-gradient property boundary to
exceed the maximum contaminant levels established in 314 C.M.R. 22.00,
Massachusetts Drinking Water Regulations, to fall below the standards established
in 314 C.M.R. 5.00, Massachusetts Ground Water Standards, or where no such
standards exist to fall below applicable GROUNDWATER or drinking water
standards established by the Acton Water District or the Acton Board of Health.
Where existing GROUNDWATER quality is already below those standards, the
Planning Board may grant such Special Permit upon determination that the change
or expansion of the USE will not result in further degradation of the
GROUNDWATER quality, and will not impede its improvement over time.
b) Protection of Overall WATER SUPPLY – That the change or extension of the USE
will not, during construction or thereafter, have an adverse effect on the
GROUNDWATER, SURFACE WATER and overall WATER SUPPLY of the Town of
Acton and the resulting USE after the change or extension will be in harmony with
the specific purpose and intent of this Section to protect the GROUNDWATER,
SURFACE WATER and overall WATER SUPPLY of the Town of Acton.
c) Compliance – That the changed or extended USE is in harmony with the purpose
and intent of this Section and complies with the standards of Section 10.3.5 of this
Bylaw. In making such determinations, the Planning Board shall give consideration
to the proposed USE, the demonstrated reliability and feasibility of the proposed
pollution control measures associated with the USE, and the degree of pollution
threat to the GROUNDWATER which would result if the control measures perform
at less than design specifications. The Planning Board may impose such
conditions, safeguards, and limitations as it deems appropriate to protect the
GROUNDWATER and SURFACE WATER resources of the Town of Acton.
d) The Planning Board may impose conditions in the special permit to protect the
GROUNDWATER, SURFACE WATER and overall WATER SUPPLY of the Town of
Acton, including without limitation conditions to require the placement and periodic
sampling and testing of GROUNDWATER monitoring wells or SURFACE WATER
at the applicant’s expense around any aboveground or underground storage tank,
SOLID or HAZARDOUS WASTE area, or any structure or activity that may
adversely affect an AQUIFER ZONE as defined in Section 4.3.2. The Planning
Board may require that the placement of wells and/or periodic sampling and testing
be paid for by the applicant and conducted by an agent of the Acton Water
District.
4.3.8.3 Filing Requirements – The Planning Board shall promulgate and adopt rules and
regulations governing this Special Permit pursuant to Section 10.3.1 of this Bylaw.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 57
Such rules and regulations shall set forth the application filing requirements to ensure
that the application, including any plans and accompanying text, provides sufficient
information for a full evaluation of resulting impacts on the GROUNDWATER resources,
and to allow the Planning Board an evaluation of the application under the criteria set
forth in section 4.3.8.2 above.
4.3.8.4 Submittal of "As Built" Plan – Upon completion of any work authorized through a
Special Permit under this Section, an "as built" plan prepared by a Registered
Professional Engineer, showing all improvements authorized or required, shall be
submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer for approval prior to the issuance of an
Occupancy Permit.
4.4 AFFORDABLE Housing Incentives and Overlay District
4.4.1 Purpose – The purpose of this Section is to enhance the public welfare by increasing
the production of DWELLING UNITS AFFORDABLE to persons and households of
LOW-INCOME and MODERATE-INCOME. In order to encourage utilization of the
Town's remaining developable land in a manner consistent with local housing policies
and needs, the Town encourages new housing developments to contain a proportion of
the DWELLING UNITS AFFORDABLE to persons or households of LOW-INCOME and
MODERATE-INCOME. Accordingly, the provisions of this Section are designed: (1) to
increase the supply of housing in the Town of Acton that is available to and
AFFORDABLE by LOW-INCOME and MODERATE-INCOME households; (2) to
encourage a greater diversity of housing accommodations to meet the diverse needs of
FAMILIES and other Town residents; and (3) to promote a reasonable mix and
distribution of housing opportunities in residential neighborhoods throughout the Town.
4.4.2 Applicability
4.4.2.1 The provisions of this Section 4.4 may be utilized by any new development located
within the AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District, subject to the requirements and
standards set forth in this Section 4.4.
4.4.2.2 The AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District is defined and bounded as shown on the
"Affordable Housing Overlay District Map of the Town of Acton". The AFFORDABLE
Housing Overlay District shall consist of two Sub-Districts:
a) Sub-District A – In the Sub-District A, the Planning Board, when issuing a Special
Permit for an Open Space Development pursuant to Section 4.2, may authorize a
Minor AFFORDABLE Housing Development as provided in Section 4.4.3.
b) Sub-District B – In the Sub-District B, the Planning Board may authorize a Minor
AFFORDABLE Housing Development as provided in Section 4.4.3, or alternatively,
the Planning Board may allow by Special Permit a Major AFFORDABLE Housing
Development as provided in Section 4.4.4.
4.4.2.3 Said AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District is superimposed over all Districts
established by this Bylaw and the regulations related to the AFFORDABLE Housing
Overlay District are in addition to all other regulations set forth in this Bylaw. Where the
requirements and standards within the AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District, as set
forth in this Section 4.4, differ from or conflict with the requirements and standards of
the remainder of the Bylaw, the requirements and standards established for the
AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District shall prevail, except for standards established
in the Groundwater Protection and Flood Plain Districts.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 58
4.4.2.4 The AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District includes parcels of land which are not
located in a Residential District and where residential USES are not otherwise allowed.
For the purpose of utilizing the provisions of this Section 4.4 to generate AFFORDABLE
housing, but under no other circumstances, residential USES shall be permitted on
such parcels. In order to establish a reference point as a base line for any dimensional
provisions set forth in this Section 4.4, the dimensional standards of the Residence 4
(R-4) District shall be assumed for such parcels.
4.4.3 Minor AFFORDABLE Housing Developments – A Minor AFFORDABLE Housing
Development shall be regarded as an additional development option for land located in
either Sub-District of the AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District. Any Minor
AFFORDABLE Housing Development shall be an Open Space Development following
the provisions of Section 4.2 of this Bylaw, except as modified hereunder. The Planning
Board, in issuing an Open Space Development Special Permit under Section 4.2, may
authorize a Minor AFFORDABLE Housing Development, subject to the following
provisions and requirements:
4.4.3.1 Number of DWELLING UNITS to be provided – The Planning Board may allow any new
Open Space Development to have a greater number of DWELLING UNITS than would
otherwise be allowed under the provisions of Section 4.2 and other provisions of this
Bylaw, up to a maximum of twenty five percent (25%) more. In order to receive such an
increase or density bonus, a portion of the DWELLING UNITS provided within an Open
Space Development shall be AFFORDABLE, in accordance with one of the following
methods or a combination thereof:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 59
Method of Providing AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
Percentage increase in
DWELLING UNITS allowed
for each one percent (1%)
of the total number of
DWELLING UNITS which is
AFFORDABLE*
Option 1: Donation to the Acton Housing Authority, in accordance with
Section 4.4.6. For each 1.0% of AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITS provided under this option, a developer shall receive a
density bonus of 5.0% in the total number of DWELLING
UNITS.*
5.0%
Option 2: Sale to the Acton Housing Authority, in accordance with Section
4.4.6. For each 1.0% of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
provided under this option, a developer shall receive a density
bonus of 2.5% in the total number of DWELLING UNITS.*
2.5%
Option 3: Sale, lease or rental to MODERATE-INCOME households, in
accordance with Section 4.4.6. For each 1.0% of
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS provided under this option,
a developer shall receive a density bonus of 1.75% in the total
number of DWELLING UNITS.*
1.75%
Option 4: Cash payment to the Town of Acton or its designee in lieu of
providing AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS. Such cash
payment shall be of an amount equal to the cost of developing
such DWELLING UNITS as evidenced by a Development Pro
Forma, prepared by the developer and acceptable to the
Planning Board. Such cash payment shall be reserved solely
for the purpose of the purchase, rehabilitation and/or
construction of LOW-INCOME and MODERATE-INCOME
housing. For each monetary amount paid under this option
which is equal to the cost of developing 1.0% of the total
number of DWELLING UNITS a developer shall receive a
density bonus of 5.0% in the total number of DWELLING
UNITS.*
5.0%
Option 5: An arrangement with the Town of Acton or its designee,
whereby title to the property underlying the prospective
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS is donated to the Town of
Acton or its designee and, in exchange, the Town of Acton or its
designee will grant qualified purchasers a 99-year ground lease
to such underlying property. Such ground lease shall contain
provisions which limit the sale and occupancy of the affected
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS to LOW-INCOME or
MODERATE-INCOME households as defined in this Bylaw.
For each 1.0% of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS provided
under this option, a developer shall receive a density bonus of
2.5% in the total number of DWELLING UNITS.*
2.5%
* Results of percentage increases in DWELLING UNITS shall be rounded up to the next whole
number to determine the total number of DWELLING UNITS. Percentages for AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS (or for DWELLING UNITS for which cash payment is made under Option 4)
shall be calculated from this total number of DWELLING UNITS and results shall then be
rounded up to the next whole number to determine the number of AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITS to be provided (or the number of DWELLING UNITS for which cash payment is to be
made).
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 60
Example:
Development without density bonus with 10% density bonus with 25% density bonus
Total number of
DWELLING UNITS
25 27.5 - rounded up to
next whole number = 28
31.25 - rounded up to next
whole number = 32
Number of
AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS
provided under
Option 1 0 0.56 rounded up to 1 1.60 rounded up to 2
Option 2 0 1.12 rounded up to 2 3.20 rounded up to 4
Option 3 0 1.60 rounded up to 2 4.57 rounded up to 5
Option 4 0 None / Cash payment
for constructing 0.56,
rounded up to 1,
DWELLING UNIT
None / Cash payment for
constructing 1.60, rounded
up to 2, DWELLING UNITS
Option 5 0 1.12 rounded up to 2 3.20 rounded up to 4
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the voluntary inclusion of additional
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS at the developer's choice without exceeding the
maximum density increase of 25%.
4.4.3.2 Adjustments of dimensional requirements – The Planning Board may allow a reduction
in the Dimensional Requirements found in Section 4.2.3.3 for LOTS and
STRUCTURES. The percentage reduction shall not exceed the percentage increase in
the number of DWELLING UNITS permitted under Section 4.4.3.1 above.
4.4.3.3 Two-FAMILY STRUCTURES – The Planning Board may allow the construction of two-
FAMILY STRUCTURES which are designed to be consistent in character with the
single FAMILY STRUCTURES in the same development. Such two-FAMILY
STRUCTURES may be allowed at a rate of one two-FAMILY STRUCTURE in place of
two single FAMILY STRUCTURES where the following conditions are met:
a) at least fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of DWELLING UNITS are
AFFORDABLE under Options 1,2,3 or 5 of Section 4.4.3.1 above;
b) the two-FAMILY STRUCTURES have no more than one (1) doorway facing the front
yard area and shall, in terms of exterior appearance be compatible in design, and to
the extent practicable, be indistinguishable from the single FAMILY STRUCTURES
in the same development;
c) not more than fifty percent (50%) of the total number of STRUCTURES are two-
FAMILY STRUCTURES, and
d) the number of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS located in two-FAMILY
STRUCTURES does not exceed two (2), or fifty percent (50%) of the total number
of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS, whichever results in the greater number of
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS to be located in two-FAMILY STRUCTURES.
Where two-FAMILY STRUCTURES are part of the development plan, the Planning
Board may permit the side yard requirement to be eliminated so as to allow the
separate sale of individual DWELLING UNITS within a two-FAMILY STRUCTURE
along with their respective accompanying yard area. Where two-FAMILY
STRUCTURES are allowed, the combined LOT area upon which the DWELLING
UNITS of the two-FAMILY STRUCTURE are located only needs to comply with the LOT
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 61
area requirement as applicable to a LOT with a single FAMILY STRUCTURE located
within the same Open Space Development. The Planning Board may establish design
guidelines for two-FAMILY STRUCTURES, require submission of architectural floor
plans and side elevation plans for all proposed two-FAMILY STRUCTURES, and
impose additional conditions affecting the design and location of two-FAMILY
STRUCTURES. All privileges and exemptions provided to single FAMILY residential
USES or BUILDINGS under this Bylaw shall also apply to two-FAMILY STRUCTURES
permitted hereunder. The inclusion of two-FAMILY STRUCTURES shall not result in an
increase in the number of DWELLING UNITS above the 25% density bonus permitted
under Section 4.4.3.1.
4.4.3.4 A Minor AFFORDABLE Housing Development shall be subject to the provisions and
requirements of Sections 4.4.5 through 4.4.9.
4.4.4 Major AFFORDABLE Housing Development – A Major AFFORDABLE Housing
Development shall be regarded as an additional development option for land located in
Sub-District B of the AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District. A Major AFFORDABLE
Housing Development may be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board.
Such Major AFFORDABLE Housing Development shall be governed by the following
provisions:
4.4.4.1 Affordability Provisions – A Major AFFORDABLE Housing Development must meet one
of the following conditions:
a) a minimum of 40% of the total number of DWELLING UNITS within the Major
AFFORDABLE Housing Development shall be sold, leased or rented to
MODERATE-INCOME households in accordance with Sections 4.4.6;
b) a minimum of 30% of the total number of DWELLING UNITS within the Major
AFFORDABLE Housing Development shall be sold to the Acton Housing Authority
in accordance with Section 4.4.6, and/or be built on land under an arrangement,
whereby title to the property underlying the prospective AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITS is donated to the Town of Acton or its designee and, in exchange, the Town
of Acton or its designee will grant qualified purchasers a 99-year ground lease to
such underlying property. Such ground lease shall contain provisions which limit the
sale and occupancy of the affected AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS to LOWINCOME
or MODERATE-INCOME households as defined in this Bylaw, or
d) a minimum of 20% of the total number of DWELLING UNITS within the Major
AFFORDABLE Housing Development shall be donated to the Acton Housing
Authority in accordance with Section 4.4.6.
The Planning Board may approve a proportionate combination of the above conditions.
For instance, if 20% of the DWELLING UNITS are AFFORDABLE under condition a.,
then half of the affordability requirement is satisfied. Consequently, to meet the full
affordability requirement, an additional 15% of the DWELLING UNITS would have to be
AFFORDABLE under condition b. (half of 30%), or an additional 10% under condition c.
(half of 20%), or additional DWELLING UNITS would have to be AFFORDABLE under a
proportionate combination of conditions b. and c.. Results of all percentages shall be
rounded up to the next whole number to determine the number of AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS.
4.4.4.2 Dimensional Provisions – A Major AFFORDABLE Housing Development, shall be
subject to the following dimensional standards:
a) Minimum TRACT OF LAND area: 80,000 square feet.
b) Minimum TRACT OF LAND FRONTAGE: Fifty (50) feet.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 62
c) Maximum density: Five (5) DWELLING UNITS per acre, based on the total
development site including Common Land.
d) Minimum TRACT OF LAND width: Fifty (50) feet.
e) Maximum BUILDING height: Thirty six (36) feet.
f) Maximum number of DWELLING UNITS per BUILDING: Fifteen (15), however
within an entire Major AFFORDABLE Housing Development the average number of
DWELLING UNITS per BUILDING shall not exceed eight (8).
g) Minimum separation of BUILDINGS: Twenty (20) feet;
h) Minimum area to be set aside as Common Land pursuant to the provisions for
Common Land in Section 4.2: Thirty percent (30%) of the total development site.
i) Minimum perimeter buffer: Fifty (50) feet between any LOT line to abutting
properties and any BUILDING within the development. Such buffer shall be
landscaped or remain in its natural vegetation.
4.4.4.3 Design Provision – Each DWELLING UNIT in a Major AFFORDABLE Housing
Development shall have at least one separate ground floor entrance/exit, unless the
Planning Board permits otherwise as part of its Special Permit. In addition, each
STRUCTURE shall be compatible with the architectural style and scale of the
neighborhood within which it is proposed. The Planning Board may establish design
guidelines for Major AFFORDABLE Housing Developments. In granting a Special
Permit, the Planning Board may impose conditions regarding dimensional controls and
bulk of BUILDINGS to enhance the architectural compatibility with the surrounding
neighborhood.
4.4.4.4 Other Provisions – The Planning Board, in granting a Special Permit for a Major
AFFORDABLE Housing Development, may impose reasonable conditions to protect the
environment, and the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood, of residents in the
proposed development, and of the general public. Such conditions may include, but
shall not necessarily be limited to, requirements for the tertiary treatment of wastewater
effluent, the location of wastewater effluent disposal, and necessary limitations on the
total number of DWELLING UNITS to prevent negative impacts on the groundwater and
other existing or potential public water resources.
4.4.4.5 A Major AFFORDABLE Housing Development shall be subject to the provisions and
requirements of Sections 4.4.5 through 4.4.9.
4.4.5 Development Standards for Major and Minor AFFORDABLE Housing Developments.
4.4.5.1 Location of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS – AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
shall be dispersed throughout the development to insure a true mix of market-rate and
AFFORDABLE housing.
4.4.5.2 Comparability – AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall in terms of exterior
appearance be compatible in design with, and to the extent possible indistinguishable
from, market-rate DWELLING UNITS in the same development. All internal design
features shall be substantially the same as for market-rate DWELLING UNITS.
4.4.5.3 DWELLING UNIT size – Except as otherwise provided by the Planning Board,
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall contain two or more bedrooms and shall be
suitable in type and design for FAMILY occupancy.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 63
4.4.5.4 Rights and privileges – The owners or renters of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS
shall have all rights, privileges and responsibilities given to owners or renters of market
rate DWELLING UNITS, including access to all amenities within the development.
4.4.5.5 DWELLING UNITS for Handicapped Persons – The Planning Board may require that
some of the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS be constructed so as to be suited for
access and occupancy by a handicapped person or persons.
4.4.6 Affordability Requirements for Major and Minor AFFORDABLE Housing Developments.
4.4.6.1 Long term affordability – AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall be restricted to LOWINCOME
or MODERATE-INCOME use for the maximum period permitted by law, in
one of the following ways:
a) Donation of DWELLING UNITS to the Acton Housing Authority – DWELLING UNITS
are donated to the Acton Housing Authority (A.H.A.), subject to the acceptance of
the A.H.A.
b) Sale of DWELLING UNITS to the Acton Housing Authority – DWELLING UNITS set
aside for sale to the Acton Housing Authority (A.H.A.) shall be offered at prices
which do not exceed the lesser of (i) the general development costs of the particular
DWELLING UNITS, or (ii) the current acquisition cost limits for the particular
DWELLING UNITS under applicable state or federal financing programs. If the
A.H.A. is unable to purchase the set-aside DWELLING UNIT(S) at the time of
completion, the developer shall grant to the A.H.A. an exclusive right to purchase
such DWELLING UNIT(S) within said cost limits, and shall lease or rent the
DWELLING UNIT(S) to LOW-INCOME persons or households from a list prepared
by the A.H.A., until such time as the A.H.A. can purchase the DWELLING UNIT(S).
If, after two (2) years, the A.H.A. has not purchased the DWELLING UNIT(S), the
developer may sell the DWELLING UNIT(S) as set forth under Option 5 of Section
4.4.3.1 or condition b. of Section 4.4.4.1, after making proper arrangements
pursuant to such sections with the Town of Acton or its designee.
c) Sale, Lease or Rental of DWELLING UNITS to LOW-INCOME or MODERATEINCOME
Households – DWELLING UNITS set aside for sale, lease or rental to
LOW-INCOME or MODERATE-INCOME households shall be restricted for
occupancy by qualified households which meet the definition of "LOW-INCOME" or
"MODERATE-INCOME" respectively, as set forth in this Bylaw.
4.4.6.2 Resale Controls – Each AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT created in accordance with
this Section 4.4 shall have limitations governing its resale which must be satisfied
before the property can be sold by its owners. The purpose of these limitations is to
preserve the long-term affordability of the DWELLING UNIT and to ensure its continued
availability to LOW-INCOME or MODERATE-INCOME households. The resale controls
shall be established through deed or lease restrictions or otherwise, subject to the
approval of the Planning Board, and shall be in force for such maximum period of time
from the date of initial sale as may be permitted under applicable state law governing
such restrictions. The resale controls shall be established in such a manner so as to be
enforceable by the Town of Acton, and renewable by the Town of Acton through
standard procedures provided by applicable state law.
4.4.6.3 Maximum Sales Price for AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS.
a) Initial Sale – The maximum initial sales price shall be set at the most recently
published median FAMILY income for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical
Area times a maximum multiplier of two and one-quarter (2.25), adjusted for
DWELLING UNIT size in accordance with Section 4.4.6.5 below.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 64
b) Resales – Maximum sales prices at subsequent resales shall be limited to the
median FAMILY income for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area as last
published prior to the resale, times the same multiplier used at the initial sale,
adjusted for DWELLING UNIT size in accordance with Section 4.4.6.5 below, plus
the cost of documented capital improvements, other than bedroom additions,
garages, and improvements detached from the DWELLING UNIT, at a maximum
rate of one percent (1.0%) of the DWELLING UNIT purchase price per year.
However, the resale price after inclusion of such capital improvement costs shall in
no case exceed one hundred and twenty percent (120%) of the median FAMILY
income for the Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area as last published prior to
the resale, times a multiplier of two and one-quarter (2.25), adjusted for DWELLING
UNIT size in accordance with Section 4.4.6.5 below. These resale limitations shall
be recorded as part of the deed restriction.
4.4.6.4 Maximum rental price for AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS – The maximum gross
monthly rent, including the estimated cost of utilities to be paid by the tenant, shall be
twenty percent (20%) of the most recently published median household income for the
Boston Primary Metropolitan Statistical Area, divided by twelve (12), adjusted for
DWELLING UNIT size in accordance with Section 4.4.6.5 below. The schedule of
utilities most recently published for the Acton area by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development for use in federal rent subsidy programs shall be used to
estimate the cost of utilities to be paid by the tenant.
4.4.6.5 DWELLING UNIT size adjustments – Maximum sales and resales prices and gross
rents of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall be further adjusted for DWELLING
UNIT size by multiplying the amounts computed under Sections 4.4.6.3 and 4.4.6.4
above by the applicable adjustment factor as follows:
DWELLING UNIT Size Adjustment Factor
1 or 2 Bedroom 0.90
3 Bedroom 1.00
4 or more Bedroom 1.10
4.4.6.6 Right of first refusal – All deed restrictions and/or restrictive covenants for
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall require that the owner grants a Right of First
Refusal to the Town of Acton or its designee at the restricted resale value, and that the
owner provides notice of such Right of First Refusal to the Town of Acton or its
designee prior to selling his/her DWELLING UNIT. If the Town of Acton or its designee
fails to exercise its Right of First Refusal by signing a Purchase and Sales Agreement
within thirty (30) days of receipt of the owner's notice, the owner may thereafter proceed
to sell the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT at the restricted resale value to any person
or household who meets the applicable income guidelines. The owner, in consultation
with the Town of Acton or its designee, shall make a diligent effort to locate eligible
purchasers. If no eligible purchaser is found after the expiration of ninety (90) days, the
owner may proceed to sell the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT to any purchaser of his
or her choice, provided however that any deed restrictions, covenants, agreements
and/or other mechanisms restricting rent levels and resale prices shall remain in effect.
4.4.6.7 Relationship to Public Funding Programs – Applicants may elect to utilize public
subsidies in connection with the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS required by this
Section 4.4. Such election is subject to the DWELLING UNIT price limitations of the
funding program and the approval by the funding agency.
4.4.6.8 Ratio of DWELLING UNITS to be Set-aside for LOW-INCOME or MODERATEINCOME
Households – The ratio of the number of DWELLING UNITS to be set-aside
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 65
for LOW-INCOME households to the number of DWELLING UNITS to be set-aside for
MODERATE-INCOME households, and the Option or combination of Options provided
under Section 4.4.3.1, and the conditions or combination of conditions provided under
Section 4.4.4.1, shall be subject to the approval of the Planning Board as a part of the
Special Permit.
4.4.7 Application Requirements – Applicants for a Major or Minor AFFORDABLE Housing
Development shall submit a plan and application that meet the requirements of this
Section 4.4, including an indication of the number, type and location of all
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS; a complete Development Pro Forma including an
indication of all costs to the buyers or renters of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS;
identification of proposed governmental subsidy arrangements; and all other information
which may be required by the Acton Planning Board under the Rules and Regulations
for Open Space Developments (Minor AFFORDABLE Housing Developments) or under
the Rules and Regulations for Major AFFORDABLE Housing Developments, as
applicable.
4.4.8 Additional Requirements
4.4.8.1 Local Preference – To the maximum extent practical and subject to applicable Federal
or State financing or subsidy programs, the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall be
initially offered to qualified LOW- and MODERATE-INCOME households that meet local
preference criteria established from time to time by the Town of Acton or the Acton
Community Housing Corporation. Procedures for the selection of purchasers and/or
tenants shall be subject to approval by the Town of Acton or its designee. The local
preference restriction shall be in force for 120 days from the date of the first offering of
sale or rental of a particular AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT. The applicant shall make
a diligent effort to locate eligible purchasers or renters for the AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNIT who meet the local preference criteria and the applicable income
requirements.
4.4.8.2 Where an AFFORDABLE Housing Development does not generate a sufficient number
of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS to satisfy, in terms of whole DWELLING UNITS,
all of the local preference requirements as set forth herein, the AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS in such a development shall be offered to eligible purchasers based
on the following priorities: first - current residents pursuant to 4.4.8.1.a. (up to 30%);
second - persons employed within Acton pursuant to 4.4.8.1.b. (up to 10%); third -
persons who previously resided in Acton pursuant to 4.4.8.1.c.
4.4.8.3 Persons who both reside and work in the Town of Acton shall be counted as residents
only.
4.4.8.4 Residency in the Town of Acton shall be established through certification by the Town
Clerk based on the Town Census, voter registration, or other acceptable evidence.
4.4.8.5 These restrictions shall be in force for a period of four (4) months from the date of the
first offering of sale or rental of a particular DWELLING UNIT to the public. The Town of
Acton or its designee, or the developer, as applicable, shall make a diligent effort to
locate eligible purchasers and/or renters who meet the above qualifications as well as
the applicable income requirements.
4.4.8.6 Results of all percentages herein shall be rounded to the next whole number to
determine the actual number of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS to be offered to
each of the preference groups.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 66
4.4.8.7 Purchaser/tenant selection - Procedures for the selection of purchasers and/or tenants
shall be subject to approval by the Town of Acton or its designee.
4.4.9 Enforcement
4.4.9.1 Restrictive documents – AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall be rented or sold
subject to applicable deed covenants, contractual agreements and/or other
mechanisms restricting such features as the USE and occupancy, rent levels, and sales
prices of such DWELLING UNITS to assure their affordability.
4.4.9.2 Enforcement upon Transfer of DWELLING UNIT - Nothing in this Section 4.4 shall be
construed to cause eviction of a home owner or tenant of an AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNIT due to loss of his/her eligibility status during the time of ownership or
tenancy. Rather, the restrictions governing an AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT shall
be enforced upon resale, re-rental or re-lease of the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT,
or, in the case of a rental DWELLING UNITS, by such other appropriate mechanism as
the Planning Board may specify in its Special Permit. Any mechanism and remedy to
enforce the restrictions governing an AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT shall be set forth
in a deed covenant or other appropriate recordable document.
4.4.9.3 All Restrictions Remain in Effect – Nothing in this Section shall be construed to allow
any deed restrictions, covenants, agreements and/or other mechanisms restricting such
items as the use and occupancy, rent levels, and resale prices of AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS, and the enforcement thereof to expire prior to any maximum
limitations set forth by applicable state law.
4.4.9.4 Timing of commitments – All contractual agreements with the Town of Acton and other
documents necessary to insure compliance with this Section shall be executed prior to
and as a condition of the issuance of any special permit required to commence
construction.
4.4.9.5 Timing of construction – As a condition of the issuance of a special permit under this
Section, the Planning Board may set a time schedule for the construction of both
AFFORDABLE and market-rate DWELLING UNITS. No Certificate of Occupancy shall
be issued for any market-rate DWELLING UNITS in a development subject to the
requirements of this Section until there have been issued Certificates of Occupancy for
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS in an amount equal to the percentage of
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS which are to be constructed in the development.
For instance, if twenty percent (20%) of the development is to consist of AFFORDABLE
DWELLING UNITS, and ten (10) market-rate DWELLING UNITS are seeking
Certificates of Occupancy, at least two (2) AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS shall
have received Certificates of Occupancy.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 67
SECTION 5.
DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
5.1 Standard Dimensional Provisions – No land shall be used, and no STRUCTURE or
BUILDING shall be used or construction begun except in accordance with Section 5
Dimensional Regulations and the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations unless
otherwise specifically permitted in this Bylaw.
5.2 Methods for Calculating Dimensional Requirements – The following shall apply:
5.2.1 LOT area – LOT area shall be determined by calculating the area within a LOT
including any area within the LOT over which easements have been granted, provided
that no area within a STREET shall be included in determining minimum LOT area.
5.2.2 FRONTAGE –
FRONTAGE shall
be measured in a
continuous line
along the sideline
of a STREET
between the points
of intersection of
the side LOT lines
with the STREET.
5.2.2.1 FRONTAGE for a corner LOT may be
measured either to the point of intersection of the extension of the sideline of the rightsof-
way or to the middle of the curve connecting the sideline of the intersecting
STREETS.
5.2.2.2 If a LOT has FRONTAGE on more than one STREET, the FRONTAGE on one
STREET only may be used to satisfy the minimum required LOT FRONTAGE.
Measuring
LOT FRONTAGE
STREET Sidelines of
STREET
L
O
T
l
i
n
e
L
O
T
l
i
n
e
Measure from these points
X ft. (See Table)
LOT FRONTAGE
Measuring LOT FRONTAGE
(Corner LOT)
STREET STREET
Sideline Intersection
Method
Half-the-rounding
Method
L LOT line LOT line
O
T
l
i
n
e
L
O
T
l
i
n
e
Sidelines
of STREET
Sidelines
of STREET
Sidelines of
STREETS
Measure from these points
X ft. (See Table)
LOT FRONTAGE
Measure from these points
X ft. (See Table)
LOT FRONTAGE
Either Method
is Permitted
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 68
TABLE OF STANDARD DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
See also Special Provisions and Exceptions to Dimensional Regulations (Section 5.3), Transfer of Development Rights for special dimensional
regulations affecting the LB, NAV and EAV Districts and certain land in the R-2, R-8 and R-10/8 Districts along and near Great Road (Section 5.4),
Special Provisions for Village Districts (Section 5.5), Special Dimensional Requirements in the Groundwater Protection District (Section 4.3),
Special Dimensional Regulations for Open Space Developments (OSD - Section 4.2), Planned Conservation Residential Communities (PCRC -
Section 9), and Senior Residences (Section 9B).
The symbol "NR" on this Table indicates no specific minimum or maximum regulation.
DISTRICT
ZONING
DISTRICTS
MINIMUM
LOT AREA
in sq. ft.
MINIMUM
LOT
FRONTAGE
in feet
MINIMUM
LOT WIDTH
In feet
MINIMUM
FRONT YARD
in feet
MINIMUM
SIDE & REAR
YARD in feet
MINIMUM
OPEN SPACE
in percent
MAXIMUM
FLOOR AREA
RATIO
MAXIMUM
HEIGHT
in feet
RESIDENTIAL
DISTRICTS
R-2 20,000 150 50 30 10 NR NR 36
R-4 40,000 175 50 45 20 NR NR 36
R-8 80,000 200 50 45 20 NR NR 36
R-8/4 80,000 200 50 45 20 NR NR 36
R-10 100,000 250 50 45 20 NR NR 36
R-10/8 100,000 250 50 45 20 NR NR 36
R-A 100,000 200 50 30 10 (3) 35% NR 36
R-AA 10,000 100 50 30 10 35% NR 36
VR 15,000 50 NR 10 10 20% NR 36
VILLAGE
DISTRICTS
EAV NR NR NR 10 (10) NR (1) 25% 0.20 (4) 36
EAV-2 15,000 50 NR 10 10 (1) 35% 0.20 (4) 36
NAV 10,000 100 50 10 (9) 10 (1) 35% 0.20 (4) 36
SAV NR NR NR 10 (10) 10 NR 0.20 (13) 36 (12)
WAV NR NR NR 5 (10) NR (1) NR 0.40 (11) 36 (12)
OFFICE
DISTRICTS
OP-1 80,000 200 50 50 30 (7) 35% 0.33 36
OP-2 80,000 200 50 50 30 (7) 50% 0.20 (15) 40
BUSINESS
DISTRICTS
KC 10,000 100 50 30 NR (6) NR 0.40 (14) 36
LB 20,000 200 50 75 (5) 30 (6) 50% 0.20 (4) 36
PM 10,000 100 50 30 20 35% 0.20 40
INDUSTRIAL
DISTRICTS
GI 40,000 100 50 45 20 (2) 35% 0.20 40
LI 80,000 200 50 50 30 (2) 35% 0.20 40
LI-1 80,000 200 50 50 30 (2) 50% 0.20 40
SM 40,000 100 (8) 50 50 30 (2) 35% 0.20 (17) 36 (17)
TD 40,000 100 50 45 50 (2,16) 35% 0.20 40
SP. DISTRICT ARC NR 20 50 20 10 NR NR 36
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 69
NOTES for TABLE OF STANDARD DIMENSIONAL REGULATIONS
(1) Where a nonresidential USE abuts a residential district the yard or yards abutting the residential district shall be 20
feet in WAV, 30 feet in NAV and 30 feet in EAV and EAV-2.
(2) If the LOT abuts a Residential District, whether directly or separated by a public or railroad right of way, the side and
rear yards abutting the Residential District shall be increased as follows:
Industrial District Minimum Side or Rear Yard
TD 200 feet
GI 100 feet
LI or LI-1 60 feet
SM 50 feet
(3) Where a Multifamily Dwelling USE abuts a residential zoning district other than R-A the minimum side and rear yard
shall be increased to 30 feet.
(4) In the EAV District, subject to the provisions in Sections 5.4 and 5.5B. In the EAV-2 District, subject to the provisions
in Section 5.5B.2. In the NAV District, subject to the provision in Section 5.4 and 5.5C. In the LB District, subject to
the provisions in Section 5.4.
(5) The minimum front yard to the sideline of STREETS other than Great Road shall be 30 feet. On LOTS with FRONTAGE
on Great Road and in existence on or before February 15, 1990, where the 75-foot minimum front yard to the sideline of
Great Road would exceed 30% of the LOT depth, the front yard may be reduced to 30% of that LOT depth, but not to
less than 30 feet. Lot depth shall be measured in a line that is perpendicular to the Great Road sideline.
(6) If the LOT abuts a residential zoning district the minimum side and rear yard shall be 50 feet. On LOTS in existence
on or before February 15, 1990 where the minimum side or rear yard exceeds 20% of the LOT depth, the side or rear
yard may be reduced to 20% of that LOT depth, but not to less than 30 feet. Lot depth shall be measured in a line that is
perpendicular to the applicable side or rear LOT line.
(7) If the LOT abuts a Residential District the minimum side and rear yard shall be 60 feet.
(8) Minimum LOT FRONTAGE on Rt. 27 (Main Street) shall be 200 feet.
(9) Where a LOT is facing Great Road or Main Street the minimum front yard shall be 30 feet.
(10) The maximum front yard shall be ten (10) feet in the WAV District and twenty feet (20’) in the SAV and EAV Districts,
or the lesser of the front yards of the two BUILDINGS or STRUCTURES on either side, whichever is the least.
Exceptions: a) The maximum front yard requirement shall not apply to a BUILDING or STRUCTURE in the rear of an
existing BUILDING or to an addition to the rear of an existing BUILDING or STRUCTURE, if all are located on one
LOT with FRONTAGE on only one STREET. b) The maximum front yard requirement shall not apply to a BUILDING
or STRUCTURE on a LOT without FRONTAGE and located entirely in the rear of existing BUILDINGS or
STRUCTURES so that it does not face a STREET.
(11) The FLOOR AREA RATIO may be increased to .70 provided that for every 1000 square feet of non-residential NET
FLOOR AREA built above a FLOOR AREA RATIO of .40 an at-least-equal amount of residential NET FLOOR AREA
is provided simultaneously.
(12) The minimum height of a BUILDING shall be twenty (20) feet. Accessory BUILDINGS, such as garages or sheds,
may be less than 20 feet in height.
(13) The maximum Floor Area Ratio (FAR) may be increased to .40, provided that for every square foot of non-residential
NET FLOOR AREA built above FAR of .20 an equal amount or more of habitable residential NET FLOOR AREA is
provided simultaneously, and set aside for exclusive residential USE.
(14) Subject to certain provisions in Section 5.6, Special Provisions for the Kelley’s Corner District.
(15) Subject to certain provisions in Section 5.7, Special Provisions for the Office Park 2 District.
(16) Landscaped screening shall be required to separate a nonresidential USE from a Residential District. The screen
shall be 100 feet in width and shall be nontransparent in all seasons of the year from the ground to a height of at least
six (6) feet, with intermittent visual obstruction to a height of at least 20 feet. The screen is intended to exclude visual
contact between uses and to create a strong impression of spatial separation. It may be composed of a wall, fence,
landscaped earth berm, or densely planted vegetation or a combination of these items.
(17) The maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO and height may be increased further subject to procedures and conditions
set forth in Section 10.4.3.12.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 70
5.2.3 LOT Width – The minimum required
LOT width shall be determined by
measuring the diameter of a circle,
which can be located along a
continuous but not necessarily straight
line from any LOT FRONTAGE to the
principal STRUCTURE on the LOT
without the circumference of the circle
intersecting the side LOT lines.
5.2.4 Front Yards – Front yards shall be the
distance measured in a straight line between any LOT FRONTAGE and the nearest
point of any BUILDING or STRUCTURE, excluding roof overhangs. Roof overhangs
shall not extend further than two feet into the minimum required front yard. A LOT
having FRONTAGE on two or more STREETS shall have two or more front yards, each
of which shall comply with the minimum required front yard. In no case shall any
BUILDING or STRUCTURE be located closer to the sideline of a STREET than the
minimum required front yard. The sideline of a STREET is defined by the front boundary
lines of LOTS along a STREET and not necessarily the pavement edge of a STREET or
sidewalk.
5.2.5 Side and Rear Yards – Side and rear yards shall be the distance measured in a straight
line from the nearest point of any BUILDING or STRUCTURE to each side or rear LOT
line, excluding roof overhangs. Roof overhangs shall not extend further than two feet
into the minimum required side or rear yard.
5.2.6 BUILDING Coverage – The BUILDING coverage shall be determined by dividing the total
ground area of all BUILDINGS on a LOT, including roof overhangs greater than two feet,
carports and canopies, whether or not such carports or canopies are part of a
BUILDING, by the total LOT area.
5.2.7 Height in Feet
5.2.7.1 Height in Feet, STRUCTURES – Height in feet shall be the vertical distance measured
from the mean of the finished ground level adjoining the entire STRUCTURE to the
highest extension of any part of the STRUCTURE.
5.2.7.2 Height in Feet, BUILDINGS – Height in feet
shall be the vertical distance measured from
the mean of the finished ground level
adjoining the entire BUILDING at each
exterior wall to the top of the highest roof
beams of a flat roof or to the mean level of
the highest gable or slope of a hip roof.
5.3 Special Provisions and Exceptions to Dimensional Regulations
5.3.1 Location of STRUCTURES – Unless otherwise specified in this Bylaw, no STRUCTURE
shall be located within the required yard area of any LOT except: walls or fences no
LOT
Width
STREET
X ft.. (See Table)
Height in feet
(BUILDINGS)
X ft. (See Table)
45 ft. Maximum
Finished Ground Level
Mean Finished Ground Level
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 71
more than eight feet in height; uncovered steps, ramps or terraces; sign posts;
pedestrian lighting facilities; flagpoles; or similar STRUCTURES.
5.3.2 Residence A District, Residence AA District and Multifamily Dwellings:
5.3.2.1 In the R-A District, residential USES may be established at a density of up to five
DWELLING UNITS per acre, subject to the standards set forth in the Table of Standard
Dimensional Regulations. If such USES are established as single FAMILY DWELLING
UNITS, the standards set forth in the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations may
be reduced provided that the following alternative standards are met:
a) Minimum LOT area: 8,000 square feet;
b) Minimum LOT FRONTAGE: 50 feet;
c) Minimum Front Yard: 15 feet;
d) All other dimensional regulations: as set forth for the R-2 District.
5.3.2.2 In the R-AA District, residential USES may be established at a density of up to fifteen
DWELLING UNITS per acre, subject to the standards set forth in the Table of Standard
Dimensional Regulations.
5.3.2.3 In all other districts, the following dimensional regulations must be met or maintained for
any LOT used for five or more multifamily dwellings which were in existence prior to
June 1, 1983:
a) Minimum LOT area: the greater of either 80,000 square feet; or 4,500 square feet
per one bedroom DWELLING UNIT plus 3,000 square feet for each additional
bedroom per DWELLING UNIT;
b) Minimum FRONTAGE: 200 feet;
c) Minimum LOT width: 200 feet;
d) Minimum front yard: 30 feet;
e) Minimum side and rear yards: 30 feet.
No changes may be made to the boundaries of any such LOT, or to the boundaries of
any land adjoining such LOT which is held in common ownership, until the above
requirements have been met for each multifamily dwelling, unless such changes bring
the multifamily dwelling more nearly into compliance with these standards.
5.3.3 FRONTAGE Exceptions
5.3.3.1 FRONTAGE Exception LOTS – In the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8, and R-10 Districts,
the minimum LOT FRONTAGE may be reduced by 50 feet per LOT provided that the
minimum LOT area required for each such LOT is doubled.
5.3.3.2 Curved STREET Exception LOTS – Excluding a cul-de-sac, any LOT whose entire
FRONTAGE is on the outside sideline of a curved STREET having the radius of 300
feet or less shall be permitted to reduce its minimum FRONTAGE to 125 feet for a LOT
located in the R-2 District and 150 feet for a LOT located in the R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8,
and R-10 Districts.
5.3.3.3 Cul-de-sac LOTS – In all districts the minimum LOT FRONTAGE for a LOT may be
reduced to 100 feet per LOT provided that each such LOT fronts entirely on a cul-desac
with a sideline radius of 62.5 feet or greater and provided further that no more than
three such reduced FRONTAGE LOTS shall have FRONTAGE on the cul-de-sac.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 72
5.3.4 Hammerhead LOTS – In the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8, and R-10 Districts,
Hammerhead LOTS may be created subject to the following requirements:
5.3.4.1 The minimum FRONTAGE and LOT width shall be 50 feet; and
5.3.4.2 The minimum LOT area shall be 80,000 square feet in the R-2 District, 120,000 square
feet in the R-4 District, and 200,000 square feet in the R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8 and R-10
Districts; and
5.3.4.3 The LOT shall contain a dwelling location square with a minimum side of 150 feet in the
R-2 District, 175 feet in the R-4 District, and 200 feet in the R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8 and R-10
Districts. The dwelling shall be located within the dwelling location square; and
5.3.4.4 No dwelling shall be located within 50 feet of any LOT line; and
5.3.4.5 No more than two Hammerhead LOTS shall have contiguous FRONTAGE; and
5.3.4.6 A plan showing a Hammerhead LOT submitted to the Planning Board for endorsement
under M.G.L. Ch. 41 S. 81P or 81U shall clearly identify the LOT as a Hammerhead
LOT and bear a statement to the effect that such Hammerhead LOT shall not be further
divided to reduce its area or to create additional BUILDING LOTS. Further, such plan
shall show the proposed dwelling location square.
5.3.5 Height of BUILDINGS
5.3.5.1 In all districts appurtenant STRUCTURES located upon the roof of a BUILDING may
extend above the height limit but in no case shall they exceed 45 feet in height when
combined with the height of the BUILDING nor in the aggregate occupy more than 20%
of the roof plan area unless in compliance with Section 5.3.5.2 of this Bylaw.
5.3.5.2 In the General Industrial and Industrial Park Districts the height of BUILDINGS may be
increased by right above 40 feet provided that 1) the minimum OPEN SPACE provided
on the LOT is 45% or more in the General Industrial District and 60% or more in the
Industrial Park District, 2) the maximum BUILDING coverage on the LOT is 25% or less,
and 3) the maximum height of the BUILDING is 50 feet or less.
5.3.5.3 In all Districts, the Planning Board may by special permit increase the height limits in
the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations for light poles that illuminate outdoor
recreation facilities such as, but not limited to, playing fields, pools, rinks, tennis courts,
driving ranges, ski areas, or skateboard parks that are operated as a Recreation,
Municipal, or Commercial Recreation USE. In considering a special permit, the Planning
Board shall take into account the trade-offs between the height of light poles and the
improved illumination of the facility, and it shall weigh any mitigating effects on light
trespass and glare. The luminaires on such light poles shall comply with section
10.6.2.4.c) of this Bylaw. No such light poles shall exceed a height of 85 feet.
5.3.6 No more than 50% (fifty percent) of the MINIMUM OPEN SPACE for any LOT as
required by the Table of Standard Dimensional Requirements shall be freshwater
wetlands, as defined in the M.G.L. 131, Section 40.
5.3.7 Town Boundary LOTS – In the event that a LOT is located partially outside of the Town
of Acton, FRONTAGE and LOT area located outside of the Town of Acton may be used
to satisfy the minimum FRONTAGE and LOT area requirements of this Bylaw, provided
however that this Section shall only apply:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 73
a) if the USE on such LOT is one of the following: residential, agricultural,
conservation, recreation, governmental, institutional, or public service, all as defined
in Section 3, or
b) if the USE is a permitted USE on the entirety of the LOT whether in the Town of
Acton or another town.
5.3.8 Nursing Homes in the Residential Districts
5.3.8.1 Nursing Homes in the R-2, R-4, R-8, R-8/4, R-10, R-10/8 and VR Districts shall be built
according to the following dimensional standards:
minimum LOT area - 100,000 sq. ft
minimum LOT FRONTAGE - 200 feet;
minimum LOT width - 200 feet;
minimum front, side and rear yards - 60 feet;
minimum setback of pavement areas other than ACCESS driveways
from the front LOT line
-
45 feet;
minimum setback of pavement areas from the side and rear LOT lines - 60 feet;
minimum OPEN SPACE - 35 percent;
maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO - 0.20;
maximum height of STRUCTURES - 36 feet;
maximum number of stories above finished ground level - 2.
5.3.8.2 Nursing Homes on LOTS in the R-A and R-AA Districts shall be built according to the
standards set forth in the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations and the maximum
FLOOR AREA RATIO on such LOTS shall not exceed 0.20.
5.3.9 Child Care Facilities in Residential Zoning Districts - In addition to the standards set
forth in the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations, the following standards shall
apply to Child Care Facilities located in Residential Zoning Districts:
R-2 R-4 R-8 &
R-8/4
R-10 &
R-10/8
R-A &
R-AA
VR
Minimum OPEN SPACE not
including outdoor play areas
35% 35% 35% 35% 35% 35%
Maximum FLOOR AREA
RATIO
0.10 0.07 0.04 0.03 0.20 0.17
Maximum NET FLOOR AREA 2,500
sq. ft.
3,500
sq. ft.
5,000
sq. ft.
5,000
sq. ft.
5,000
sq. ft.
2,500
sq. ft.
5.3.10 Adult USES – No Special Permit for an Adult USE shall be granted unless the USE
complies with the following standards:
5.3.10.1 No LOT containing an Adult USE shall be located within 750 feet of a Residential
District, a Village District, the KC District, or the ARC District.
5.3.10.2 No LOT containing an Adult USE shall be located within 750 feet of the Acton town
boundary.
5.3.10.3 No LOT containing an Adult USE shall be located within 1,500 feet of any BUILDING or
LOT owned or operated by the Acton Public Schools or the Acton-Boxborough Regional
School District, or any public school operated by any abutting Town or abutting
Regional School District.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 74
5.3.10.4 No LOT containing an Adult USE shall be located within 2,000 feet of any other LOT
containing an Adult USE, and no Adult USE establishment shall be located within 2,000
feet of any other Adult USE establishment.
5.3.10.5 The hours in which Adult USES are open to the public shall be limited as follows: adult
bookstore, adult paraphernalia store, adult video store or similar Adult USE between the
hours of 9:00 AM and 9:00 PM; adult motion picture theater, adult entertainment or
similar Adult USE between the hours of 3:00 PM and 12:00 midnight.
5.3.11 Full Service Retirement Communities:
5.3.11.1 Full Service Retirement Communities in the R-2, R-4, R-8, R-8/4, R-10, R-10/8 and VR
Districts shall be built according to the following dimensional standards:
minimum LOT area - 100,000 sq.ft.;
minimum LOT FRONTAGE - 200 feet;
minimum LOT width - 200 feet;
minimum front yard - 45 feet;
minimum side and rear yard for BUILDINGS containing one or two
DWELLING UNITS
- 20 feet;
minimum side and rear yard for all other BUILDINGS - 60 feet;
minimum setback of pavement areas other than ACCESS driveways
and walk ways from the front LOT line
- 45 feet;
minimum setback of pavement areas, other than walkways, from
the side and rear LOT lines
- 60 feet;
minimum separation of BUILDINGS within the LOT - 20 feet;
minimum OPEN SPACE - 35 percent;
maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO - 0.30;
maximum height of STRUCTURES - 36 feet.
Maximum total NET FLOOR AREA occupied by allowed Business
USES such as Retail Store, Restaurant, and Services
- the smaller of 10,000 sq.
ft. or 10% of the total NET
FLOOR AREA in the full
service retirement
community
5.3.11.2 Full Service Retirement Communities in all other Zoning Districts shall be built
according to the dimensional standards set forth in Section 5 and the Table of Standard
Dimensional Regulations except that the Minimum Side and Rear Yard for BUILDINGS
containing one or two DWELLING UNITS shall be the lesser of 20 feet or the dimension
required in the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations; the Minimum OPEN
SPACE shall be the lesser of 35% or the percentage set forth in the Table of Standard
Dimensional Regulations; the Maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO shall be the greater of
0.30 or the FLOOR AREA RATIO set forth in the Table of Standard Dimensional
Regulations; and the limit on the number of DWELLING UNITS in the R-A and R-AA
Districts shall not apply.
5.3.12 Assisted Living Residences in Residential Districts – In Residential Districts Assisted
Living Residences with more than 10 residents shall be subject to the same
dimensional standards as Nursing Homes in Residential Districts.
5.4 Transfer of Development Rights
5.4.1 Purpose – The purpose of this Section is to provide a mechanism for transferring
development rights between designated districts, in order to achieve the following
objectives:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 75
a) To encourage compact development within defined village centers, reinforcing
Acton's traditional pattern of development and providing convenient and attractive
commercial and personal service centers for residents of Acton's neighborhoods;
b) To discourage excessive development in the Great Road corridor, so as to reduce
traffic congestion and minimize the need for public spending on infrastructure
expansion;
c) To conserve public funds by concentrating development in areas where public
infrastructure and services may be most efficiently provided;
d) To balance long-term tax revenue reductions in areas planned for limited
development with long-term revenue increases in areas planned for concentrated
development; and
e) To accomplish the above objectives in a manner in which landowners are
compensated for reductions in long-term development potential, through transfers
with other landowners who benefit from increases in development potential.
Thus the provisions of this Section are intended primarily to change the pattern and
location of future development within the Town, rather than to change the overall
amount or type of such development; and to accomplish such intended changes in a
way that is equitable to affected property owners.
5.4.2 Sending Districts and Receiving Districts
5.4.2.1 Development rights may be transferred from Sending Districts to Receiving Districts.
5.4.2.2 The Sending Districts shall include: (a) the Limited Business (LB) District, and (b) all
residentially zoned parcels with FRONTAGE on Great Road (excluding those in the
Residence A District) for a depth of 500 feet from the layout line of Great Road which
were zoned General Business in the year 1989.
5.4.2.3 The Receiving Districts shall include the North Acton Village (NAV) and East Acton
Village (EAV) Districts.
5.4.2.4 The objective of the Transfer of Development Rights mechanism is to achieve different
development densities than the maximum FLOOR AREA RATIOS set forth in the Table
of Standard Dimensional Regulations (Section 5). The preferred target densities are
FAR of 0.10 in the Limited Business District, the permitted residential density in the
residentially zoned Sending District areas, and FAR of 0.30 in the Receiving Districts.
5.4.3 Special Permit for Transfer of Development Rights – The Transfer of Development
Rights shall be authorized by special permit from the Board of Selectmen subject to the
requirements of this Section 5.4.
5.4.3.1 Standards for Review – In deciding on the merits of a proposal for Transfer of
Development Rights from the Sending District to a Receiving District, the Board of
Selectmen shall consider the following criteria and objectives:
a) Increased density on a LOT in the Receiving District should support a sense of
community, through a concentration of a variety of USES;
b) therefore, density increases in the Receiving Districts should be granted only where
such concentrations are compatible with surrounding USES;
c) The implementation of this provision should tend to facilitate the development of a
viable village center, that provides convenient and attractive commercial and
personal services for its residents and for the residents of Acton's neighborhoods;
d) and should generally support the objectives of Section 5.4.1.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 76
The Board of Selectmen shall grant a Special Permit for Transfer of Development
Rights from the Sending District to a Receiving District only if it can make appropriate
findings that the criteria and objectives of a) through d) are promoted by granting the
transfer, and if it finds that all the requirements of Section 5.4 have been met.
5.4.3.2 Procedure for Obtaining a Special Permit for the Transfer of Development Rights
a) An application for a Special Permit for the Transfer of Development Rights from a
LOT in the Sending District to a Receiving District shall be made jointly by the owner
of said LOT, willing to sell development rights, and by the prospective purchaser of
the development rights. Said prospective buyer shall demonstrate ownership of a
LOT in the Receiving District onto which the development rights are to be
transferred. The application shall contain sufficient information to permit the Board
of Selectmen's determination of the total development rights and of the transferable
development rights on a LOT in the Sending District, expressed in number of
DWELLING UNITS for residential development rights and in NET FLOOR AREA for
nonresidential development rights. The application shall specify the amount of
development rights that is requested to be transferred. The Board of Selectmen
may forward the application and accompanying plans to other municipal boards and
officials for review and comment prior to making its determination.
b) The special permit issued pursuant to this Section 5.4 shall specify the amount of
development rights that may be transferred to the LOT in the Receiving District and
the amount of transferable development rights that remain on the LOT in the
Sending District after the transfer, if any, expressed in number of DWELLING
UNITS for residential development rights and in NET FLOOR AREA for
nonresidential development rights. The development rights specified on the special
permit shall be equal to the total development rights determined in accordance with
Section 5.4.6.1, less any NET FLOOR AREA or built residential LOTS in existence
at the time the determination is made. The transferable development rights shall be
sold only to the applicant who has signed the application as the owner of the LOT in
the Receiving District, and the development rights shall be transferred only to said
LOT.
c) A special permit hereunder shall not authorize the transfer of USES. USES in the
Receiving Districts must comply with the USE regulations of Section 3 of this Bylaw.
5.4.3.3 Records of Development Rights with the Board of Selectmen – The Board of Selectmen
shall keep an official register of the development rights issued hereunder, and said
register shall be made available for public inspection in the Town Hall.
5.4.3.4 The Board of Selectmen shall require that upon Transfer of the Development Rights
authorized in its special permit, the owner of the LOT in the Sending District shall file
with the Middlesex South Registry of Deeds or the Land Court (as applicable) an
irrevocable restrictive covenant approved by the Board of Selectmen, running with the
land permanently restricting the development of the LOT. The covenant shall restrict
the LOT in the Sending District by the amount of development rights transferred to a
LOT in the Receiving District, permitting only the amount of development rights that
remain on the LOT, if any, all as specified in the special permit authorizing the transfer.
5.4.4 Transferring Development Rights
5.4.4.1 Development rights shall be considered as interests in real property. A landowner in a
Receiving District may purchase some or all of the transferable development rights of a
LOT in a Sending District, as authorized in the special permit, at whatever price may be
mutually agreed upon by the two parties.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 77
5.4.4.2 The Transfer of Development Rights shall have the effect of permitting an increase in
the intensity of development of a LOT in a Receiving District; provided that a Transfer of
Development Rights from a Sending District shall not result in a FLOOR AREA RATIO
for any LOT in a Receiving District greater than the sum of:
a) the nonresidential NET FLOOR AREA divided by the total NET FLOOR AREA (This
is equal to the proposed percent share of nonresidential NET FLOOR AREA divided
by 100) multiplied by a FAR factor of 0.25, plus
b) the residential NET FLOOR AREA divided by the total NET FLOOR AREA (This is
equal to the proposed percent share of residential NET FLOOR AREA divided by
100) multiplied by a FAR factor of 0.40.
5.4.4.3 An application for a building permit, indicating a FLOOR AREA RATIO greater than the
maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO permitted in the Table of Standard Dimensional
Regulations for a LOT in a Receiving District, shall include the approved special permit
authorizing the Transfer of Development Rights. An application for a Site Plan Special
Permit for such LOT shall include documentation of the proposed Transfer of
Development Rights, including the property from which the development rights are
derived and the amount of development rights proposed to be utilized in the Receiving
District.
5.4.5 Recording of the Transfer – Prior to the issuance of any building permit for a LOT in a
Receiving District, where the proposed development would result in a FLOOR AREA
RATIO in excess of the maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO permitted in the Table of
Standard Dimensional Regulations, the following documents must be submitted to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer:
5.4.5.1 Deed of Transfer – The owner of land in the Receiving District, who has acquired the
transferable development rights specified in the special permit authorizing a transfer
shall submit to the Zoning Enforcement Officer three copies of an executed and
recorded deed of transfer of said development rights derived from a LOT in the sending
district, along with three copies of the Special Permit authorizing the transfer. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall forward one copy of each to the Board of Selectmen
and to the Town Clerk.
5.4.5.2 Restrictive Covenant – Also, three copies of the recorded covenant shall be submitted
to the Zoning Enforcement Officer who shall forward one copy each to the Board of
Selectmen and the Town Clerk. Upon issuance of the Building Permit, the Zoning
Enforcement Officer shall notify the Board of Selectmen that the transferable
development rights as specified in the special permit authorizing such transfer have
been exercised. The Board of Selectmen shall forthwith make an entry in the official
register canceling these transferable development. The Building Commissioner shall
keep a record in his files, identifying the LOT in the Sending District as being restricted
with regard to future development.
5.4.6 Calculation of Development Rights in Sending Districts – Landowners in Sending
Districts are allowed to build to the full intensity permitted by the provisions of the
underlying district, subject to certain regulations set forth herein. However, as an
incentive to limit the total amount of floor area along Great Road and to encourage the
Transfer of Development Rights to the Village Districts, a ceiling is established on the
number of parking spaces that may be provided on a LOT in the Sending Districts.
Landowners may choose to limit the amount of BUILDING area erected on the site and
sell the unused development rights to buyers who may apply these rights to a LOT in a
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 78
Receiving District in accordance with procedures set forth in Sections 5.4.3, 5.4.4, and
5.4.5.
5.4.6.1 Determination of the Total Development Rights – The total amount of development
rights pertaining to the LOT shall be computed as follows:
a) Nonresidential Districts – The maximum permitted nonresidential NET FLOOR
AREA as computed in Section 10.4.3.8 of this Bylaw, less any development rights
previously transferred to any LOT in a Receiving District,
b) Residential Districts – The maximum permitted number of BUILDING LOTS
determined in accordance with the procedures for determining the maximum
number of BUILDING LOTS set forth in Section 4.2.3.2 less any development rights
previously transferred to any LOT in Receiving District; provided however that the
owner of any land which was zoned for nonresidential USES in 1989 shall be
permitted to also transfer such nonresidential development rights in accordance with
this Bylaw. In calculating the development rights on such LOT, the maximum
permitted nonresidential NET FLOOR AREA shall be determined as computed in
Section 10.4.3.8 based on a maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO of 0.20, less the
maximum permitted number of residential BUILDING LOTS determined in
accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4.2.3.2 (whereby one
BUILDING LOT shall be equal to 1000 square feet of non-residential NET FLOOR
AREA), less any development rights previously transferred to any LOT in a
Receiving District.
5.4.6.2 Maximum Number of Parking Spaces Permitted – In addition to the requirements of this
Bylaw that a minimum number of parking spaces must be provided for various uses, in
Sending Districts the parking spaces required to be provided may not exceed a
maximum number. In the Sending District, the number of parking spaces that may be
constructed on a LOT shall not exceed one parking space per 3,000 square feet of
DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA.
5.4.6.3 Calculating Development Rights That May Be Transferred – In lieu of constructing the
total permitted NET FLOOR AREA or number of DWELLING UNITS calculated in
Section 5.4.6.1, with the maximum number of parking spaces determined in Section
5.4.6.2, an applicant may choose to build at a lower intensity, and the difference in NET
FLOOR AREA or DWELLING UNITS between what is permitted and what is actually
proposed shall constitute the remaining transferable development rights. The number
of parking spaces to be provided shall be determined by the minimum parking space
standards of this Bylaw but shall not exceed the maximum number of parking spaces
permitted under Section 5.4.6.2.
5.4.6.4 Conversion to Other Uses – Development rights may be transferred to a property in a
Receiving District as authorized in the special permit issued under Section 5.4. In a
Receiving District, nonresidential development rights may be used for nonresidential
development in a direct one-for-one relationship, or they may be converted to
residential development rights by dividing the nonresidential NET FLOOR AREA in
square feet by a conversion factor of 1,000 square feet to yield the number of
DWELLING UNITS which may be used in a Receiving District. Residential
development rights may not be converted to nonresidential development rights.
5.4.7 Mandatory Mix of USES with Increased Floor Area – The Transfer of Development
Rights option may not be used solely to increase the allowable NET FLOOR AREA of a
single USE permitted in the underlying district. Any LOT which is permitted an increase
in NET FLOOR AREA above the maximum NET FLOOR AREA set forth in the Table of
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 79
Standard Dimensional Regulations must include a mix of residential and nonresidential
USES such that:
a) residential USES shall comprise at least 25% of the NET FLOOR AREA on the
LOT;
b) nonresidential USES shall comprise at least 25% of the NET FLOOR AREA on the
LOT.
Different USES may be apportioned between two or more BUILDINGS provided all the
BUILDINGS are functionally integrated through the use of attractive OPEN SPACE
design and pedestrian walkways. Combined residential and nonresidential BUILDINGS
are permitted provided that the residential portions of such BUILDINGS are located
above the nonresidential portions.
5.5 Special Provisions for Village Districts
5.5.1 Purposes – The purposes of this section are to set forth specific provisions regarding
development scale and intensity in the Village Districts in order to promote compact
development patterns, a mixture of housing and businesses, the preservation and
vitality of small businesses, pedestrian amenities and pedestrian-scale environments,
and environmentally sustainable design and construction.
5.5A Business Size Limits in Village Districts
5.5A.1 Maximum Floor Area of Businesses and Industries – The maximum NET FLOOR AREA
of an individual business or industrial establishment shall not exceed the following (all
limits expressed in square feet):
PRINCIPAL USES VILLAGE DISTRICTS
EAV NAV SAV WAV
3.4.11 Commercial Education or Instruction 5,000 NR NR NR
3.5.1 Retail Store 7,500 5,000 3,000 5,000
3.5.2 Office 7,500 5,000 3,000 5,000
3.5.3 Health Care Facility 5,000 5,000 3,000 5,000
3.5.5 Restaurant 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000
3.5.9 Lodge or Club 5,000 NR 5,000 5,000
3.5.10 Veterinary Care 5,000 NR 3,000 3,000
3.5.12 Services 5,000 5,000 3,000 3,000
3.5.13 Repair Shop, Technical Shop, Studio 5,000 5,000 3,000 3,000
3.5.14 Building Trade Shop NR 5,000 (1) 5,000 (1) 5,000 (1)
3.5.15 Commercial Recreation 7,500 NR NR 5,000
3.5.16 Commercial Entertainment 5,000 NR NR 5,000
3.6.3 Manufacturing NR NR 5,000 5,000
(1) The maximum NET FLOOR AREA for building cleaning services shall be 3,000 square
feet.
NR = No Regulation
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 80
5.5B Special Provisions for the East Acton Village District
5.5B.1 Design Provisions for the East Acton Village District
5.5B.1.1 Purpose – In the East Acton Village District, the principal goal guiding the regulations
set forth herein is to sustain and encourage a vital business center that provides
needed goods, services, and jobs in a manner that is compatible with Acton’s historic
development pattern and establishes pedestrian accessibility and circulation throughout
the East Acton Village area in order to limit vehicular congestion. These regulations will
provide clear guidance to those who would like to expand or locate businesses in the
East Acton Village District. They will also ensure that future development will help
create the form, cohesion, order, and supporting infrastructure that will identify the East
Acton Village District as an attractive, pleasant, and desirable center for business,
shopping, and other commercial and community activities.
The layout and design of the sites and BUILDINGS shall be conducive to pedestrian
use. The purpose of the design principles herein is to provide convenient and efficient
pedestrian access within the East Acton Village District; to connect the East Acton
Village District via pedestrian ways to surrounding neighborhoods and facilities which
are otherwise separated with landscape buffers; to provide a safe and comfortable
pedestrian environment with walkways, pedestrian conveniences and amenities; and to
encourage BUILDINGS with a pedestrian oriented scale and design. For more guidance
related to the layout and design of sites and buildings in the East Acton Village (EAV)
District, please refer to the East Acton Village Plan as amended.
5.5B.1.2 The following standards shall apply to all STRUCTURES and additions to
STRUCTURES for which a Site Plan Special Permit is required on LOTS in the EAV
District:
a) The Sidewalks – The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall require
sidewalks along the LOT’S FRONTAGE on a STREET or STREETS. The sidewalk
shall be at least 10 feet wide but wider where necessary to allow pedestrian
shopping and activities to spill out onto the sidewalk. Sidewalks may be located
wholly or partially within the STREET layout. If on LOTS, sidewalks shall be
considered part of the minimum required OPEN SPACE. The sidewalk shall be
separated, where feasible, from the vehicular roadway with a landscaped buffer to
provide both safety to pedestrians and to create the sense of village. The
landscaped buffer shall consist of shade trees placed at appropriate intervals and
other landscaping and STREET design elements such as benches and shrubs, and
it may consist in part of on-STREET vehicular parking spaces.
b) Walkways – The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall require walkways
among BUILDING entrances using straight and/or gently curving paths connecting
BUILDINGS to BUILDINGS, BUILDINGS to STREETS, and BUILDINGS to
sidewalks with minimal interruption by driveways. Parking lot aisles, along with
access and interior driveways, do not count as walkways. Walkways should include
“bulges” to allow for gathering points that may include special features (e.g., water
elements, sculptures, statues, etc.). Special features should be designed for public
interaction. Benches and other places for people to wait, bicycle racks, stroller bays,
and other pedestrian amenities may be required near building entrances if deemed
appropriate by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority. Where feasible,
walkways should have some degree of enclosure achieved through the use of
BUILDING fronts, trees, low hedges, arcades, trellised walks, or other means in
order to positively define its space. Walkways and related pedestrian amenities on
LOTS under this Section b) and the following Sections c) and d) shall be considered
part of the minimum required OPEN SPACE.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 81
c) Connections between LOTS – The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall
require driveway and walkway connections to abutting LOTS within the EAV District
using the standards from Section b) above. Where such connections are not
available due to existing conditions on abutting LOTS, provisions shall be required
to connect to such abutting LOTS at a future date in locations determined by the
Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority.
d) Connections to EAV Surroundings – The Site Plan Special Permit Granting
Authority shall require pedestrian connections to abutting neighborhoods and
facilities outside the EAV District using the standards from Section b) above. Where
such connections are not available due to existing conditions in the surrounding
area, provisions shall be required for such connections at a future date in locations
determined by the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority.
e) The Pedestrian Plaza – Where a LOT has on it STRUCTURES totaling a NET
FLOOR AREA of 30,000 square feet or more, it shall have one or more pedestrian
plazas on it.
i. The combined area of pedestrian plazas shall measure at least 5% of the NET
FLOOR AREA on the LOT, but not more than 3,000 square feet in combined
area shall be required. At least one of the pedestrian plazas shall measure
1,500 square feet or more with a minimum side dimension of 20 feet. No
pedestrian plaza shall measure more than 3,000 square feet.
ii. The pedestrian plaza shall be a natural gathering spot at the STREET level in
front of a BUILDING, on the side of a BUILDING, or in between BUILDINGS,
which is to be used exclusively by pedestrians and connects to the sidewalk and
walkways. For the purpose of this Section, a pedestrian arcade located within a
BUILDING footprint and open to the outdoors may be counted towards the
minimum area required for a pedestrian plaza.
iii. The pedestrian plaza shall be designed open on one side to an adjacent larger
space, natural view, or activity area such as an outdoor cafe, coffee cart, food
stand, basketball hoop, game tables, or playground. Within the pedestrian plaza,
at least one seating area or activity pocket shall be placed along the edge of the
plaza looking into the plaza. The pedestrian plaza shall be accented with
pedestrian amenities such as benches, kiosks and other partly enclosed outdoor
structures to facilitate waiting and/or group activities. Where feasible, add a few
steps at the edge where stairs come down or where there is a natural change in
grade. Make these raised areas immediately accessible from below so that
people may congregate and sit to watch the local activity. To create minor
boundaries between outdoor areas and/or BUILDINGS where there is no grade
change, add “sitting walls”. Sitting walls should be no higher than 16 inches and
wide enough to sit on (at least 12 inches wide).
iv. Shade trees, ornamental trees and other landscaping shall be included to
provide shelter from the sun, to reduce noise, to beautify/enhance the
appearance of the EAV District and to mitigate fumes. All landscaping shall use
species that are tolerant to the climatic conditions in Acton and shall be
designed to facilitate ongoing maintenance and watering.
v. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Bylaw to the contrary, the serving of
foods and drinks at outdoor tables shall be permitted in a pedestrian plaza.
vi. A pedestrian plaza shall be considered part of the minimum required OPEN
SPACE. The area required for a sidewalk shall not be included in the pedestrian
plaza.
f) Driveways and Parking Lots –
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 82
i. No driveway or parking lot shall be placed in the portion of a LOT that is directly
in front of a BUILDING as seen from a STREET, whether or not the BUILDING
is located on the same LOT as the driveway or parking lot, except that a
driveway and parking lot may be placed in the front of a BUILDING that is
located in the rear of another BUILDING when viewed from a STREET. No
driveways or parking lots shall be located between a pedestrian plaza and a
STREET, unless the pedestrian plazas are located in the rear of a BUILDING
when viewed from a STREET. No driveway or parking lot shall intersect or be
mixed with a pedestrian plaza.
ii. Vehicular driveways and parking lots may be located to the side and rear of
BUILDINGS, to the rear of a pedestrian plaza or underground. Where parking is
located to the rear of BUILDINGS with additional BUILDINGS behind, a
quadrangle effect should be created allowing parking, landscaping, and
walkways / bikeways within this center area surrounded on all sides by shops
and activity centers.
g) BUILDING Design –
i. At least 60 percent of the front side of a LOT facing a STREET, measured in
percentage of linear feet of the LOT FRONTAGE, shall be occupied by
BUILDINGS or by a pedestrian plaza that are located within 20 feet of the
STREET sideline. A reduction of this requirement of the front side of a LOT may
be allowed provided the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority finds that
the alternative design features are consistent with Section 5.5B.1.1 of this
Bylaw.
ii. BUILDINGS shall be of a design similar to the architecture in historic commercial
centers of New England in terms of scale, massing, roof shape, spacing, and
exterior materials. Alternative designs may be allowed provided the Site Plan
Special Permit Granting Authority finds the alternative design is consistent with
Section 5.5B.1.1 of the Bylaw.
iii. BUILDING facades facing STREETS or pedestrian plazas are also referred to
herein as the BUILDING front(s) or BUILDING front facade(s). Such BUILDING
fronts shall have setbacks only to accommodate sidewalks and/or pedestrian
plazas or amenities and shall have a vertical orientation, meaning either that the
BUILDING shall actually have a greater height than width, or that the facades
and roof lines of the BUILDING are designed to reduce the massing and bulk so
that it appears as a group of smaller masses with a distinct vertical orientation.
iv. The BUILDING front facades shall be articulated to achieve a human scale and
interest. The use of different textures, shadow lines, uneven angles, detailing
and contrasting shapes is required. Not more than 50 feet of a BUILDING front
shall be in the same vertical plane.
v. The BUILDING front facade(s) shall be faced with materials that resemble
historic New England architecture.
vi. On the BUILDING fronts, the ground floor shall be designed to be occupied by
businesses with a higher percentage of walk-in traffic (e.g., Retail Stores,
Restaurants, Service related businesses, Commercial Entertainment).
vii. The main business entrance to each ground floor business, identified by the
larger doors, signs, canopy, or similar means of highlighting, shall be from the
BUILDING front.
viii. Arcades and canopies are encouraged. They shall not be considered part of the
BUILDING. These arcades and canopies should be used to connect the
BUILDINGS to one another so that a person can walk from place to place under
shelter. Arcades and canopies may be located within the 10-foot front yard
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 83
setback where the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority finds such
placement appropriate and consistent with Section 5.5B.1.1 of the Bylaw.
ix. The BUILDING front(s) shall contain windows covering at least 15 percent of the
facade surface. Windows shall be highlighted with frames, lintels, and sills, or
equivalent trim features.
x. Except for ground level display windows, windows shall have a 2:1 ratio of
height to width. Alternative window designs may be allowed provided the Site
Plan Special Permit Granting Authority finds them to be consistent with Section
5.5B.1.1 of the Bylaw and that they enhance one or more architectural features.
xi. On the ground level portion of the BUILDING front, the amount of windows in the
facade surface shall be at least 20 percent but not larger than 80 percent.
Ground floor display windows shall be framed on all sides by the surrounding
wall. They shall be highlighted with frames, lintels and sills or equivalent trim
features, or may instead be recessed into the wall or projected from the wall.
xii. Mirror windows and highly reflective surfaces shall not be allowed on the
BUILDING fronts.
xiii. Roofs shall be gabled with a minimum pitch of 9/12 (9” vertical for every 12”
horizontal) and have overhanging eaves of at least one foot. Two or three story
BUILDINGS, or two or three story portions of a BUILDING, may have a flat roof
provided that the tops of the BUILDING front facades are treated with an
articulated cornice, dormers, or other architectural treatment that appears an
integral part of the BUILDING from all visible sides of the BUILDING.
xiv. The main features of the architectural treatment of the BUILDING front facades,
including the materials used, shall be continued around all sides of the
BUILDING that are visible from a STREET or a pedestrian plaza. The Site Plan
Special Permit Granting Authority may approve alternate treatment of side and
rear BUILDING walls that is consistent with Section 5.5B.1.1 of the Bylaw and
preserves the architectural integrity of the BUILDING as a whole.
xv. Garage doors or loading docks shall not be allowed in the BUILDING fronts.
xvi. BUILDING service and loading areas shall incorporate effective techniques for
visual and noise buffering from adjacent USES.
xvii. Accessory STRUCTURES, air conditioning equipment, electric utility boxes,
satellite dishes, trash receptacles, and other ground level utilities shall be
unobtrusive when viewed from the STREET and adjacent LOTS.
xviii. Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view by the use of
architecturally compatible materials.
5.5B.2 Variable Density Provisions for the East Acton Village Districts
5.5B.2.1 Purpose – The purposes of this section are to better distinguish the East Acton Village
District visually and aesthetically from the rest of the development along Great Road
(Route 2A); to keep it compact; to maintain its historic structures; to increase business
variety; to promote a pedestrian-friendly village environment; to encourage affordable
housing; and to promote environmentally sustainable designs and construction
methods. The density incentives offered in this section are intended to entice property
owners to redevelop their properties in accordance with the design provisions of the
previous Section 5.5B.1, and to help overcome redevelopment obstacles, such as cost
of redevelopment and loss of income during construction time. Vehicle parking, OPEN
SPACE, and waste water management requirements impact the development potential
of properties in different ways. Therefore, not all properties may be able to achieve the
maximum density level set forth in this section. Density in the East Acton Village District
shall not be considered as an end in itself, but as a prerequisite to achieve the critical
mass required for a vibrant village.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 84
5.5B.2.2 Variable Density Options – For a LOT in the East Acton Village District, the Board of
Selectmen may grant a Special Permit for increases in density by allowing additional
NET FLOOR AREA above the FLOOR AREA RATIO of 0.20 set forth in the Table of
Standard Dimensional Regulations. To increase the density, the options a) through d)
set forth below may be selected and combined in a flexible manner to increase the NET
FLOOR AREA up to a maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO of 0.50 on the LOT. To the
extent that this Special Permit may coincide or overlap with other special permits from
the Board of Selectmen in other sections of this Bylaw, they shall be processed
concurrently so far as practical:
a) Transfer of Development Rights – Density on the LOT may be increased through
the Transfer of Development Rights according to one or more of the methods,
procedures, and requirements set forth in the following subsections. The amount of
NET FLOOR AREA that is added under this option shall not exceed the equivalent
of a FLOOR AREA RATIO of 0.20 on the LOT:
i. Transfer of Development Rights under Section 5.4 – Transfer of Development
Rights from the Sending District as defined in Section 5.4.2.2 to a receiving LOT
in the East Acton Village District subject to the provisions for such transfers set
forth in Section 5.4 and its subsections of this Bylaw.
ii. Transfer of Development Rights within the East Acton Village Districts - Transfer
of Development Rights from a sending LOT within the East Acton Village District
or the East Acton Village 2 (EAV-2) District to a receiving LOT in the East Acton
Village District. The effect of such a transfer shall be an increase in NET FLOOR
AREA on the receiving LOT compensated by an equal reduction in the
maximum NET FLOOR AREA, and the concurrent maximum FAR, on the
sending LOT, subject to the bonus provision iii. below.
iii. Bonus for Certain Transfers – Where the receiving LOT within the East Acton
Village District is located on the east side of Great Road, and the sending LOT is
located in the East Acton Village District on the west side of Great Road or
within the East Acton Village 2 (EAV-2) District, and the sending LOT contains
or has stream frontage on Nashoba Brook, the receiving LOT shall be entitled to
a 25% density bonus on the transferred NET FLOOR AREA. However, this
bonus shall not result in exceeding the maximum FAR 0.20 factor allowed for
receiving LOTS in Section 5.5B.2.2.a). For example, under this bonus, an
additional 1,250 square feet of NET FLOOR AREA on the receiving LOT
requires the purchase of only 1,000 square feet of NET FLOOR AREA from the
sending LOT. 250 square feet constitutes the bonus.
iv. Determination of Development Rights for affected LOTS under Sections ii. and
iii. above – Before granting a Special Permit for the Transfer of Development
Rights under Section ii. or iii. above, the Board of Selectmen shall determine the
total development rights for all LOTS to be affected by the proposed transfer,
expressed in NET FLOOR AREA as computed in Section 10.4.3.8 of this Bylaw,
counting any development rights previously added or removed from such LOTS.
The application for a Special Permit under this Section shall contain sufficient
information to permit the Board of Selectmen's determination of the development
rights that may be transferred.
v. The Board of Selectmen shall require that, upon transfer of the development
rights authorized in its special permits, the owner of the sending LOT shall file
with the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds or the Land Court (as
applicable) an irrevocable restrictive covenant, approved by the Board of
Selectmen, running with the land, permanently restricting the development of the
sending LOT. The covenant shall restrict the sending LOT by the amount of
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 85
development rights transferred to another LOT, permitting only the amount of
development rights that remain on the LOT, if any, all as specified in the Special
Permit authorizing the transfer.
vi. Implementation of Transfer – Following the approval of a Special Permit under
this Section, the applicant shall complete the transfer procedures set forth in
Sections 5.4.4 and 5.4.5, except that the formulas in Section 5.4.4.2 shall not
apply to transfers within the East Acton Village and East Acton Village 2
Districts.
b) Historic Preservation – Density on the LOT may be increased if the proposed
development includes the restoration or preservation of a historic STRUCTURE on
the LOT, subject to the requirements and penalties set forth in the following
subsections. The amount of NET FLOOR AREA that is added under this option shall
not exceed the equivalent of a FLOOR AREA RATIO of 0.10 on the LOT.
i. Detailed Proposal – The application for a Special Permit to increase density
shall include a detailed proposal for the restoration or preservation of a historic
STRUCTURE, including architectural drawings, building materials, cost
estimates, and an architect’s opinion regarding its feasibility and risks.
ii. Historical Commission Certification – The application for a Special Permit to
increase density shall include a written certification from the Acton Historical
Commission that the STRUCTURE is included in Acton’s Cultural Resources
Inventory or that the completion of a survey leading to its inclusion is pending.
iii. Historical Commission Recommendation – The application for a Special Permit
to increase density shall include a written recommendation from the Acton
Historical Commission stating its support for the restoration or preservation of
the STRUCTURE and the methods to achieve it.
iv. Performance Guarantee to Secure Preservation Commitment – In granting a
Special Permit to increase density under this Section, the Board of Selectmen
may require a performance guarantee to secure the restoration or preservation
of the historic STRUCTURE.
v. Penalty – The intentional demolition of a historic STRUCTURE, for which the
Acton Historical Commission certifies that it is included in Acton’s Cultural
Resources Inventory or that the completion of a survey leading to its inclusion
is pending, shall result in the prohibition of any and all density increases
available under this Bylaw on the subject LOT for a period of 25 years following
the demolition. However, this penalty shall not apply, where the Acton Historical
Commission has, prior to the demolition, provided its written consent to the
demolition in accordance with its authority and jurisdiction under Chapter N of
the Bylaws of the Town of Acton.
c) Affordable Housing – Density on the LOT may be increased if the proposed
development includes at least 1 affordable DWELLING UNIT or 10% affordable
DWELLING UNITS on the LOT, whichever is greater, subject to the standards and
requirements set forth in the following subsections. The amount of NET FLOOR
AREA that is added under this option shall not exceed the equivalent of a FLOOR
AREA RATIO of 0.10 on the LOT.
i. The term “affordable DWELLING UNIT” as used in this Section shall mean a
DWELLING UNIT that is restricted to sale, lease or rental to persons or
households within specific income and asset limitations, and at specific price
limits, both as established in provisions of any State or Federal rental assistance
programs, subsidy programs for reducing mortgage payments, or other
programs that provide for affordable housing for low and moderate income
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 86
persons or households, and that are in effect at the time that the Board of
Selectmen receive the Special Permit application.
ii. Affordability Standards – Subject to the Board of Selectmen’s approval, an
applicant for a density bonus under this option may utilize an available State or
Federal assistance program or choose to meet affordability requirements by
utilizing income and asset standards, and by establishing rents, leases, sales
prices, entry fees, condominium fees, and other costs for affordable DWELLING
UNITS that are generally consistent with available affordable housing assistance
programs.
iii. Affordability Restrictions – Affordable DWELLING UNITS shall be maintained as
such in perpetuity. Each affordable DWELLING UNIT shall be rented or sold to
its initial and all subsequent buyers or tenants subject to deed riders, restrictive
covenants, contractual agreements, or other mechanisms restricting the USE
and occupancy, rent levels, sales prices, resale prices, and other cost factors to
assure their long term affordability. These restrictions shall be in force for
perpetuity. They shall be enforceable and renewable by the Town of Acton
through standard procedures provided by applicable law.
iv. The Board of Selectmen may require that the restrictions for affordable
DWELLING UNITS contain a Right of First Refusal to the Town of Acton or its
designee at the restricted resale value, and that the owner provides notice of
such Right of First Refusal to the Town of Acton or its designee prior to selling
the affordable DWELLING UNITS with adequate time for the Town or its
designee to exercise the Right of First Refusal.
v. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to cause eviction of an owner or
tenant of an affordable DWELLING UNIT due to loss of his/her income eligibility
status during the time of ownership or tenancy. Rather, the restrictions
governing an affordable DWELLING UNIT shall be enforced upon resale, rerental,
or re-lease of the affordable DWELLING UNIT. The mechanisms and
remedies to enforce the restrictions governing an affordable DWELLING UNIT
upon resale, re-rental, or re-lease shall be set forth in its deed restrictions.
vi. All contractual agreements with the Town of Acton and other documents
necessary to insure the long term affordability of an affordable DWELLING UNIT
shall be executed prior to the issuance of any building permit that will implement
the increase in density authorized under the Special Permit.
vii. Locations and compatibility of affordable DWELLING UNITS – Affordable
DWELLING UNITS shall be dispersed throughout the development to insure a
true mix of market-rate and affordable DWELLING UNITS. The exterior of
affordable DWELLING UNITS shall be compatible with, and as much as
possible indistinguishable from, market-rate DWELLING UNITS on the same
LOT. All internal design features of affordable DWELLING UNITS shall be
substantially the same as those of market-rate DWELLING UNITS.
viii. Local Preference – To the maximum extent practical and subject to applicable
Federal or State financing or subsidy programs, the AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITS shall be initially offered to qualified LOW- and MODERATE-INCOME
households that meet local preference criteria established from time to time by
the Town of Acton or the Acton Community Housing Corporation. Procedures for
the selection of purchasers and/or tenants shall be subject to approval by the
Town of Acton or its designee. The local preference restriction shall be in force
for 120 days from the date of the first offering of sale or rental of a particular
AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT. The applicant shall make a diligent effort to
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 87
locate eligible purchasers or renters for the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNIT
who meet the local preference criteria and the applicable income requirements.
ix. Timing of construction – As a condition of the issuance of a Special Permit
under this Section, the Board of Selectmen may set a time or development
schedule for the construction of affordable DWELLING UNITS and market-rate
DWELLING UNITS on the LOT.
d) LEED certification – Density on the LOT may be increased if the proposed
development is certified under the United States Green Building Council’s LEED
(Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) program. The amount of NET
FLOOR AREA that is added under this option shall not exceed the equivalent of a
FLOOR AREA RATIO of 0.05 on the LOT. To qualify for the density bonus for LEED
certification in the East Acton Village District, a project would have to meet the
LEED standards for New Construction & Major Renovation Projects.
5.5C Special Provisions for the North Acton Village District
5.5C.1 Variable Density Provisions for the North Acton Village District
5.5C.1.1 Purpose – These provisions are intended to permit flexible density levels for individual
LOTS in the North Acton Village District, while maintaining an overall ceiling on total
NET FLOOR AREA. The purpose of permitting variable density levels is to permit
further clustering of USES in a compact village pattern, while limiting total traffic
generation and providing for sufficient OPEN SPACE and off-STREET parking areas.
The provisions should be interpreted as permitting the Transfer of Development Rights
within the North Acton Village District, but not as permitting an increase in the total
amount of maximum development in that District.
5.5C.1.2 Transfer of Development Rights Within the North Acton Village District
a) For a LOT in the North Acton Village District, the Board of Selectmen may grant a
Special Permit for the Transfer of Development Rights within the District. The effect
of such Special Permit shall be to permit an increase in NET FLOOR AREA above
the total amount permitted by:
i. the applicable maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO set forth in the Table of
Standard Dimensional Regulations, and
ii. if applicable, any Certificate of Development Rights previously transferred to the
LOT from within or from outside the District.
b) Any such increase in NET FLOOR AREA shall be compensated by an equal
reduction in the maximum NET FLOOR AREA for another LOT in the North Acton
Village District.
5.5C.1.3 Standards of Review – In deciding on the merits of a proposal for Transfer of
Development Rights within the North Acton Village District, the Board of Selectmen
shall consider the following criteria and objectives:
a) Increased density on a LOT should support a sense of community through a
concentration of a variety of USES; therefore, density increases should be granted
only where such concentrations are compatible with surrounding USES. The
implementation of this provision should tend to facilitate the development of a viable
village center through the grouping of higher density USES around an identifiable
core, such as a plaza, common or other municipal facility.
b) In addition, the Transfer of Development Rights should serve a public purpose on
the LOT from which development rights are to be transferred, by providing shared
off-STREET parking, usable public or semi-public OPEN SPACE or other public
amenities.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 88
c) The Board of Selectmen shall grant a Special Permit for the Transfer of
Development Rights within the North Acton Village District only if it can make
appropriate findings that the criteria and objectives of a) and b) are promoted by
granting the transfer.
5.5C.1.4 Administration
a) Determination of Development Rights for Affected LOTS – Before granting a Special
Permit under Section 5.5C.1, the Board of Selectmen shall determine the
development rights for all LOTS to be affected by the proposed transfer. The
Special Permit shall specify the residential, nonresidential, and total development
rights for each LOT, expressed in NET FLOOR AREA as computed in Section
10.4.3.8 of this Bylaw, less any development rights previously removed from such
LOTS. The application for a Special Permit under this Section shall contain sufficient
information to permit the Board of Selectmen's determination of the development
rights that may be transferred.
b) The Board of Selectmen shall require that upon Transfer of the Development Rights
authorized in its special permits, the owner of a LOT from which development rights
have been removed, shall file with the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds or
the Land Court (as applicable) an irrevocable restrictive covenant, approved by the
Board of Selectmen, running with the land, permanently restricting the development
of the LOT. The covenant shall restrict the LOT by the amount of development rights
transferred to another LOT, permitting only the amount of development rights that
remain on the LOT, if any, all as specified in the Special Permit authorizing the
transfer.
c) Implementation of Transfer – Following the approval of a Special Permit under this
Section, the applicant shall complete the transfer procedures set forth in Sections
5.4.4 and 5.4.5, except that the formulas in Section 5.4.4.2 shall not apply to
transfers within the North Acton Village District.
5.5C.2 STREET reservations in the North Acton Village District – In the North Acton Village
District, a Special Permit or Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority may require the
reservation of STREET rights of way for all purposes, for which public STREETS and
ways are used in the Town of Acton. It may further require that new STREETS be
constructed following approval in accordance with MGL Ch. 41, s. 81K - 81GG and the
Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations to connect with existing approved STREETS.
Where such STREET rights of way are reserved, the FLOOR AREA RATIO on the
remaining land shall be calculated by including the rights of way reserved hereunder,
including any necessary easements, in the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA.
5.6 Special Provisions for the Kelley’s Corner District
5.6.1 Purpose – In the Kelley’s Corner District, the principal goal guiding the regulations set
forth herein is to sustain and encourage a vital business center that provides needed
goods, services, jobs and increased tax revenues in a manner that is compatible with
Acton’s historic development pattern and establishes pedestrian accessibility and
circulation throughout the Kelley’s Corner area. These regulations will provide clear
guidance to those who would like to expand or locate businesses in the Kelley’s Corner
District. They will ensure that future development will help create the form, cohesion,
order, and supporting infrastructure that will identify the Kelley’s Corner District as an
attractive, pleasant, and desirable center for business, shopping and other commercial
and community activities.
Pedestrian access and circulation are favored in order to limit vehicular congestion and
air pollution. Adjacent residential neighborhoods will be connected to the Kelley’s
Corner District via pedestrian ways but are otherwise separated with landscape buffers.
In order to support the growth and vitality of the center, higher density developments
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 89
are required to contribute to a fund for the construction of a centralized wastewater
collection and treatment system serving the Kelley’s Corner District and surrounding
areas. The regulations are intended to implement the Kelley’s Corner Plan as
amended.
It is widely recognized that the mere provision of sidewalks and crosswalks will not
encourage pedestrian use of a commercial area unless the layout and design of the
sites and BUILDINGS are also conducive to pedestrian use. The leading design
principles are therefore to provide convenient and efficient pedestrian access within the
Kelley’s Corner District and to surrounding neighborhoods and facilities, to provide a
safe and comfortable pedestrian environment with walkways, pedestrian conveniences
and amenities, and to encourage BUILDINGS with a pedestrian oriented scale and
design.
5.6.2 The following standards shall apply to all LOTS in the KC District:
5.6.2.1 The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall require sidewalks along the LOT’S
FRONTAGE on a STREET or STREETS and walkways between BUILDING entrances
and the nearest STREET or STREETS with minimal interruption by driveways. Parking
lot aisles, and access and interior driveways do not count as walkways;
5.6.2.2 The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall require driveway and walkway
connections to abutting LOTS within the KC District. Where such connections are not
available due to current conditions on abutting LOTS, provisions shall be required to
connect to such abutting LOTS at a future date in locations determined by the Site Plan
Special Permit Granting Authority;
5.6.2.3 The Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall require pedestrian connections to
abutting neighborhoods and facilities outside the KC District. Where such connections
are not available due to current conditions in the surrounding area, provisions shall be
required for such connections at a future date in locations determined by the Site Plan
Special Permit Granting Authority.
5.6.3 The following standards shall apply on all LOTS in the KC District where the FLOOR
AREA RATIO exceeds 0.20:
5.6.3.1 The Sidewalk – A sidewalk shall be provided along the LOT’S FRONTAGE on a
STREET or STREETS. The sidewalk shall be at least 10 feet wide. Sidewalks may be
located wholly or partially within the STREET layout. The sidewalk shall be separated
from the vehicular roadway with a landscaped buffer at least 10 feet wide, which shall
consist of shade trees placed at 40-45 foot intervals and other landscaping or STREET
design elements, and which may consist in part of on-STREET vehicular parking
spaces.
5.6.3.2 The Pedestrian Plaza – A pedestrian plaza shall be provided on any LOT where the
NET FLOOR AREA is 30,000 square feet or more and the FLOOR AREA RATIO
exceeds 0.35.
a) The pedestrian plaza shall be an area at the STREET level in front of a BUILDING,
on the side of a BUILDING, or in between BUILDINGS, which is to be used
exclusively by pedestrians and connects to the sidewalk. For the purpose of this
section, a pedestrian arcade located within a BUILDING footprint and open to the
outdoors may be counted towards the minimum area required for a pedestrian
plaza.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 90
b) A pedestrian plaza shall contain a minimum of 1,500 square feet in area and shall
measure at least 20 feet in width. If the NET FLOOR AREA of the BUILDINGS on a
LOT exceeds 100,000 square feet, the minimum area for a pedestrian plaza shall be
3,000 square feet. The area required for a sidewalk shall not be included in the
pedestrian plaza.
c) The pedestrian plaza shall be next to the STREET and sidewalk, and shall be open
on one or more sides to the sidewalk.
d) The pedestrian plaza shall be accented with pedestrian amenities such as benches
and kiosks. Shade trees, ornamental trees and other landscaping shall be provided
to create a separation between pedestrian and vehicular traffic, to highlight
BUILDINGS and pedestrian spaces, to provide shelter from the sun, to minimize
glare for drivers, to reduce noise, and to mitigate fumes.
e) All landscaping shall use species that are tolerant to the climatic conditions in Acton
and shall be designed to facilitate ongoing maintenance and watering.
f) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Bylaw to the contrary, the serving of
foods and drinks at outdoor tables shall be permitted in a pedestrian plaza.
5.6.3.3 Driveways and Parking Lots –
a) No driveway or parking lot shall be placed in the portion of a LOT that is directly in
front of a BUILDING as seen from a STREET, whether or not the BUILDING is
located on the same LOT as the driveway or parking lot, except that a driveway and
parking lot may be placed in the front of a BUILDING that is located in the rear of
another BUILDING when viewed from a STREET. No driveways or parking lots
shall be located between a pedestrian plaza and a STREET, nor shall any driveway
or parking lot intersect or be mixed with a pedestrian plaza.
b) Vehicular driveways and parking lots may be located to the side and rear of
BUILDINGS or to the rear of a pedestrian plaza.
5.6.3.4 BUILDING Design –
a) At least 60 percent of the front side of a LOT facing a STREET, measured in
percentage of linear feet of the LOT FRONTAGE, shall be occupied by BUILDINGS
or by a pedestrian plaza that are located within 40 feet of the STREET sideline. A
reduction of this requirement to 50 percent of the front side of a LOT may be
allowed provided the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority finds that the
alternative design features are consistent with Section 5.6.1 of this Bylaw.
b) BUILDINGS shall be of a design similar to the architecture in historic commercial
centers of New England in terms of scale, massing, roof shape, spacing and exterior
materials. Alternative designs may be allowed provided the Site Plan Special
Permit Granting Authority finds the alternative design is consistent with Section
5.6.1 of the Bylaw.
c) BUILDING facades facing STREETS or pedestrian plazas are also referred to
herein as the BUILDING front(s) or BUILDING front facade(s). Such BUILDING
fronts shall have a vertical orientation, meaning either that the BUILDING shall
actually have a greater height than width, or that the facades and roof lines of the
BUILDING are designed to reduce the massing and bulk so that it appears as a
group of smaller masses with a distinct vertical orientation.
d) The BUILDING front facades shall be articulated to achieve a human scale and
interest. The use of different textures, shadow lines, detailing and contrasting
shapes is required. Not more than 50 feet of a BUILDING front shall be in the same
vertical plane.
e) The BUILDING front facade(s) shall be faced with materials used in historic New
England architecture. Alternative materials may be used on the BUILDING front
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 91
facade(s) provided that the Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority finds the
materials to be consistent with Section 5.6.1 of the Bylaw.
f) On the BUILDING fronts, the ground floor shall be occupied, or designed to be
available for occupancy, by Retail Stores; Restaurants; Hotel, Motel, Inn,
Conference Center; Lodges or Clubs; Bed & Breakfast; Services; Commercial
Entertainment; real estate agencies; insurance agencies; travel agencies; law
offices; medical and dental offices; walk-in clinics; small equipment repair services;
tailors; or photography studios.
g) The main business entrance to each ground floor business, identified by the larger
doors, signs, canopy or similar means of highlighting, shall be from the BUILDING
front.
h) Grocery retailers with a NET FLOOR AREA larger than 20,000 square feet may
have a second main entrance in another location, for instance towards a parking lot
in the rear or the side of a BUILDING.
i) Arcades and canopies shall not be considered part of the BUILDING. Arcades and
canopies may not be located within 10 feet of the sideline of a STREET unless the
Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority finds that the reduction in setback to the
sideline of the STREET is consistent with Section 5.6.1 of the Bylaw.
j) The BUILDING front(s) shall contain windows covering at least 15 percent of the
facade surface. Windows shall be highlighted with frames, lintels and sills or
equivalent trim features. Windows and doors shall be arranged to give the facade a
sense of balance and symmetry.
k) Except for ground level display windows, windows shall have a 2:1 ratio of height to
width. Alternative window designs may be allowed provided the Site Plan Special
Permit Granting Authority finds them to be consistent with Section 5.6.1 of the Bylaw
and that they enhance one or more architectural features.
l) On the ground level portion of the BUILDING front, the amount of windows in the
facade surface shall be at least 20 percent but not larger than 80 percent. Ground
floor display windows shall be framed on all sides by the surrounding wall. They
shall be highlighted with frames, lintels and sills or equivalent trim features, or may
instead be recessed into the wall or projected from the wall.
m) Mirror windows and highly reflective surfaces shall not be allowed on the BUILDING
fronts.
n) Roofs shall be gabled with a minimum pitch of 9/12 (9” vertical for every 12”
horizontal) and have overhanging eaves of at least one foot. Two or three story
BUILDINGS, or two or three story portions of a BUILDING, may have a flat roof
provided that the tops of the BUILDING front facades are treated with an articulated
cornice, dormers, or other architectural treatment that appears an integral part of the
BUILDING from all visible sides of the BUILDING.
o) The main features of the architectural treatment of the BUILDING front facades,
including the materials used, shall be continued around all sides of the BUILDING
that are visible from a STREET or a pedestrian plaza. The Site Plan Special Permit
Granting Authority may approve alternate treatment of side and rear BUILDING
walls that is consistent with Section 5.6.1 of the Bylaw and preserves the
architectural integrity of the BUILDING as a whole.
p) Garage doors or loading docks shall not be allowed in the BUILDING fronts.
q) BUILDING service and loading areas shall incorporate effective techniques for
visual and noise buffering from adjacent USES.
r) Accessory STRUCTURES, air conditioning equipment, electric utility boxes, satellite
dishes, trash receptacles and other ground level utilities shall be unobtrusive when
viewed from the STREET and adjacent LOTS.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 92
s) Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened from public view by the use of
architecturally compatible materials.
5.7 Special Provisions for the Office Park 2 District
5.7.1 Purpose – The purpose of this Section is to set forth specific standards for the
development in the Office Park 2 District to ensure that the prime location of this district
on Route 2 is utilized to its optimum while ensuring adequate provisions for wastewater
collection and treatment and vehicular access and circulation in the general area.
5.7.2 On any LOT where a FLOOR AREA RATIO in excess of 0.10 is proposed, the Site Plan
Special Permit Granting Authority may require, as a condition of a site plan approval,
the following contributions to the Town of Acton:
5.7.2.1 An area of land suitable in size and location for the construction of a centralized
wastewater collection, treatment and disposal system serving the OP-2 District and
other areas within the Town of Acton. Where such a contribution of land is made, the
maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO on the remaining land shall be calculated by including
in the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA the land contributed to the Town; and
5.7.2.2 An area of land suitable in size and location to be used for the construction of a Service
Road (as defined in the Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations) on the south side of
Route 2 between Route 111 west of Route 2, and Route 2 just east of Hosmer Street.
Where such a contribution of land is made, the maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO on the
remaining land shall be calculated by including in the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA the
land dedicated to the Town.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 93
SECTION 6.
PARKING STANDARDS
6.1 Definitions – For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meaning:
6.1.1 ACCESS Driveway – The travel lane
that allows motor vehicles ingress from
the STREET and egress from the site
and includes the area between
the edge of STREET pavement to the
area within the LOT where the ACCESS
driveway is no longer within the
minimum parking area setback required
under Section 6.7.2.
6.1.2 BUILDING Service Area – A room or
rooms in a BUILDING used to house
electrical or mechanical equipment necessary to provide central utility service to the
BUILDING, such as a boiler room.
6.1.3 Interior Driveway – A travel lane located
within the LOT which is not used to
directly enter or leave parking spaces.
An interior driveway shall not include
any part of the ACCESS driveway.
NOTE: Under Section 10.4.4 the Board of Selectmen may, under limited circumstances, increase
the requirements of this Section or grant relief from the requirements of this Section. The
reader is advised to consult Section 10.4.4 to determine whether increased parking
requirements may be imposed or to determine the circumstances under which relief may
be available.
Access Driveway
Parking Lot
Access
Driveway
Perimeter of
Parking Lot
Street
Lot Line
Required
Setback Area
Limits of Street
Pavement
Sidelines of
Street
Interior Driveway
Interior Driveway
Interior Driveway
Building
Street
Lot Line
Perimeter of
Parking Lot
Landscaped Island
Required Setback Area
Access
Drive-
Limits of way
Street
Pavement
Sidelines
of
Street
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 94
6.1.4 Maneuvering Aisle – A travel lane
located within the perimeter of a
parking lot by which motor vehicles
directly enter and leave parking
spaces.
6.1.5 NET FLOOR AREA – As defined in Section 1.3.7 FLOOR AREA, NET of the Acton
Zoning Bylaw.
6.1.6 Parking Stall Length of Line – The
longitudinal dimension of the stall
measured parallel to the angle of
parking.
6.1.7 Width of Parking Stall – The
linear dimension measured
across the stall and parallel to
the maneuvering aisle.
6.2 General Provisions – All required parking shall be located on the same LOT as the
USE it serves except within a MAJOR AFFORDABLE Housing Development (Section
4.4) and a PCRC (Section 9) where required parking may be provided in a flexible
configuration within the TRACT OF LAND comprising the development, and except as
provided in Section 6.9. Parking facilities shall also comply with the requirements of the
Massachusetts Architectural Access Board.
6.2.1 Change of USE – The USE of any land or STRUCTURE shall not be changed from a
USE described in one Section of the Schedule of Parking USES to a USE in another
Section of the Schedule nor shall any NET FLOOR AREA of a BUILDING be increased
Maneuvering Aisle
Building
Street
Lot Line
Perimeter of
Parking Lot
Landscaped Island
Required Setback Area
Access
Driveway
Limits of
Street
Pavement
Sidelines
of
Street
Maneuvering
Aisle
Maneuvering
Aisle
Maneuvering
Aisle
Parking Stall Length of Line
Landscaped Island Curb Line
Measure Here
Measure Here
Parking
Space
900
450
Width of Parking Stall
Landscaped Island Curb Line
Measure
Here
Measure
Here
Parking
Space
900
450
Centerline of Maneuvering Aisle
These Two Lines
These Two Lines Must Be Parallel
Must Be Parallel
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 95
in any manner unless the number of parking spaces required for the new USE are
provided.
6.2.2 Undetermined USES – Where the USE of a BUILDING or BUILDINGS has not been
determined at the time of application for a building permit or special permit, the parking
requirements applicable to the most intensive USE allowed in the district where such
undetermined USE is to be located shall apply provided, however, that the number of
parking spaces actually built need not exceed the number required by the actual USE or
USES of the BUILDING.
6.2.3 Relief from Parking Regulations by Special Permit from the Board of Selectmen – Relief
from the parking regulations may be granted by special permit from the Board of
Selectmen where the Board finds that it is not practicable to provide the number of
parking spaces required, and either 1) in the case of a change from a nonconforming
USE to a conforming USE, that the benefits of a change to a conforming USE outweigh
the lack of parking spaces, or 2) in the case of a change from one conforming USE to
another conforming USE, that the lack of parking spaces will not create undue
congestion or traffic hazards on or off the site; provided that in either case the Board of
Selectmen shall require the maximum practicable number of parking spaces. This
Section shall not be construed to provide relief from the requirements of Section 5.4.6.2.
6.3 Minimum Parking Space Requirements by USE
6.3.1 Schedule
6.3.1.1 Dwelling Two spaces for each DWELLING UNIT, except for an Accessory
Apartment as defined in Section 3.8.1.6.
6.3.1.2 Home Occupation Three spaces and where non-residents are employed or where
retail sales are conducted the Board of Appeals shall have the
authority under Section 3.8.1.2 to require the number of parking
spaces which it deems to be adequate and reasonable.
6.3.1.3 Educational (not including
auditorium)
One space for each employee plus one space for each classroom
plus one space for each four students above grade ten.
6.3.1.4 Nursing Home, Assisted
Living Residence, or Full
Service Retirement
Community
Two spaces for each DWELLING UNIT that is designed for
independent living; plus one space for each additional three beds.
6.3.1.5 Child Care Facility (1) One space per ten (10) children of rated capacity of the child care
facility plus one space for each staff person on the largest shift.
6.3.1.6 Retail Stores and Services
not listed below; Repair
Shop, Technical Shop,
Studio; Restaurants without
seating
One space for each 300 square feet of NET FLOOR AREA.
6.3.1.7 Bank; Credit Union;
Convenience Store;
Shopping Center with
two or more
Restaurants, Retail
Stores or Services, or
any combination thereof
Three spaces per 1,000 s.f. of NET FLOOR AREA.
6.3.1.8 Furniture Store One space per 600 s.f. of NET FLOOR AREA.
6.3.1.9 Office One space for each 250 square feet of NET FLOOR AREA.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 96
6.3.1 Schedule (continued)
6.3.1.10 Restaurant (not otherwise
listed); Funeral Home;
Religious; Lodge or Club;
Other Place of Assembly
One space for each three seats.
6.3.1.11 Fast Food Restaurants with
seating but no table service
One space per 100 s.f. of NET FLOOR AREA.
6.3.1.12 Hotel, Motel, Inn, Conference
Center
One space for each bedroom, plus one space per 4 persons of
rated capacity of conference rooms, banquet halls, restaurants,
and other adjunct facilities.
6.3.1.13 Building Trade Shop One Space for each 1000 s.f. of NET FLOOR AREA or one space
per employee on the largest shift, whichever is greater.
6.3.1.14 Commercial Recreation;
Commercial Entertainment;
Auditorium
One space per four seats or one space per 200 s.f. of NET
FLOOR AREA or one space per 4 persons of rated capacity,
whichever is greater.
6.3.1.15 Vehicle Service Station;
Vehicle Repair; Vehicle Body
Shop
Two spaces plus three spaces for each service bay.
6.3.1.16 Industrial One space for each 2,000 s.f. of NET FLOOR AREA for the first
20,000. s.f. plus one space for each additional 10,000 s.f. of NET
FLOOR AREA, or one space for each employee on the largest
shift, whichever is greater.
6.3.1.17 Golf Courses Ten spaces per hole, plus one space per employee on the largest
shift, plus one space per 3 persons of the capacity of all other
accessory indoor and outdoor facilities as determined by the
Special Permit Granting Authority.
(1) The number of parking spaces for a Child Care Facility in a Residential Zoning District shall not exceed
the minimum requirement.
6.3.2 Parking for Persons with Disabilities – Parking spaces for persons with disabilities as
required by the Massachusetts Architectural Access Board shall be provided as part of
the spaces required under Section 6.3.1.
6.3.3 Comparable USES – Where a USE is not specifically included in Section 6.3.1, it is
intended that the requirements for the most nearly comparable USE specified shall
apply.
6.3.4 Mixed USES – For mixed USES the total number of required parking spaces shall be
the sum of parking spaces required for each individual USE as listed in Section 6.3.1,
except where it can be demonstrated that the parking need for the USES occurs at
different times.
6.3.5 Car/Van Pools – In conjunction with a Site Plan Special Permit (Section 10.4), the
Special Permit Granting Authority may authorize a reduction in the number of required
parking spaces provided that an effective employee car pool/van pool program will be
implemented and car pool/van pool spaces are designated.
6.3.6 Reserve Parking – In conjunction with a Site Plan Special Permit, the Special Permit
Granting Authority may authorize the set-aside of part of the required number of parking
spaces as "reserve parking". See Section 10.4.4 for details.
6.3.7 Bicycle Parking –Off-STREET parking facilities shall provide bicycle parking spaces as
follows:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 97
6.3.7.1 Bicycle parking spaces shall be located as close as possible and within plain sight of
the main BUILDING entrance or entrances without displacing required parking spaces
for persons with disabilities. They shall be principally part of and accessible from the
vehicle parking lot or facility rather than part of the sidewalk and walkway system.
6.3.7.2 Each bicycle parking space shall measure at least 2.5 feet in width by 6 feet in length
with at least one 4-foot wide maneuvering aisle perpendicular to the length.
6.3.7.3 Each bicycle parking space shall feature a securely anchored rack (ground-mounted
inverted-U with cross bar, or similar shape or functionality) high enough to support the
entire height of a bicycle frame, to allow locking of the bicycle frame to the rack in more
than one location, and to prevent the rack from being a tripping hazard when empty.
6.3.7.4 Bicycle parking spaces shall be protected from motor vehicles with solid barriers such
as posts or bollards.
6.3.7.5 Bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for all USES, except single- to four-FAMILY
Dwellings, at a rate of not less than one (1) bicycle parking space for each twenty (20)
motor vehicle parking spaces in the parking facility, but never less than two (2) bicycle
parking spaces; and no parking facility shall be required to have more than thirty (30)
bicycle parking spaces overall.
6.3.7.6 The number of bicycle parking spaces provided for a residential USE may be located
within a BUILDING. Such indoor bicycle parking does not have to comply with the
dimensional and design standards set forth herein, but shall be designed as a practical
installation for easy access and use. Where bicycle parking spaces within a BUILDING
are not accessible to visitors, at least one third of the required bicycle parking spaces
shall be installed outdoors in compliance with this section 6.3.7.
6.3.7.7 The first two (2) through six (6) bicycle parking spaces provided in compliance with this
section shall reduce by one space the minimum off-street motor vehicle parking
requirement set forth in section 6.3.1 above, and each additional six (6) bicycle parking
spaces so provided shall further reduce said motor vehicle parking requirement by one
(1) space.
6.4 Loading Areas – Except in the WAV and SAV Districts, one or more off-STREET
loading areas shall be provided for any business that may be regularly serviced by
tractor-trailer trucks or other similar delivery vehicles, so that adequate areas shall be
provided to accommodate all delivery vehicles expected at the premises at any one
time. Loading areas shall be located at either the side or rear of each BUILDING and
shall be designed to avoid traffic conflicts with vehicles using the site or vehicles using
adjacent sites.
6.5 Standard Parking Dimensional Regulations – Off-STREET parking facilities shall be
laid out and striped in compliance with the following minimum provisions:
Angle of Parking
*(in degrees)
Width of
Parking
Stall
Parking Stall
Length of Line
Width of
Maneuvering Aisle
90*(two-way) 9.0' 18.5' 24'
60*(one-way) 10.4' 22' 18'
45*(one-way) 12.7' 25' 14'
Parallel (one-way) 8.0' 22' 14'
Parallel (two-way) 8.0' 22' 18'
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 98
6.6 Small Car Stalls – In parking facilities containing more than 40 parking stalls, 30
percent of such parking stalls may be for small car use, except for retail store, personal
service facility, general services or restaurant USES. Such small car stalls shall be
grouped in one or more contiguous areas and shall be identified by a sign(s).
Angle of Parking
*(in degrees)
Width of
Parking
Stall
Parking Stall
Length of Line
Width of
Maneuvering Aisle
90*(two-way) 8.5' 15' 24'
60*(one-way) 9.8’ 18.5' 18'
45*(one-way) 12.0' 21.5' 14'
Parallel (one-way) 8.0' 18' 14'
Parallel (two-way) 8.0' 18' 18'
6.6.1 Small Car Parking Dimensional Regulations – Off-STREET small car parking facilities
shall be laid out and striped in compliance with the following minimum provisions:
6.7 Parking Lot Design Requirements – All parking lots shall be designed in compliance
with the following design standards, except as provided in Section 6.9. In addition, the
following standards shall not apply to parking lots serving a single to four-FAMILY
residential USE, an Assisted Living Residence with 10 or less residents, a religious
USE, a Conservation USE, and a Municipal outdoor recreation USE.
Required parking spaces, loading areas and driveways shall be provided and
maintained with suitable grading, paved surfaces and adequate drainage. Any parking
lot containing five (5) or more parking spaces shall include landscaping as required
below which is, in the opinion of the Special Permit Granting Authority (if the parking
area is related to a permitted USE for which a site plan or other special permit is
required) or the Zoning Enforcement Officer (for other parking areas), located and
designed to enhance the visual appearance of the parking or loading facility, to ensure
traffic safety, and to minimize the adverse effects of the parking or loading facility on the
natural environment.
6.7.1 Cells – Parking requirements shall be met by utilization of parking lot cells having a
maximum of forty (40) parking spaces per parking lot cell. There shall be a minimum
separation distance of thirty (30) feet between parking lot cells.
6.7.2 Set-Backs – Except as may be required elsewhere in this Bylaw, no parking space or
other paved surface, other than ACCESS driveways, common driveways, walkways,
sidewalks or bikeways, shall be located within 30 feet of the front LOT line and within 10
feet of the side and rear LOT lines, and notwithstanding the foregoing, no parking space
or other paved surface, other than ACCESS driveways, common driveways, walkways,
sidewalks or bikeways, shall be located within the limits of a landscaped buffer area
required under Section 10.4.3.5 and Section 10.4.3.6.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 99
6.7.3 ACCESS Driveways – Each LOT may have one ACCESS driveway through its
FRONTAGE which shall be 24 feet wide, unless, in the opinion of the Special Permit
Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a permitted USE for which a site plan
or other special permit is required) or the Zoning Enforcement Officer (for other parking
areas), a wider and/or greater number of ACCESS driveways is necessary to provide
adequate area for safe vehicular turning movements and circulation. An ACCESS
driveway for one-way traffic only may be a minimum of 14 feet wide. There shall be no
more than one additional ACCESS driveway for each 200 feet of FRONTAGE and all
such additional ACCESS driveway(s) shall be at least 200 feet apart on the LOT
measured from the centerline of each ACCESS driveway. No driveway for a
nonresidential PRINCIPAL USE shall cross land in a residential zoning district in which
the PRINCIPAL USE is not allowed.
6.7.4 Interior Driveways – Interior driveways
shall be at least 20 feet wide for twoway
traffic and 14 feet for one-way
traffic.
6.7.5 Notwithstanding the requirements for
ACCESS driveways and interior
driveways set forth above, ACCESS
and interior driveways in the Village
Residential District shall be at least 12
feet wide.
6.7.6 Perimeter Landscaping
Requirements – All parking lots/cells
with more than five (5) spaces and all
loading areas shall be bordered on all
sides with a minimum of a ten (10) foot
wide buffer strip on which shall be
located and maintained appropriate
landscaping of suitable type, density
and height to effectively screen the
parking area. The perimeter
landscaping requirements shall be in
addition to any minimum OPEN
SPACE or landscaped buffer area
required elsewhere in this Bylaw.
However, where the minimum required front, side or rear yard is less than forty (40)
feet, the landscaped buffer areas required in Section 10.4.3.6 and the areas required for
perimeter landscaping may overlap. In such instances, the landscaping requirements of
Sections 10.4.3.6 and 6.7.8 shall be applied in a manner that will, in the opinion of the
Special Permit Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a permitted USE for
which a site plan or other special permit is required) or the Zoning Enforcement Officer
(for other parking areas), provide a landscaped buffer as effective as it would be
achieved through the separate implementation of the requirements of Sections 10.4.3.6
and 6.7.8.
6.7.7 Interior Area Landscaping Requirements – A minimum of ten percent (10%) of the
interior area, exclusive of perimeter landscaping, of a parking lot cell containing more
than twenty-five (25) parking spaces must be planted as landscaped island areas. The
landscaped islands shall be so located that some portion of every parking space is not
more than forty-five (45) feet from either a landscaped island or the perimeter planting
area. Landscaped islands shall be dimensioned so that a circle with a minimum radius
Example for Parking
Lot Design
Requirements
Maneuvering Aisle
Interior Driveway
Parking Lot Cell
Perimeter Landscaping Strip
Street
Sideline of Street
Interior Driveway
Access
Driveway
Parking Spaces
10% Landscaped Island
5 ft. radius
10’
10’
10’
30’
30’ 24’
20’
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 100
of 5 feet can be placed at each location within the island except that within the
immediate vicinity of driveway or maneuvering aisle roundings and intersections the
radius may be reduced to two feet. Curbing, at least five (5) inches in height, shall
surround each landscaped island as protection from vehicles. The interior area
landscaping requirements shall be in addition to any minimum OPEN SPACE required
elsewhere in this Bylaw.
6.7.8 Plantings for Perimeter and Interior Area Landscaping Requirements Shall Consist of:
6.7.8.1 At least one shrub per thirty (30) square feet and one shade tree per two hundred (200)
square feet of landscaped area shall be provided, unless the Special Permit Granting
Authority (if the parking area is related to a permitted USE for which a site plan or other
special permit is required) or the Zoning Enforcement Officer (for other parking areas)
or their designee, determine that there exists sufficient existing vegetation to allow for a
different amount of new landscaping.
6.7.8.2 Shade trees shall be of a species tolerant to the climatic conditions of Acton and of
parking area conditions, and be at least one and three-quarter (1 3/4) inch caliper
(measured four feet above grade level).
6.7.8.3 Shrubs shall be a mix of deciduous and evergreen varieties, tolerant to the climatic
conditions of Acton, and be at least eighteen (18) inches in height at time of planting.
Snow storage areas shall be planted with shrubs that are tolerant to weight and
extended duration of snow cover.
6.7.8.4 The remainder of the landscaped areas shall be planted with ground surface cover,
such as lawn grass or live ground cover, over at least four (4) inches of topsoil, unless
the Special Permit Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a permitted USE
for which a site plan or other special permit is required) or the Zoning Enforcement
Officer (for other parking areas) or their designee, determine that another type of
ground surface cover is appropriate for a specific purpose or location.
6.7.8.5 Wherever possible, the above requirements shall be met by retention of existing
vegetation.
6.7.8.6 Planting shall be done in accordance with proper landscaping practices.
6.7.8.7 Trees, shrubs, grass and ground cover which die or become diseased shall be
replaced.
6.7.8.8 Final locations of all plantings shall be inspected and approved by the Special Permit
Granting Authority (if the parking area is related to a permitted USE for which a site plan
or other special permit is required) or the Zoning Enforcement Officer (for other parking
areas) or their designee, including the viability of existing vegetation retained after
development and any necessary replacements thereof.
6.7.9 Flexible Parking Lot Design Requirements – A Special Permit or Site Plan Special
Permit Granting Authority having jurisdiction, or the Zoning Enforcement Officer in
cases where no special permit or site plan special permit is required, may as an
alternative to strict conformance with the requirements of Sections 6.7.1, 6.7.2, 6.7.5
thru 6.7.8, and 10.4.3.6 of this Bylaw, including their subsections, and subject to the
following requirements, conditions, and findings, approve a Flexible Parking Plan as
follows:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 101
6.7.9.1 The special permit or site plan special permit application shall contain a Parking Proof
Plan, prepared and stamped by a Registered Professional Engineer, drawn to sufficient
detail to demonstrate compliance with all applicable local, State, and Federal laws and
regulations, including this Bylaw without the benefit of this Section 6.7.9. The Parking
Proof Plan shall show the number of proposed parking spaces and identify the total
area of impervious paved surface, parking lot landscaping, and OPEN SPACE on the
LOT.
6.7.9.2 The special permit or site plan special permit application shall contain a Flexible Parking
Plan, prepared and stamped by a Registered Professional Engineer, showing the same
number of parking spaces as on the Parking Proof Plan and a parking lot layout that
differs in whole or in part from the requirements of Sections 6.7.1, 6.7.2, 6.7.5 thru
6.7.8, and 10.4.3.6. The Flexible Parking Plan shall include sufficient detail, including
drainage system details, to demonstrate compliance with all other applicable local,
State, and Federal laws and regulations, and it shall identify the total area of impervious
paved surface, parking lot landscaping, and OPEN SPACE on the LOT. The Flexible
Parking Plan shall be submitted with a list of waivers from the stated sections of this
Bylaw and supporting materials detailing why the Flexible Parking Plan is more
advantageous for the site; better protects the neighbors including abutting residential
properties; is more conservative in its use of natural resources; and/or overall would be
in the better interest of the Town of Acton as compared to the Parking Proof Plan.
6.7.9.3 In cases where a special permit or site plan special permit is not required, the Parking
Proof Plan and Flexible Parking Plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer.
6.7.9.4 The Flexible Parking Plan shall comply with the following minimum standards:
a) Except for ACCESS driveways, common driveways, or walkways, all parking spaces
and paved surfaces shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from any LOT line.
b) The landscaping of the parking lots shall as a minimum comply with Section 6.9.4.7
including subsections a) through e).
6.7.9.5 The Special Permit or Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority, or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer where no special permit or site plan special permit is required, may
at their sole discretion approve the Flexible Parking Plan if the Board or the Zoning
Enforcement Officer as applicable finds and determines that the Parking Proof Plan
conforms to the provisions of this Bylaw; and that the Flexible Parking Plan conforms to
Section 6.7 except as waived under this subsection 6.7.9, is more advantageous for the
site, is more conservative in its use of natural resources, and overall would be in the
better interest of the Town of Acton as compared to the Parking Proof Plan.
6.8 Structured Parking – Except in the KC, WAV and SAV Districts, the accommodation of
required off-STREET parking spaces in a garage, deck or other STRUCTURE shall
require, in addition to all other OPEN SPACE requirements of this Bylaw, the set-aside
of OPEN SPACE of an area equal to the floor area of the structured parking facility in
excess of one story. In all zoning districts structured parking facilities shall not be
counted in calculating the NET FLOOR AREA of a BUILDING. In the SAV District,
structured parking shall only be allowed if incorporated in a BUILDING occupied with
other USES, and a separate detached parking STRUCTURES shall only be permitted if
it qualifies as a municipal USE.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 102
6.9 Special Provisions for Parking in the Village, Kelley’s Corner, and Powder Mill
Districts
6.9.1 In the EAV District, except as otherwise provided herein, no BUILDING or
STRUCTURE shall be located on any LOT and no activity shall be conducted upon any
LOT unless off-STREET parking is provided in accordance with the following
requirements:
6.9.1.1 No off-STREET parking spaces shall be established between the front line of the
principal BUILDING and the sideline of a STREET, except as may be provided
otherwise in the Design Provisions for the East Acton Village District.
6.9.1.2 Required off-STREET parking for a USE may be provided on any LOT within the same
Zoning District as the USE, but not necessarily on the same LOT as the USE.
6.9.1.3 Connection of Parking – A Special Permit Granting Authority shall require that all
parking lots be connected by a common driveway to the parking lots of all adjacent
USES and to all adjacent land in the EAV and EAV-2 Districts, unless it finds that
physical constraints, present site configuration, uncooperative abutters, or land vacancy
precludes strict compliance. In such cases, the site and the parking lot shall be
designed to provide for the future construction of common driveways. For the purposes
of this section, common driveway shall be defined as a driveway that is shared by two
or more LOTS and located at least partially within the required setback areas of such
LOTS. Such a common driveway can be either a shared ACCESS driveway to a
STREET, or a driveway to a STREET, or a driveway connecting such LOTS with each
other.
6.9.1.4 Number of Parking Spaces – The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be
70% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1. In the case of collective use of a parking lot in
accordance with Section 6.9.1.5 below, the minimum number of required parking
spaces shall be 50% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1.
6.9.1.5 Collective Use of Parking Lots – Off-STREET parking lots may serve, collectively or
jointly, different USES located throughout the EAV District where such a collective use
of the parking lot is based on a written agreement that: 1) assures the continued
collective use; 2) states the number of parking spaces allocated to each participating
USE; and 3) assures ACCESS to and maintenance of the common parking lot. The
parking spaces provided through the collective use of parking lots shall be counted
towards the minimum required number of spaces for the participating USES applying
the discount as set forth in Section 6.9.1.4 above.
6.9.1.6 Structured parking shall not be allowed except under ground.
6.9.1.7 The parking lot design requirements of Section 6.7 shall apply in the EAV District,
except that:
a) The requirements for parking lot cells and separation of cells (Section 6.7.1) shall
not apply.
b) The requirements for set-backs (Section 6.7.2) shall not apply. This does not waive
the requirements for perimeter landscaping (Section 6.7.6).
c) The interior area landscaping (Section 6.7.7) may be substituted with one or more
consolidated bioretention areas with minimum side dimensions measuring at least
38 X 12 feet each. Bioretention areas shall be designed and landscaped to trap and
mitigate runoff from paved surfaces consistent with the description and intent of
EPA Storm Water Technology Fact Sheet – Bioretention (EPA 832-F-99-012,
September 1999), or equivalent. The landscaping requirements of Sections 6.7.8.1
through 6.7.8.5 shall not apply to bioretention areas. Bioretention areas may be
sited anywhere in the parking lot that is convenient to manage parking lot traffic and
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 103
facilitate pedestrian use, including adjacent to and connecting with vegetated areas
on the perimeter of a parking lot. Bioretention areas shall be considered part of the
minimum required OPEN SPACE.
6.9.2 In the NAV District, the following special provisions for parking shall apply:
6.9.2.1 No off-STREET parking spaces shall be established between the front line of the
principal BUILDING and the sideline of a STREET.
6.9.2.2 The Board of Selectmen may authorize by Special Permit an off-STREET parking lot or
STRUCTURE not located upon the same LOT with the associated USE, provided said
parking lot or STRUCTURE lies also within the NAV District.
6.9.2.3 The number of parking spaces to be provided for a mixed-USE development in the
North Acton Village District shall be equal to 85 percent of the sum of the number of
parking spaces for each USE on the LOT, determined separately for each USE based
upon the standards set forth in Section 6.3.1
6.9.2.4 Except as stated in Sections 6.9.2.1 through 6.9.2.3, the parking lot design
requirements of Section 6.7 shall apply in the NAV District.
6.9.3 In the EAV-2 District, the following special provisions for parking shall apply:
a) Connection of Parking – A Special Permit Granting Authority shall require that all
parking facilities be connected by a common driveway to the parking facilities of all
adjacent USES and to all adjacent land in the EAV, EAV-2, and LB zoning districts,
unless it finds that physical constraints, present site configuration, uncooperative
abutters, or land vacancy precludes strict compliance. In such cases, the site and
the parking facility shall be designed to provide for the future construction of
common driveways. For the purposes of this Section, common driveway shall be
defined as a driveway that is shared by two or more LOTS and located at least
partially within the required setback areas of such LOTS. Such a common driveway
can be either a shared ACCESS driveway to a STREET, or a driveway to a
STREET, or a driveway connecting such LOTS with each other.
b) Collective Use of Parking Facilities – Off-STREET parking facilities may serve,
collectively or jointly, different USES located throughout the same zoning district
where such a collective use of the parking facility is based on a written agreement
that: 1) assures the continued collective use; 2) states the number of parking spaces
allocated to each participating USE; and 3) assures ACCESS to and maintenance of
the common parking facility. In the case of such collective use of a parking facility,
the minimum number of required parking spaces shall be 70% of the requirements
in Section 6.3.1.
c) Otherwise, the parking lot design requirements of Section 6.7 shall apply in the EAV-
2 District.
6.9.4 WAV and SAV Districts – In the WAV and SAV Districts, except as otherwise provided
herein, no BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall be located on any LOT and no activity shall
be conducted upon any LOT unless off-STREET parking is provided in accordance with
the following requirements:
6.9.4.1 Required off-STREET parking for a USE may be provided on any LOT within the same
Zoning District as the USE, but not necessarily on the same LOT as the USE.
6.9.4.2 No off-STREET parking spaces shall be established between the front line of the
principal BUILDING and the sideline of a STREET, except on LOTS having frontage on
more than one STREET. On LOTS having FRONTAGE on more than one STREET,
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 104
the main BUILDING entrance shall face a STREET and parking spaces shall be located
on the opposite side of the main BUILDING entrance.
6.9.4.3 Connection of Parking – A Special Permit Granting Authority shall require that all
parking facilities be connected by a common driveway to the parking facilities of all
adjacent USES and to all adjacent land in the same Zoning District, unless it finds that
physical constraints, present site configuration, uncooperative abutters, or land vacancy
precludes strict compliance. In such cases, the site and the parking facility shall be
designed to provide for the future construction of common driveways. For the purposes
of this section, common driveway shall be defined as a driveway that is shared by two
or more LOTS and located at least partially within the required setback areas of such
LOTS. Such a common driveway can be either a shared ACCESS driveway to a
STREET or a driveway to a STREET or a driveway connecting such LOTS with each
other.
6.9.4.4 Number of Parking Spaces – The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be
70% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1. In the case of collective use of a parking
facility in accordance with Section 6.9.4.5, the minimum number of required parking
spaces shall be 50% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1.
6.9.4.5 Collective Use of Parking Facilities – Off-STREET parking facilities may serve,
collectively or jointly, different USES located throughout the same Zoning District where
such a collective use of the parking facility is based on a written agreement that: 1)
assures the continued collective use; 2) states the number of parking spaces allocated
to each participating USE; and 3) assures ACCESS to and maintenance of the common
parking facility. The parking spaces provided through the collective use of parking
facilities shall be counted towards the minimum required number of spaces for the
participating USES applying the discount as set forth in Section 6.9.4.4.
6.9.4.6 Design Requirements – The parking lot design requirements of Section 6.7 shall not
apply in the WAV and SAV Districts. Off-STREET parking spaces, except parking
spaces serving a single to four-FAMILY residential USE or an Assisted Living
Residence with 10 or less residents, shall be either contained within a BUILDING or
STRUCTURE or subject to the following requirements.
a) Required parking spaces, ACCESS driveways, and interior driveways shall be
provided and maintained with suitable grading, paved surfaces, adequate drainage,
and landscaping as required in Section 6.9.4.7.
b) ACCESS Driveways – Not more than one ACCESS driveway for two-way traffic
from a STREET to a parking facility shall be permitted. An additional ACCESS
driveway from a STREET may be permitted provided that the ACCESS driveways
are limited to one-way traffic. However, there shall not be more than two (2)
ACCESS driveways for one-way traffic for any parking facility. ACCESS, interior and
common driveways for two-way traffic shall be twenty feet (20') wide. The ACCESS,
interior and common driveways for one-way traffic shall be fourteen (14) feet wide.
c) Set-Backs – Except where parking lots established in accordance with Section
6.9.4.5 cross over common LOT lines, all parking spaces and paved surfaces other
than ACCESS driveways or common driveways shall be set back a minimum of five
(5) feet from any LOT lines.
6.9.4.7 Landscaping of Parking Lots – Parking lots shall include a landscape area equal to a
minimum of five percent (5%) of the area of the parking lot.
a) Shade trees – One shade tree shall be provided for each two thousand (2,000)
square feet or less of pavement area. Each shade tree shall be from a deciduous
species rated for U.S.D.A. Hardiness Zone 5 that is expected to reach at least 20
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 105
feet in height at maturity; be seven (7) feet in height with a trunk caliper size of at
least 3/4 inches at the time of planting; and be surrounded by a landscaped area of
one hundred square feet (100 sq. ft.) to accommodate the root system of the tree.
Additional landscaping may be required by a Special Permit Granting Authority to
better screen the parking lot from the STREET and adjacent USES.
b) Perimeter Planting Strip – Parking lots adjacent to STREETS, sidewalks, paths or
ACCESS driveways shall include a perimeter planting strip at least seven and onehalf
(7.5) feet wide. However, if the planting strip is protected from vehicular damage
through the use of planting beds that are raised above the surface of the parking lot
at least twelve (12) inches or through the use of bollards or balustrades, the width of
the planting strip may be reduced to five (5) feet. Said planting strip shall feature a
physical separation of the parking lot and adjacent ways of at least two and one-half
(2.5) feet in height. This physical separation may be created through the use of
plantings, walls, or fencing (other than chain link or smooth concrete) or a
combination of plantings and fencing. No more than twenty percent (20%) of this
perimeter planting strip shall be impervious.
c) Plantings – Plantings for landscaped areas shall include a mixture of flowering and
decorative deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs and shall be planted with
suitable ground cover.
d) Sight Distance – All landscaping along any STREET FRONTAGE shall be placed
and maintained so that it will not obstruct sight distance.
e) Protection of Landscaped Areas – Landscaped areas shall be planted and protected
in such a manner that the plantings will not be damaged by vehicles.
6.9.5 KC District – In the Kelley’s Corner District, no BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall be
located on a LOT and no activity shall be conducted upon any LOT unless off-STREET
parking is provided in accordance with the following requirements:
6.9.5.1 Required off-STREET parking for a USE may be provided on any LOT within the
Kelley’s Corner District, but not necessarily on the same LOT as the USE.
6.9.5.2 Connection of Parking – A Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall require that
all parking facilities be connected by a common driveway to the parking facilities of all
adjacent USES and to all adjacent LOTS within the Kelley’s Corner District, unless it
finds that physical constraints, present site configuration, uncooperative abutters, or
land vacancy precludes strict compliance. In such cases, the site and the parking
facility shall be designed to provide for the future construction of common driveways.
For the purposes of this section, common driveway shall be defined as a driveway that
is shared by two or more LOTS and located at least partially within the required setback
areas of such LOTS. Such a common driveway can be either a shared ACCESS
driveway to a STREET or a driveway to a STREET leading to another LOT or a
driveway connecting such LOTS with each other. See also Section 10.4.3.3 of this
Bylaw regarding common driveways.
6.9.5.3 Number of Parking Spaces – The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be
70% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1. In the case of collective use of a parking
facility in accordance with Section 6.9.5.4, the minimum number of required parking
spaces shall be 50% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1.
6.9.5.4 Collective Use of Parking Facilities – Off-STREET parking facilities may serve,
collectively or jointly, different USES located throughout the Kelley’s Corner District
where such a collective use of the parking facility is based on a written agreement that:
1) assures the continued collective use; 2) states the number of parking spaces
allocated to each participating USE; 3) assures ACCESS to and maintenance of the
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 106
common parking facility, and 4) is filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Any
change to such agreement shall also be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The
number of parking spaces allocated in the agreement to each participating USE shall be
counted toward the minimum required number of parking spaces for such USE as
determined under Section 6.9.5.3.
6.9.5.5 Design Requirements and Landscaping – Off-STREET parking spaces, except spaces
serving a single to four-FAMILY residential USE or an Assisted Living Residence with
10 or less residents, shall either be contained within a BUILDING or STRUCTURE, or
be provided in accordance with the design requirements of section 6.7 including all its
subsections. In addition, no parking space or other paved surface, other than walkways
and bikeways, shall be located within 20 feet of an abutting residential zoning district.
6.9.6 PM District – In the Powder Mill District, no BUILDING or STRUCTURE shall be located
on a LOT and no activity shall be conducted upon any LOT unless off-STREET parking
is provided in accordance with the following requirements:
6.9.6.1 Required off-STREET parking for a USE may be provided on any LOT within the
Powder Mill District, but not necessarily on the same LOT as the USE.
6.9.6.2 Connection of Parking – A Site Plan Special Permit Granting Authority shall require that
all parking facilities be connected by a common driveway to the parking facilities of all
adjacent USES and to all adjacent LOTS within the Powder Mill District, unless it finds
that physical constraints, present site configuration, uncooperative abutters, or land
vacancy precludes strict compliance. In such cases, the site and the parking facility
shall be designed to provide for the future construction of common driveways. For the
purposes of this section, common driveway shall be defined as a driveway that is
shared by two or more LOTS and located at least partially within the required setback
areas of such LOTS. Such a common driveway can be either a shared ACCESS
driveway to a STREET or a driveway to a STREET leading to another LOT or a
driveway connecting such LOTS with each other. See also Section 10.4.3.3 of this
Bylaw regarding common driveways.
6.9.6.3 Number of Parking Spaces – The minimum number of required parking spaces shall be
70% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1. In the case of collective use of a parking
facility in accordance with Section 6.9.6.4, the minimum number of required parking
spaces shall be 50% of the requirements in Section 6.3.1.
6.9.6.4 Collective Use of Parking Facilities – Off-STREET parking facilities may serve,
collectively or jointly, different USES on LOTS located throughout the Powder Mill
District where such a collective use of the parking facility is based on a written
agreement that: 1) assures the continued collective use; 2) states the number of parking
spaces allocated to each participating USE; 3) assures ACCESS to and maintenance of
the common parking facility, and 4) is filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer. Any
change to such agreement shall also be filed with the Zoning Enforcement Officer. The
number of parking spaces allocated in the agreement to each participating USE shall be
counted toward the minimum required number of parking spaces for such USE as
determined under Section 6.9.6.3.
6.9.6.5 Design Requirements and Landscaping – Off-STREET parking spaces, except spaces
serving a single to four-FAMILY residential USE, shall either be contained within a
BUILDING or STRUCTURE, or be provided in accordance with the design requirements
of Section 6.7 including all its subsections. In addition, no parking space or other paved
surface, other than walkways and bikeways, shall be located within 20 feet of an
abutting residential zoning district.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 107
6.10 Parking Lot Bonds and Securities – The Special Permit Granting Authority (if the
parking area is related to a permitted USE for which a site plan or other special permit is
required) or the Zoning Enforcement Officer (for other parking areas) or their designee
may require a bond or other form of security to ensure the satisfactory planting of
required landscaping and to ensure the survival of such landscaping for up to two (2)
years following such planting. All required landscaping and plantings must be
maintained in a neat, attractive appearance as a condition of the continued PRINCIPAL
USE of the LOT.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 108
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 109
SECTION 7.
SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES
7.1 Purpose – Signs are a necessary means of communicating information. Generally,
signs are intended to be highly visible. They attract attention and are one of the most
visible and apparent aspects of a town's character. They tend to produce a lasting
impression on residents and visitors and they provide an indication of the commercial
health of a business area and a town as a whole. Simplicity in design and restrained
use of signs are necessary to prevent a sign overload which creates clutter and is as
confusing as no signs at all. The purposes of this section are:
7.1.1 To promote the safety and welfare of residents, businesses and visitors;
7.1.2 To enhance the safety of all traffic participants by encouraging simple messages and by
preventing sign overload, clutter and confusion;
7.1.3 To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication, information and
advertisement;
7.1.4 To foster free and effective expression and advertising, through creative and distinctive
design;
7.1.5 To maintain and enhance the aesthetics of the built environment and the character of
the Town;
7.1.6 To encourage signs which by their location, size and design are in harmony and
compatible with the surrounding BUILDINGS and environment;
7.1.7 To maintain and promote economic health and stability;
7.1.8 To further the general purposes of this Bylaw.
7.2 Definitions – For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meaning. The terms defined below are capitalized in the following parts of this
Section in addition to the terms defined in Section 1.
7.2.1 AWNING SIGN – A permanent SIGN which is affixed to or consists of a permanent or
retractable awning or marquee permanently mounted to the exterior surface of a
BUILDING.
7.2.2 BILLBOARD SIGN – A SIGN which advertises a business, service, product, commodity,
entertainment or similar object or activity which is conducted, sold or offered on a LOT
other than the LOT on which the SIGN is ERECTED.
7.2.3 BUSINESS CENTER – For the purpose of this Section, BUSINESS CENTER shall be
defined as a business development occupied by or available for occupancy to at least
two distinctly separate businesses on one or more adjacent LOTS sharing common
facilities such as driveways and parking areas.
7.2.4 DISPLAY AREA – The total surface area of a SIGN, including all lettering, wording,
designs, symbols, background and frame, but not including any support structure or
bracing incidental to the SIGN. The DISPLAY AREA of an INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN,
AWNING SIGN or irregularly shaped SIGN shall be the area of the smallest rectangle
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 110
into which the letters, designs or symbols will fit. Where SIGN faces are placed back to
back and face in opposite directions, the DISPLAY AREA shall be defined as the area
of one face of the SIGN.
7.2.5 ERECTING – Any installing, constructing, reconstructing, replacing, relocating or
extending of a SIGN, but ERECTING shall not include repairing, maintaining, relettering,
or repainting of an existing SIGN.
7.2.6 EXTERIOR SIGN – A WALL SIGN, PROJECTING SIGN or AWNING SIGN.
7.2.7 FREESTANDING SIGN – A non-movable SIGN not affixed to any BUILDING but
constructed in a permanently fixed location on the ground with its own support structure,
including a MONUMENT SIGN, and displaying a SIGN face on not more than two sides.
7.2.8 INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN – A WALL SIGN consisting of individual letters mounted to
a BUILDING surface without any background or frame.
7.2.9 MONUMENT SIGN – A form of a FREESTANDING SIGN which is attached to and in
contact with the ground over the full width of its DISPLAY AREA.
7.2.10 NEON SIGN – A SIGN which features exposed glass tubing filled with fluorescent gas.
7.2.11 LED SIGN – A SIGN that features light emitting diodes arranged in a pattern to create
pictures, symbols or letters.
7.2.12 OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK – For the purpose of this Section, OFFICE
PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK shall be defined as a development of two or more
BUILDINGS on one or more adjacent LOTS totaling at least 50,000 square feet of NET
FLOOR AREA and available for occupancy by users of office or industrial BUILDING
space.
7.2.13 MOVABLE SIGN – Any SIGN not permanently attached to the ground or to a
BUILDING or permanent STRUCTURE, which is designed to be portable such as an Aframe,
H-frame or T-frame SIGN placed on the surface of the ground or temporarily
staked into the ground.
7.2.14 PROJECTING SIGN – A SIGN which is permanently affixed to the exterior surface of a
BUILDING or STRUCTURE with the DISPLAY AREA positioned perpendicular to the
wall to which the SIGN is mounted.
7.2.15 ROOF SIGN – A SIGN which is painted, mounted or in any way projected above the
lowest point of the eaves of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE, not including any SIGN
defined as a WALL SIGN and not including any WALL SIGN mounted on a vertical
BUILDING wall located above the eaves of any lower portion or wing of a BUILDING.
7.2.16 SIGN – Any symbol, design or device used to identify or advertise any place, business,
product, activity, service, person, idea or statement.
7.2.17 WALL SIGN – A SIGN which is painted or otherwise permanently affixed to a vertical
exterior surface of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE with the DISPLAY AREA positioned
parallel with the wall to which the SIGN is mounted, and including such a SIGN affixed
to a parapet or to the lower slope of a gambrel or mansard roof.
7.2.18 WINDOW SIGN – A SIGN, picture, symbol or message visible from the window’s
exterior side, either hung or otherwise attached directly to the inside of a window, or
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 111
painted or etched on either side of the window pane or glass, not including any part of a
customary window display of merchandise or other product.
7.2.19 TEMPORARY or SPECIAL EVENT SIGN – A temporary SIGN to announce a church
bazaar, fair, circus, festival, business or shop opening, special sale by a store or
business, or similar event; or a temporary SIGN for a business in place of a permanent
sign.
7.3 SIGNS Prohibited in All Districts
7.3.1 Any SIGN ERECTED in violation of this Bylaw.
7.3.2 BILLBOARD SIGNS unless specifically authorized herein; and SIGNS on utility poles,
communication towers, water towers, fences, trees, shrubs or other natural features,
except for directional SIGNS listed in Section 7.5.3.
7.3.3 Any SIGN ERECTED within or above a STREET or affixed to public property, except for
permitted EXTERIOR SIGNS above a sidewalk and except for SIGNS within or above a
STREET or affixed to public property for which written approval has been issued by the
Board of Selectmen or its designee. The Board of Selectmen may adopt and from time
to time amend policies and regulations regarding SIGNS within or above a STREET or
affixed to public property.
7.3.4 MOVABLE SIGNS except as specifically provided herein. Any SIGN designed to be
transported by means of wheels, and SIGNS attached to or painted on vehicles parked
and visible from a STREET or a right of way customarily used by the general public,
unless said vehicle is registered and used, as a vehicle, in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business.
7.3.5 ROOF SIGNS, and any other SIGNS on a LOT which in any way are projected above a
BUILDING or STRUCTURE.
7.3.6 Except as specifically provided herein, any SIGN consisting of or containing pennants;
ribbons; streamers; spinners; balloons; strings of lights not associated with a specific
religious holiday; flags other than those identifying a nation, state, city or town or
located on land owned by the Town of Acton; revolving beacons; searchlights;
animation.
7.3.7 SIGNS that change or rearrange characters or letters or illustrations, except as
specifically provided herein; or flash, rotate, or make noise; or sparkle, twinkle or
purposely reflect sunlight; or move, or give the illusion of moving, except for indicators
of time and temperature or barber poles.
7.3.8 Where this Bylaw requires minimum side or rear yards for BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES, any FREESTANDING SIGN ERECTED in such minimum yard, unless
such SIGN is a directional SIGN listed in Section 7.5.3.
7.3.9 Any SIGN or advertising device which due to its shape or combination and arrangement
of colors and/or words resemble traffic SIGNS and traffic control devices.
7.3.10 Any SIGN which in any way creates a hazard to traffic participants, obscures or
confuses traffic controls or blocks safe sight distance.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 112
7.3.11 Any SIGN which in any way obstructs free entrance or egress from a door, window or
fire escape.
7.3.12 Any SIGN advertising or identifying a business, service, product, commodity,
entertainment or similar object or activity which has been discontinued. Such SIGN
shall be removed promptly, in any case within 30 days after notice by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
7.3.13 Any SIGN that depicts, describes or relates to nudity or sexual conduct as defined in
M.G.L., Ch. 272, s. 31, and that is visible from the outside of a BUILDING.
7.4 General Regulations – Except where stated otherwise, the following provisions shall
apply to SIGNS in all Zoning Districts.
7.4.1 Design – In the Village Districts no visible portion or exterior surface of any EXTERIOR
or FREESTANDING SIGN shall be made of plastic, other petroleum based products, or
sheet metal, except that in the EAV District such materials may be used provided that
the visible portions and exterior surfaces of a SIGN have a wooden appearance.
7.4.2 Construction and Maintenance – SIGNS shall be constructed of durable and
weatherproof materials. They shall be maintained in safe structural condition and good
visual appearance at all times and no SIGN shall be left in a dangerous or defective
state. All electrical equipment associated with a SIGN shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with the National Electrical Code. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to inspect any SIGN and order the owner to paint, repair or remove a
SIGN which constitutes a hazard, or a nuisance due to improper or illegal installation,
dilapidation, obsolescence or inadequate maintenance.
7.4.3 Illumination
7.4.3.1 No SIGN shall be illuminated longer than 30 minutes before opening or after closing of
any store or business.
7.4.3.2 No SIGN shall incorporate or be lighted by flashing or blinking lights, or by lights
changing in intensity.
7.4.3.3 Except as otherwise provided herein, illumination for any SIGN shall be provided
through a stationary external light source, with the light projected downward from above
and in compliance with section 10.6.2.4.a) of this Bylaw. In no case shall the
illumination of a SIGN cause blinding or otherwise obstruct the safe vision of any traffic
participant anywhere. SIGN illumination through an external source shall always be
white or off-white.
7.4.3.4 The following types of SIGNS with internal or quasi-internal illumination shall be
permitted, provided that they comply with all applicable standards of the previous
section. The word “opaque” as used in the following Sub-Sections shall mean that the
opaque object shall appear black when the sign is lit at night.
a) NEON or LED SIGNS, subject to Sections 7.5.17 and 7.13.1.6.
b) Opaque INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGNS or symbols, back-lit with a white and
concealed light source, thereby creating an effect by which the letters or symbols
are silhouetted against a wall illuminated by said light source.
c) SIGNS featuring individual letters or symbols which are cut out from an opaque
facing and back-lit with a white and concealed light source, thereby creating an
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 113
effect by which the facing, from which the letters or symbols are cut out, is
silhouetted against a wall illuminated by said light source.
d) Back-lit AWNING SIGNS with the light source internal or concealed from public
view. Such SIGNS shall not be permitted in a Village District.
e) INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGNS with translucent letter faces, internally illuminated with
a soft-glow light source; or SIGNS with an opaque SIGN face with cutout translucent
letter surfaces which are internally illuminated with a soft-glow light source. Such
SIGNS shall not be permitted in a Village District.
7.4.3.5 In the EAV District, PROJECTING SIGNS, AWNING SIGNS, WALL SIGNS and
FREESTANDING SIGNS shall not be illuminated except as described in Sections
7.4.3.4 b) or c), or from an external light source with the light projected downward from
above.
7.4.3.6 In all other Village Districts:
a) PROJECTING SIGNS and AWNING SIGNS shall not be illuminated.
b) WALL SIGNS shall not be illuminated except as described in Sections 7.4.3.4 b) or
c), or from an external light source with the light projected downward from above.
c) FREESTANDING SIGNS shall not be illuminated except as described in Sections
7.4.3.4 b) or c) or from an external light source.
7.4.3.7 The DISPLAY AREA of an illuminated SIGN shall not exceed an average illuminance of
50 foot-candles measured directly on the surface of the SIGN.
7.4.3.8 Where possible, the light fixtures used for SIGN illumination should be classified as
"energy efficient", as defined by the power utility company serving the LOT.
7.4.4 Other Regulations
7.4.4.1 Where more than one SIGN is permitted for a PRINCIPAL USE, a combination of not
more than two of the following types of SIGNS shall be permitted per PRINCIPAL USE:
WALL SIGN, PROJECTING SIGN, AWNING SIGN, and FREESTANDING SIGN.
However, in the EAV District, a combination of up to three such SIGN types shall be
permitted per PRINCIPAL USE. This section does not apply to any SIGN that does not
require a SIGN Permit as listed in Section 7.5, or to an off-premises directional SIGN
permitted under Section 7.9, or to a Temporary or Special Event Signs(s) permitted
under Section 7.10.
7.4.4.2 The height, width and thickness of a SIGN shall be determined as the maximum vertical
and horizontal dimensions of a SIGN including all support structures and bracing.
7.5 SIGNS Which Do Not Require a SIGN Permit – The following SIGNS do not require a
SIGN Permit or Special Permit, nevertheless such SIGNS shall comply with Sections
7.3 and 7.4 above unless specifically provided otherwise in this section. No such SIGN
shall be ERECTED within 5 feet of the sideline of a STREET or any other right of way
customarily used by the general public, unless such SIGN is a traffic SIGN, landmark
SIGN, directional SIGN, or an EXTERIOR SIGN.
7.5.1 Agricultural SIGNS – A SIGN associated with an agricultural USE as referenced in
Section 3 of M.G.L., Ch. 40A, offering for sale produce and other farm products,
provided that such a SIGN indicates only the name and price of farm products which
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 114
are for sale at the time the SIGN is displayed. The maximum DISPLAY AREA of such
SIGN shall be 10 square feet. Such SIGN may be a MOVABLE SIGN.
7.5.2 Construction SIGNS – One SIGN on the LOT of a new project identifying the proposed
BUILDING, the owner or intended occupant and the contractor, architect and engineers.
Its DISPLAY AREA shall not to exceed 8 square feet in the Residential and Village
Districts, nor 20 square feet in any other District. Such SIGNS shall not be illuminated
and shall not be ERECTED prior to the issuance of a building permit, and it shall be
removed upon completion of the construction or prior to issuance of the occupancy
permit, whichever occurs sooner.
7.5.3 Directional SIGNS – Unless otherwise specified herein, a directional SIGN may be
ERECTED on a LOT wherever appropriate and functional to serve its specific purpose
and where it is not in violation of Section 7.3. A directional SIGN may be a SIGN
necessary for the safety and direction of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; a SIGN
identifying handicapped parking and access; a SIGN giving direction to a public service
facility or accommodation; an official inspection station SIGN; a SIGN displaying a
STREET name or number or a house, block, unit or BUILDING number; a SIGN
required for occupational safety and health reasons; a SIGN posted to prohibit
trespassing, hunting, or certain other activities on private property; or any other SIGN
providing essential direction or guidance. Except as may otherwise be required by
local, state or federal regulations, the DISPLAY AREA of a directional SIGN shall not
exceed two square feet and no directional SIGN shall be ERECTED more than six feet
above the ground level if mounted on a wall of a STRUCTURE or more than four feet
above the ground if freestanding. Directional SIGNS shall not be illuminated, nor
advertise, identify or promote any business, business service, product, commodity,
entertainment or similar object or activity.
7.5.4 Directory SIGNS – One directory SIGN listing the name and location of the occupants of
a BUILDING may be ERECTED on the exterior wall of a BUILDING at each entrance or
at one other appropriate location on the wall of a BUILDING, provided that: (1) in the
Business, Industrial and Office Districts the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed one
square foot for each occupant identified on the directory SIGN, nor more than a total of
12 square feet; and (2) in any other Zoning District the DISPLAY AREA shall not
exceed one half square foot for each occupant identified on the directory SIGN, nor
more than a total of 6 square feet. Such SIGNS shall not be illuminated.
7.5.5 Fuel Pump SIGNS – Fuel pump SIGNS located on service station fuel pumps
identifying the name or type of fuel and price thereof.
7.5.6 Governmental SIGNS – SIGNS, including MOVABLE SIGNS, ERECTED and
maintained by the Town of Acton, the Water Supply District of Acton, the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or the Federal Government on any land, BUILDING
or STRUCTURE in use by such governmental entity. Any other signs erected by such
governmental entity at any location required for public or environmental health, safety or
notification purposes, or announcing the date, time and place of elections or town
meeting.
7.5.7 Identification SIGNS – For single and two FAMILY residential USES in any Zoning
District, one SIGN on a LOT identifying the occupants of the dwelling, an authorized
home occupation and/or any other USE which is conducted on the LOT and is permitted
in a Residential District. In a Residential District, one SIGN on a LOT identifying a nonconforming
USE. All such SIGNS shall not exceed two square feet of DISPLAY AREA
and shall not be illuminated, except when coincidental to the illumination of a
BUILDING, driveway or similar feature.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 115
7.5.8 Landmark SIGNS – Any SIGN determined by the Board of Selectmen to be of particular
artistic or historic merit that is unique or extraordinarily significant to the Town and its
residents. Such a SIGN may be new or old, it may or may not comply with this Bylaw, it
may be a picture, mural, statue, sculpture or other form of artistic expression, it may
warrant preservation in its original form or may be in need of restoration, or it may be a
marker to identify or commemorate a particular significant location, a historic event or
person, or a natural feature.
7.5.9 Menu SIGNS – One menu SIGN per restaurant, affixed to the exterior wall of a
restaurant with a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 2 square feet.
7.5.10 Multifamily Dwelling SIGNS – A SIGN identifying the name of a multifamily residential
dwelling, not exceeding 6 square feet in DISPLAY AREA. If freestanding its height shall
not exceed 4 feet above ground level and if mounted to the exterior wall of a BUILDING
no portion thereof shall be higher than 6 feet from the ground.
7.5.11 Residential Development SIGNS – A SIGN identifying the name of a residential
development, not exceeding 6 square feet in DISPLAY AREA. If freestanding, its height
shall not exceed 4 feet above ground level, and if mounted to the exterior wall of a
BUILDING, no portion thereof shall be higher than 6 feet from the ground. Any such
SIGN in existence prior to January 1, 1995, which does not meet these standards, shall
nevertheless be deemed to comply herewith.
7.5.12 Political SIGNS – In addition to WINDOW SIGNS, SIGNS may be ERECTED on a LOT
displaying political messages. Such SIGNS shall be stationary and shall not be
illuminated. The height of such SIGNS shall not exceed 4 feet and the DISPLAY AREA
of each sign shall not exceed 6 square feet. SIGNS associated with a political event
such as elections, primaries, balloting, or voter registration shall be removed within 5
days after the event.
7.5.13 Religious SIGNS – SIGNS identifying a religious USE and ERECTED on the same LOT
as the religious USE. Such SIGNS shall not be illuminated and shall be limited to one
WALL SIGN with a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 12 square feet, and one
FREESTANDING SIGN with a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 8 square feet and a
maximum height of 5 feet.
7.5.14 Sale, Rent or Lease SIGNS – A For Sale, Rent or Lease SIGNS shall not require a
SIGN permit provided that its DISPLAY AREA does not exceed 20 square feet for
property located in a Business, Office or Industrial Zoning District and 8 square feet for
property located in any other district. In a Residential District, one For Sale, Rent or
Lease SIGN shall be allowed per LOT, and one such SIGN shall be permitted for each
business or establishment in any other Zoning District. Such a SIGN shall not be
illuminated. Such SIGN may be a MOVABLE SIGN and it shall be removed
immediately following the closing of a sale, lease or rental agreement.
7.5.15 Traffic SIGNS – Standard traffic SIGNS and control devices.
7.5.16 WINDOW SIGNS – WINDOW SIGNS, other than a NEON or LED SIGN, in the
Business, Village, Industrial and Office Districts shall not require a SIGN Permit
provided that their aggregate DISPLAY AREA covers no more than 25 percent of the
window in which they are ERECTED. Such SIGN shall not be illuminated. WINDOW
SIGNS promoting a public service or charitable event shall not be calculated in the
allowable 25 percent.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 116
7.5.17 NEON or LED WINDOW SIGNS – NEON or LED WINDOW SIGNS in the Business,
Village, Industrial, and Office Park Districts shall not require a SIGN Permit provided
that the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed ten square feet or cover more than 25% of
the window in which they are ERECTED, whichever is less. There shall be not more
than one such SIGN allowed per PRINCIPAL USE. In the Village Districts, a NEON or
LED WINDOW SIGN may only be placed in a ground floor window. As with any other
SIGN, a NEON or LED WINDOW SIGN shall not be illuminated longer than 30 minutes
before opening of after closing of the store or business.
7.5.18 Yard sale or garage sale SIGNS – One SIGN, which may be a MOVABLE SIGN, on the
LOT where the sale occurs, displaying only the words "Yard Sale" or "Garage Sale"
together with the date of the event. Such SIGN shall not exceed 6 square feet in
DISPLAY AREA and shall not be illuminated. Such SIGN shall not be ERECTED
sooner than 3 days before the sale and it shall be removed not later than 1 day after the
sale. In no case shall such a SIGN be ERECTED on a LOT for more than 5 days per
calendar year.
7.5.19 “OPEN” SIGNS - One SIGN, other than a WINDOW SIGN, associated with a
PRINCIPAL USE indicating that the establishment is open for business. Such a SIGN
shall be either affixed to the BUILDING as near as practically possible to the entrance of
the establishment or to a FREESTANDING SIGN otherwise permitted under this Bylaw.
Such a SIGN shall not exceed 6 square feet in DISPLAY AREA. The DISPLAY AREA of
such an “OPEN” SIGN shall not count towards the DISPLAY AREA of any other SIGN
on the premises. Notwithstanding Section 7.3.6, an “OPEN” SIGN may be a flag or a
banner.
7.6 SIGN Permits – Any SIGN permitted under the following Sections 7.7 through 7.13
shall require a SIGN Permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer and no such SIGN
shall be ERECTED except in conformity with such a SIGN Permit and in the exact
location and manner described in the SIGN Permit.
7.6.1 Application – All applications for SIGNS requiring a SIGN Permit shall be made to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer in such form as he may require, and such applications shall
include at least: 1) the location, by STREET number, of the proposed SIGN; 2) the
name and address of the SIGN owner and the owner of the LOT where the SIGN is to
be ERECTED, if other than the SIGN owner; 3) a scale drawing showing the proposed
construction, method of installation or support, colors, display, dimensions, location of
the SIGN on the site, and method of illumination; 4) such other pertinent information as
the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require to ensure compliance with the Bylaw and
any other applicable law; and 5) the application must be signed by the owner of the
SIGN and the owner of the LOT where the SIGN is to be ERECTED; the Lot owner’s
signature shall not be required for TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to reject any SIGN Permit
application which is not complete when submitted.
7.6.2 Time Limitations – The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall approve or disapprove any
application for a SIGN Permit within 45 days of receipt of the application. If the Zoning
Enforcement Officer should fail to approve or disapprove an application for a SIGN
Permit within such 45 day period, the application shall be deemed to be approved.
7.6.3 Fees – The Board of Selectmen shall establish and from time to time review a SIGN
Permit fee which shall be published as part of a SIGN Permit application form.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 117
7.7 EXTERIOR SIGNS – Any PRINCIPAL USE permitted in a Business, Industrial, Office or
Village District may ERECT an EXTERIOR SIGN subject to the following:
7.7.1 Except as may otherwise be provided, one EXTERIOR SIGN shall be permitted for
each PRINCIPAL USE. Such EXTERIOR SIGN may be a WALL SIGN, a
PROJECTING SIGN or an AWNING SIGN.
7.7.2 Except as specifically provided for certain WALL SIGNS, an EXTERIOR SIGN may only
be ERECTED on the exterior wall of the ground floor and up to 1 foot below the level of
the bottom sills of the windows of the story above the ground floor of a BUILDING.
7.7.3 An EXTERIOR SIGN shall not be ERECTED within 6 inches of any horizontal edge of a
BUILDING or STRUCTURE nor extend beyond such horizontal edge. Except for
AWNING SIGNS, an EXTERIOR SIGN shall not obscure or cover architectural features
such as but not limited to arches, sills, eaves moldings, cornices, transoms, lintels and
windows, and shall not be ERECTED within 6 inches from any such architectural
features.
7.7.4 WALL SIGNS – A WALL SIGN may be ERECTED on a BUILDING, or on an arcade
STRUCTURE attached to the ground floor of a BUILDING, or on a permanent canopy
STRUCTURE associated with a motor vehicle service station or a bank drive-up
window.
7.7.4.1 The maximum DISPLAY AREA of a WALL SIGN affixed to the exterior wall of a
BUILDING in conformance with Section 7.7.2, or to an arcade, canopy, parapet, or
gambrel or mansard roof, shall not exceed 1 square foot for each lineal foot of wall(*).
{(*) The wall front or store front occupied by a business, or the width of the canopy side
to which the SIGN is attached.}
7.7.4.2 The height of a WALL SIGN shall not exceed 4.5 feet in the Business, Industrial, and
Office Districts, 3 feet in the EAV and EAV-2 Districts, and 2 feet in all other Village
Districts.
7.7.4.3 The maximum width of a WALL SIGN affixed to the exterior wall of a BUILDING in
conformance with Section 7.7.2, or to an arcade, canopy, parapet, or gambrel or
mansard roof, shall not exceed 1 foot for each 2 lineal feet of wall(*) up to 30 feet in the
Business, Industrial and Office Districts, and 1 foot for each 3 lineal feet of wall(*) up to
20 feet in the Village Districts. {(*) The wall front or store front occupied by a business,
or the width of the canopy side to which the SIGN is attached.}
7.7.4.4 A business occupying a floor other than the first floor of a BUILDING may ERECT a
WALL SIGN at a BUILDING elevation higher than the one permitted in Section 7.7.2,
provided that the maximum width shall not exceed 8 feet in the Business, Industrial and
Office Districts, and 6 feet in the Village Districts.
7.7.4.5 A WALL SIGN may be affixed to a parapet or to a gambrel or mansard roof of a single
story BUILDING. In addition to any other applicable requirements, such a WALL SIGN
shall maintain a minimum distance of 1 foot from the top of the parapet or from the top
of the lower slope of the gambrel or mansard roof.
7.7.4.6 A WALL SIGN shall not project more than 1 foot from the surface to which it is attached.
7.7.4.7 A WALL SIGN shall not be ERECTED within 2 feet from the vertical edge of the
BUILDING, arcade or canopy surface to which it is attached nor extend beyond such
vertical edge.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 118
7.7.4.8 A WALL SIGN shall be affixed to a more or less flat exterior surface in a location where
the symmetry of the BUILDING, arcade or canopy and their features will be maintained.
7.7.5 PROJECTING SIGNS – A PROJECTING SIGN may be ERECTED on a BUILDING
provided that the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed 12 square feet in the Business,
Industrial and Office Districts, and 6 square feet in the Village Districts. The thickness
between the SIGN faces shall not exceed 1 foot. A PROJECTING SIGN shall not
project more than 3 feet from the face of the wall and shall maintain a minimum
clearance of 8 feet above a walkway or sidewalk.
7.7.6 AWNING SIGNS – An AWNING SIGN may be ERECTED on a BUILDING. Such
AWNING SIGN may consist of letters or symbols affixed to an awning in a parallel,
perpendicular and/or convex position to the wall onto which the awning is mounted,
except that in the Village Districts the convex position of letters to the wall shall not be
permitted. Letters and symbols on an AWNING SIGN shall be flush with the surface of
the awning. The maximum DISPLAY AREA of an AWNING SIGN shall be 12 square
feet for surfaces positioned parallel or convex to the BUILDING wall, and 6 square feet
for surfaces positioned perpendicular to the BUILDING wall. Except in the EAV District,
if the AWNING SIGN is ERECTED on an awning manufactured with canvas on a frame
that is retractable to the wall, one additional EXTERIOR SIGN, which may be a WALL
SIGN or a PROJECTING SIGN, shall be permitted on the BUILDING for the same
PRINCIPAL USE. An AWNING SIGN shall not project more than 3 feet from the wall
and shall maintain a minimum clearance of 8 feet above a walkway or sidewalk. Where
an AWNING SIGN is ERECTED on the wall of a BUILDING, all other awnings without a
SIGN located on the same BUILDING shall be subject to the same dimensional
requirements as the AWNING SIGN.
7.7.7 Secondary EXTERIOR SIGNS – If a business has a direct entrance into the business in
a wall other than the front wall, there may be a secondary WALL SIGN, PROJECTING
SIGN or AWNING SIGN affixed to such wall at such entrance; and if the business has a
wall other than the front wall without a direct entrance to the business that faces upon a
STREET or parking area, there may be a secondary WALL SIGN affixed to such wall;
provided, however, that no business shall have more than two secondary EXTERIOR
SIGNS in any event. In the EAV District, an additional secondary EXTERIOR SIGN
shall be permitted on the front wall of the PRINCIPAL USE, provided that it is of a
different type (WALL SIGN, PROJECTING SIGN, or AWNING SIGN) than any other
SIGN on the front wall. The DISPLAY AREA of any secondary EXTERIOR SIGN shall
not exceed 6 square feet.
7.7.8 One EXTERIOR SIGN shall be permitted for a BUSINESS CENTER in addition to any
other permitted EXTERIOR SIGNS. Such EXTERIOR SIGN shall conform to the
dimensional requirements for EXTERIOR SIGNS and identify only the BUSINESS
CENTER. If such EXTERIOR SIGN is ERECTED in a Village Districts, no
FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted on the same LOT, nor within the same
BUSINESS CENTER.
7.8 FREESTANDING SIGNS – Any PRINCIPAL USE permitted in a Business, Industrial,
Office or Village District may ERECT a FREESTANDING SIGN identifying a business or
a BUSINESS CENTER, subject to the following:
7.8.1 One FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted on a LOT identifying a business located
on the same LOT.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 119
7.8.2 No FREESTANDING SIGN shall be ERECTED within 5 feet of the sideline of a
STREET or any right of way customarily used by the general public, or within such
greater distance that is equal to the height of the FREESTANDING SIGN, and no
portion of a FREESTANDING SIGN shall be located within the airspace above any such
minimum required distance.
7.8.3 A FREESTANDING SIGN shall be integrated into the landscape design of the LOT or
parcel. It shall be centered within a landscaped area located on the LOT or parcel with
a minimum area in square feet to be equal to the overall height of the SIGN multiplied
by two, by the power of two. (Example - SIGN height = 6 feet: 6 ft. x 2 = 12 ft.;
12 ft. x 12 ft. = 144 sq. ft. = minimum landscaped area). Such landscaped area shall be
planted and maintained with suitable vegetation including shrubs and flowering
perennials surrounding the base of the FREESTANDING SIGN. The landscaped area
required under this section may be provided as part of a landscaped area required
under any other section of this Bylaw.
7.8.4 If a FREESTANDING SIGN is a MONUMENT SIGN where the exterior surface of the
support structure consists of masonry material which remains in its natural color other
than plain gray concrete, the area below the lowest portion of any letter, symbol or
illustration consisting of such masonry surface shall not be counted as DISPLAY AREA.
7.8.5 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in the Business,
Industrial and Office Districts:
7.8.5.1 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a business, such FREESTANDING SIGN
shall be permitted in addition to any EXTERIOR SIGN permitted on the same LOT. The
DISPLAY AREA of the FREESTANDING SIGN shall not exceed 12 square feet and the
height shall not exceed 7 feet. If such a FREESTANDING SIGN is a MONUMENT
SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be increased to 16 square feet, provided however that
the height of a MONUMENT SIGN shall not exceed 4 feet, or 6 feet if its width does not
exceed 3 feet. Where the FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a motor vehicle service
station the maximum permitted DISPLAY AREA may be increased to 24 square feet if
the additionally permitted DISPLAY AREA is used solely for the posting of current
prices of fuel and gasoline.
7.8.5.2 One FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted for a BUSINESS CENTER, provided
that no other FREESTANDING SIGN identifying an individual business shall be
permitted in the BUSINESS CENTER.
7.8.5.3 A BUSINESS CENTER is eligible for two FREESTANDING SIGNS when the LOT or
LOTS of the BUSINESS CENTER have more than 300 feet of combined FRONTAGE
on one or more STREETS, provided that not more than one FREESTANDING SIGN for
the BUSINESS CENTER shall be allowed along a continuous FRONTAGE on one
STREET that measures less than 300 feet.
7.8.5.4 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a BUSINESS CENTER, each business
located within such BUSINESS CENTER may display its identification on the
FREESTANDING SIGN together with the identification of the BUSINESS CENTER,
provided that such FREESTANDING SIGN remains of integrated and coherent design
and complies with all applicable standards. The DISPLAY AREA of such a
FREESTANDING SIGN shall not exceed a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 50 square
feet, and its height shall not exceed 12.5 feet. If a FREESTANDING SIGN under this
provision is a MONUMENT SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be increased to a maximum
DISPLAY AREA of 62.5 square feet. The height of such a MONUMENT SIGN shall not
exceed 10 feet.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 120
7.8.6 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in all Village Districts:
7.8.6.1 The DISPLAY AREA of a FREESTANDING SIGN identifying an individual business
shall not exceed 8 square feet and the height shall not exceed 5 feet. If such a
FREESTANDING SIGN is a MONUMENT SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be increased
to 12 square feet, provided however that the height shall not exceed 4 feet, or 5 feet if
its width does not exceed 3 feet. Where the FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a motor
vehicle service station, the maximum permitted DISPLAY AREA may be increased to
16 square feet if the additionally permitted DISPLAY AREA is used solely for the
posting of current prices of fuel and gasoline.
7.8.6.2 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a BUSINESS CENTER, each business
located within such BUSINESS CENTER may display its identification on the
FREESTANDING SIGN together with the identification of the BUSINESS CENTER,
provided that such FREESTANDING SIGN remains of integrated and coherent design
and complies with all applicable standards.
7.8.7 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in the NAV, SAV, and
WAV Districts:
7.8.7.1 One FREESTANDING SIGN may be ERECTED on a LOT provided that no BUILDING
on the LOT is located within 30 feet of the sideline of the STREET nearest which the
FREESTANDING SIGN is ERECTED.
7.8.7.2 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a business no EXTERIOR SIGN shall be
ERECTED on the same LOT.
7.8.7.3 The DISPLAY AREA of a FREESTANDING SIGN for a BUSINESS CENTER shall not
exceed a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 12 square feet, and its height shall not exceed 6
feet. If such a FREESTANDING SIGN under this provision is a MONUMENT SIGN, its
DISPLAY AREA may be a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 20 square feet. The height of
such MONUMENT SIGN shall not exceed 4 feet.
7.8.8 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in the EAV and EAV-2
Districts:
7.8.8.1 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a business, one EXTERIOR SIGN shall be
permitted.
7.8.8.2 One BUSINESS CENTER sign shall be permitted for a BUSINESS CENTER, provided
no other FREESTANDING SIGN identifying an individual business shall be permitted in
the BUSINESS CENTER.
7.8.8.3 A BUSINESS CENTER is eligible for two FREESTANDING SIGNS when the LOT or
LOTS have more than 300 feet of combined FRONTAGE on one or more STREETS,
provided that not more than one FREESTANDING SIGN for the BUSINESS CENTER
shall be allowed along a continuous FRONTAGE on one STREET that measures less
than 300 feet.
7.8.8.4 The DISPLAY AREA of a FREESTANDING SIGN identifying a BUSINESS CENTER
shall not exceed a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 27 square feet, and its height shall not
exceed 9 feet. If a FREESTANDING SIGN under this provision is a MONUMENT
SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 40 square feet. The
height of such MONUMENT SIGN shall not exceed 8 feet.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 121
7.8.9 One FREESTANDING SIGN may be ERECTED on a LOT or parcel located in the
Business, Industrial or Office District identifying an OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL
PARK which may be located on more than one LOT, subject to the following:
7.8.9.1 Only one such SIGN shall be permitted for each OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK.
7.8.9.2 Such FREESTANDING SIGN shall only identify the OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL
PARK and shall be subject to the provisions applicable to FREESTANDING SIGNS
identifying a BUSINESS CENTER as they apply to the particular location in which the
SIGN is ERECTED. However, any DISPLAY AREA specifically provided to
accommodate the listing of individual business shall not be included in calculating the
maximum DISPLAY AREA hereunder and no display of individual establishments within
an OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK shall be permitted on a FREESTANDING
SIGN hereunder.
7.8.9.3 Such FREESTANDING SIGN may be permitted in addition to any permitted EXTERIOR
SIGNS on the same LOT but no other FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted on the
same LOT or parcel.
7.8.9.4 Such SIGN shall be ERECTED on a LOT or parcel which is clearly a part of the
BUSINESS CENTER, OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK which it identifies.
7.9 Off-premises Directional SIGNS – One off-premises directional SIGN shall be
permitted on a LOT assisting motorists in finding businesses, other than home
occupations, not located on the same LOT, provided that such SIGN identifies only the
name(s) of such businesses which are located on a LOT that does not have
FRONTAGE on any of the major numbered through STREETS: Routes 2, 2A, 27, 111,
and 62. Such SIGN shall not display any advertisement nor be illuminated. The
maximum DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed 1 square foot per business identified on the
SIGN, up to 4 square feet of combined DISPLAY AREA for multiple identifications on
such SIGN. The height of such SIGN shall not exceed 5 feet above the ground. There
shall be no more than two locations at which any particular business may be identified
hereunder. No SIGN permitted hereunder shall be ERECTED within a STREET or
within any right of way customarily used by the general public, and no such SIGN shall
be ERECTED within the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8 or R-10 Districts.
7.10 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS
7.10.1 One SPECIAL EVENT SIGN may be ERECTED to announce a church bazaar, fair,
circus, festival, business or shop opening, special sale by a store or business, or similar
event. Such SIGN shall be ERECTED on the same LOT where the event is to occur. It
may identify the event and the date of the event, and it may display the event's sponsor,
organizer and main feature. Such a SIGN shall be removed not later than 1 day after
completion of the event. The display time of SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS, taken together,
shall be limited to 45 days per PRINCIPAL USE for each calendar year.
7.10.2 In addition to SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS, any PRINCIPAL USE permitted in a Business,
Industrial, Office or Village District that does not have a permanent FREESTANDING or
EXTERIOR SIGN may ERECT one TEMPORARY SIGN on the same LOT where the
PRINCIPAL USE is located for the duration between the application filing date for a
permanent SIGN permit or special permit pursuant to section 7.6 and 7.13 and, if
approved, up to 45 days after the issuance of a SIGN permit pursuant to section 7.6.
7.10.3 Only one TEMPORARY or SPECIAL EVENT SIGN shall be ERECTED per PRINCIPAL
USE at any given time.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 122
7.10.4 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS shall not exceed 10 square feet in
DISPLAY AREA.
7.10.5 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS shall neither be ERECTED on a sidewalk,
walkway or driveway, nor within 5 feet from the sideline of a STREET or right of way
customarily used by the general public.
7.10.6 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS shall comply with the provisions of Sections
7.3 and 7.4, except as set forth in this section, and they shall not be illuminated.
7.10.7 Notwithstanding subsections 7.3.4, 7.3.6, and 7.4.1, TEMPORARY and SPECIAL
EVENT SIGNS may be MOVABLE SIGNS, and in Village Districts may be made with
materials not otherwise allowed; and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS may consist of a flag or
balloon, or may be decorated with ribbons, flags, streamers or balloons that remain
reasonably within the confines of the SIGNS.
7.10.8 No TEMPORARY or SPECIAL EVENT SIGN shall be ERECTED without a SIGN permit
issued by the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer pursuant to section 7.6, which
may be a blanket SIGN permit that covers all TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT
SIGNS for a PRINCIPAL USE for up to one calendar year. The SIGN permit shall state
the specific dates and time periods during which the TEMPORARY and SPECIAL
EVENT SIGNS may be ERECTED and the specific location or locations on a LOT.
7.11 SIGNS for Golf Courses and Cross-Country Skiing in Residential Districts – One
FREESTANDING SIGN may be ERECTED for a Golf Course or a Cross-Country Skiing
course that is located in a residential district. The FREESTANDING SIGN shall have a
maximum height of 5 feet and the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed 8 square feet. In
addition, said USES may erect one WALL SIGN on the main building with a maximum
DISPLAY AREA of 20 square feet.
7.12 Non-Conforming SIGNS – Any non-conforming SIGN lawfully ERECTED may
continue, subject to the following:
7.12.1 Non-conforming SIGNS accessory to a USE or USES shall be removed or replaced
concurrently with any expansion of such USE or USES. Such non-conforming SIGNS
shall be replaced with a conforming SIGN or SIGNS prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit for any BUILDING into which the USE or USES are to be expanded.
7.12.2 Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent orderly, regular, and timely maintenance,
repair, and repainting with the same original colors of a non-conforming SIGN, or the relettering,
re-facing, or changing of message of a non-conforming sign.
7.13 SIGNS Requiring a Special Permit from the Planning Board
7.13.1 The Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority under this Section,
may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the following SIGNS and the
following deviations from the requirements of Sections 7.4, 7.7 and 7.8:
7.13.1.1 A greater number of SIGNS than allowed under Sections 7.7 and 7.8, but not more than
one SIGN in addition to the number of SIGNS otherwise permitted per LOT or per
PRINCIPAL USE, as the Planning Board finds appropriate to further the purpose of this
Section as stated in Section 7.1.
7.13.1.2 EXTERIOR SIGNS with dimensions in excess of those permitted under Section 7.7
subject to the following limitations:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 123
a) no SIGN wider than one and one half times the maximum width otherwise permitted,
and
b) no SIGN larger than twice the otherwise permitted maximum DISPLAY AREA, and
c) any such other limitation as the Planning Board may find appropriate to further the
purpose of this Section as stated in Section 7.1.
7.13.1.3 A SIGN in a location or in a position not otherwise permitted, but not a ROOF SIGN, a
BILLBOARD, or a SIGN located within the minimum required distance from the sideline
of a STREET or right of way customarily used by the general public.
7.13.1.4 SIGNS made of materials not otherwise permitted.
7.13.1.5 A SIGN attached to a stone wall, retaining wall, fence or other landscaping feature on a
LOT, provided that such SIGN and feature are, in the opinion of the Planning Board, an
integral component of the landscape design and BUILDING architecture on the LOT.
7.13.1.6 Except in the Village Districts, a NEON or LED SIGN to be ERECTED on a LOT in
place of a SIGN otherwise permitted, provided it features an individualized, custom
made design showing only a drawing, logo, symbol or illustration, but not letters. A
NEON or LED SIGN hereunder shall comply with all applicable dimensional standards.
A NEON SIGN shall be composed of primarily single strand glass tubing with a
maximum 1 inch diameter.
7.13.1.7 One SIGN for a nonconforming, pre-existing business, industrial or office USE other
than a home occupation, ERECTED in a Residential District, conforming to the
applicable requirements for a SIGN in a Village District, not illuminated and not
exceeding six square feet in DISPLAY AREA.
7.13.1.8 A FREESTANDING SIGN with less than the required landscaped area, provided that, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient landscape treatment is provided to
compensate for the reduction in area.
7.13.1.9 A type or method of SIGN illumination not otherwise permitted provided that it meets the
general objectives of Section 7.4.3.
7.13.2 A Special Permit under this section shall only be issued if the Planning Board, in
addition to the required findings of Section 10.3.5, finds that, in its opinion, the resulting
SIGN or the resulting deviation from the otherwise applicable requirements of this
Section 7 meet the following criteria:
7.13.2.1 The SIGN will be consistent with the intent and purpose of Section 7.
7.13.2.2 The SIGN will be consistent with the character and use of the area and with the Zoning
District in which it is ERECTED.
7.13.2.3 The SIGN will have appropriate scale and proportion in its design and in its visual
relationship to BUILDINGS in the area and to its general surroundings. It has been
attractively designed and located, and will be a compatible architectural element of the
BUILDING to which it principally relates and will be in harmony with other features in the
general area.
7.13.2.4 The proposed SIGN will provide continuity with other SIGNS, not including any nonconforming
SIGNS, on the same or adjacent BUILDINGS or LOTS with respect to most
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 124
but not necessarily all of the following criteria: dimension, proportion, mounting height,
materials, colors, and other important features as determined by the Planning Board.
7.13.2.5 The colors, materials and illumination of the proposed SIGN are restrained and
harmonious with the BUILDING and the site to which it principally relates.
7.13.2.6 The material used for the SIGN is appropriate and does not detract from the aesthetic
qualities of its surroundings.
7.13.2.7 The number of graphic elements on the proposed SIGN is held to the minimum needed
to convey the SIGN'S primary message and is in good proportion to the area of the
SIGN face.
7.13.2.8 The proposed SIGN will not unduly compete for attention with any other SIGN or
SIGNS.
7.13.2.9 In the case of a SIGN under Sections 7.13.1.1 through 7.13.1.3, the proposed SIGN is
necessary for adequate identification of a business which for site specific reasons would
not reasonably be possible under the otherwise applicable standards and available
options of this Bylaw.
7.13.3 When granting a special permit hereunder, the Planning Board, in order to mitigate
negative impacts of a SIGN and to help support any of its required findings under
Section 7.13.2, may impose reasonable conditions taking into consideration all aspects
of the SIGN and its impacts on the visual environment in the area, including but not
limited to design, construction, color, illumination, landscaping, and coordination with
BUILDINGS and other SIGNS in the area, it may require the removal of any nonconforming
SIGN or SIGNS on the LOT or in the same BUSINESS CENTER, and it
may impose such other conditions as it deems appropriate to further the purpose of this
Section as stated in Section 7.1.
7.13.4 The Planning Board shall promulgate Rules and Regulations governing the business of
the Planning Board under this Section, including but not limited to the contents of an
application and application fees, and it may adopt and from time to time amend design
guidelines for SIGNS as it finds appropriate.
7.13.5 Where a SIGN is located in a Local Historic District, the Planning Board shall have no
authority to require or grant a Special Permit under this Section 7.13. Instead, the
Historic District Commission shall have the power and discretion to issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness for such SIGN under the Acton Historic District Bylaw, Chapter P of the
Town Bylaws. However, any SIGN approved hereunder shall also comply with the
requirements of this Bylaw, including the requirements of Section 7.13.1.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 125
SECTION 8.
NONCONFORMING LOTS, USES, STRUCTURES AND PARKING; EXEMPTIONS
8.1 Nonconforming Lots
8.1.1 Continuation of Existing LOT – The requirements of Section 6 of “The Zoning Act” Chapter
40A of the General Laws, as amended, shall apply.
8.1.2 Changes to Unimproved LOTS – Any unimproved LOT which complied with the minimum
area, FRONTAGE, LOT width, yard and depth requirements, if any, in effect at the time the
boundaries of the LOT were defined by recorded deed or plan, may be built upon for single
FAMILY, or where permitted two-FAMILY, residential USE, notwithstanding the adoption of
new or increased LOT area, FRONTAGE, LOT width, yard or depth requirements, provided
that:
8.1.2.1 At the time of the adoption of such new or increased requirements such LOT was
held, and has continued to be held, in ownership separate from that of adjoining
land; and
8.1.2.2 The LOT had at least 5,000 square feet of area and 50 feet of FRONTAGE at the
time the boundaries of the LOT were defined; and
8.1.2.3 Any proposed STRUCTURE is situated on an unimproved LOT so as to conform
with the minimum yard requirements, if any, in effect at the time the boundaries of
such LOT were defined. In the case where no minimum yard requirements were in
effect at the time the boundaries of such LOT were defined, the minimum front
yard shall be 20 feet and the minimum side and rear yards shall be 10 feet.
8.1.3 Reconstruction of Single- and Two-FAMILY residential STRUCTURES on Nonconforming
Lots – A lawful Single-FAMILY Dwelling on a nonconforming LOT may be reconstructed for
Single-FAMILY residential USE on the same lot; and a lawful Two-FAMILY Dwelling on a
nonconforming LOT may be reconstructed for Two-FAMILY residential USE on the same
lot; in both cases subject to the following conditions and limitations:
8.1.3.1 The reconstructed STRUCTURE shall not exceed the FLOOR AREA RATIO on
the LOT of the STRUCTURE that existed on the LOT before it was razed or
damaged.
8.1.3.2 The reconstructed STRUCTURE may be placed anywhere on the LOT provided it
meets all minimum yard and maximum height requirements of this Bylaw.
8.1.3.3 The FLOOR AREA RATIO shall be determined by using either architectural and
plot plans for the existing STRUCTURE to be razed or, in the absence of such
architectural and plot plans, the FLOOR AREA RATIO shall be determined by
using the information on record at the Town of Acton Assessor’s office.
8.1.3.4 Additions to the reconstructed STRUCTURE may be made after two years
following the date of initial occupancy of the reconstructed STRUCTURE, if
otherwise permissible.
8.1.4 Extensions, alterations or changes of Single- and Two-Family Dwellings on Nonconforming
Lots – One or more extensions, alterations or changes to a single or two-family residential
STRUCTURE on a nonconforming LOT shall be deemed not to increase any nonconformity
and shall not require special permits under Section 8.1.5, provided that such extensions,
alterations or changes comply with all applicable yard requirements and in total do not
increase the size of the STRUCTURE by more than 15 percent of the GROSS FLOOR
AREA in existence on April 1, 2012 or the date that LOT became nonconforming, whichever
is later.
8.1.5 In all other cases, the Board of Appeals may, by special permit, allow such reconstruction
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 126
of, or extension, alteration or change to a Single- or Two-FAMILY residential STRUCTURE
on a nonconforming LOT, including the reconstruction anywhere on the lot of a larger
structure than otherwise allowed under Section 8.1.3, where it determines either that the
proposed modification does not increase the nonconformity or, if the proposed modification
does increase the nonconformity, it will not be substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood than the existing STRUCTURE on the nonconforming LOT.
8.2 Nonconforming USES
8.2.1 Continuation of Existing USE - The requirements of Section 6 of "The Zoning Act",
Chapter 40A of the General Laws, as amended, shall apply.
8.2.2 Changing a Nonconforming USE - A nonconforming USE may not be changed to
another nonconforming USE except in accordance with the following requirements. The
Board of Appeals may authorize by special permit a change from a nonconforming USE
to another nonconforming USE provided the Board of Appeals finds that the proposed
USE is in harmony with the character of the neighborhood and the applicable
requirements of the zoning district, and provided further that in the Residential, Village
and Office Districts the Board of Appeals may authorize a change only to one of the
following other nonconforming USES (all USES as listed in the Table of Principal
USES):
a) In Residential Districts: Two-FAMILY Dwelling; Multifamily Dwelling; Commercial
Education or Instruction; Retail Store; Office; Veterinary Care; Services; Repair
Shop, Technical Shop, Studio; except that neither nonconforming Two-FAMILY
Dwellings nor Multifamily Dwellings shall be changed to another nonconforming
USE.
b) In Village Districts: Multifamily Dwelling, Veterinary Care, Commercial
Entertainment, Manufacturing.
c) In Office Districts: Hotel, Motel, Inn, Conference Center.
8.2.3 Extending a Nonconforming USE -
8.2.3.1 In a Residential District a nonconforming USE may not be extended in area, except
that,
a) nonconforming Two-FAMILY Dwellings may be extended by right, and
b) nonconforming Multifamily Dwellings may be extended by special permit from the
Board of Appeals.
The extension of a nonconforming Two-FAMILY Dwelling or Multifamily Dwelling USE
shall be subject to the applicable dimensional controls of this Bylaw and shall not result
in an increase in the number of DWELLING UNITS, unless the dwelling qualifies for a
Dwelling Conversion in accordance with Section 3.3.4 of this Bylaw.
8.2.3.2 In all other Districts, a nonconforming USE may be extended in area by special permit
from the Board of Appeals.
8.2.4 Abandonment - A nonconforming USE which is abandoned shall not be resumed. A
nonconforming USE shall be considered abandoned:
8.2.4.1 When a nonconforming USE has been replaced by a conforming USE; or
8.2.4.2 When a nonconforming USE is discontinued for a period of two years or more; or
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 127
8.2.4.3 When a nonconforming USE has been changed to another nonconforming USE by
special permit from the Board of Appeals.
8.3 Nonconforming STRUCTURES
8.3.1 Continuation of Existing STRUCTURE - The requirements of Section 6 of "The Zoning
Act", Chapter 40A of the General Laws shall apply.
8.3.2 Changing a Nonconforming STRUCTURE - A nonconforming STRUCTURE may be
altered, reconstructed, extended or structurally changed provided that such alteration,
reconstruction, extension or structural change conforms to all the dimensional
requirements of this Bylaw. A vertical extension of a nonconforming BUILDING, which
does not expand the BUILDING horizontally so as to violate any applicable yard
requirement, shall be deemed not to increase the nonconforming nature of the
BUILDING and shall not require a special permit under Section 8.3.3.
8.3.3 A BUILDING, which is nonconforming with regard to any yard requirement may be
extended horizontally within the dimension of its existing nonconformity by special
permit from the Board of Appeals, provided that the extension otherwise conforms to all
the dimensional requirements of this Bylaw, and provided further that the Board of
Appeals finds that such an extension is not substantially more detrimental to the
neighborhood than the existing nonconforming condition of the BUILDING.
8.3.4 Restoration - If a nonconforming STRUCTURE, or a STRUCTURE on a nonconforming
LOT that cannot be built on under the requirements of Section 8.1, is damaged by fire,
flood or similar disaster to an extent greater than 50% of its fair market value before it
was damaged, it shall not be rebuilt or reconstructed without a special permit from the
Board of Appeals. No such special permit shall be granted unless the application for
such special permit is filed within two years from the date on which the damage
occurred and the Board of Appeals finds that 1) such rebuilding or reconstruction will
not be detrimental to the neighborhood, and 2) to the extent possible the STRUCTURE
will be rebuilt or reconstructed in conformity with the dimensional requirements of this
Bylaw.
8.3.5 Exemptions for certain non-complying BUILDINGS - If a BUILDING, or a part of a
BUILDING, does not comply with the dimensional controls of the Bylaw or those that
were in effect when it was constructed, it shall be considered to comply with this Bylaw
if the following conditions are met:
1) The non-compliance has existed for at least six consecutive years during which time
no enforcement action under the provision of Section 11.1 of this Bylaw has been
taken, and
2) the non-compliance was not created or increased by changes in LOT lines after the
construction of the BUILDING, and
3) there is evidence that the BUILDING was constructed except for said dimensional
non-compliance substantially in accordance with a building permit issued by the
Town.
If a BUILDING, or a part of a BUILDING, does not comply with the dimensional controls
of this Bylaw or those that were in effect when it was constructed, and conditions 1) and
2) above are met but there is no evidence a building permit was issued or the
construction in addition to said dimensional non-compliance is not in accordance with a
building permit duly issued, the Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for the
continued use of the BUILDING under the provisions of Section 10.3 of this Bylaw
provided the Board of Appeals finds that the BUILDING is not a substantial detriment to
the neighborhood.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 128
8.4 Nonconforming Parking – This Bylaw shall not be deemed to prohibit the continued
USE of any land or STRUCTURE that is nonconforming with respect to parking
requirements.
8.5 Building and Special Permit Exemption – An amendment to the Zoning Bylaw shall
not apply to a building permit, special permit or site plan special permit, the application
for which has been duly filed as required by this Zoning Bylaw or the Massachusetts
General Laws before the first publication of notice of the public hearing on such
amendment required by Massachusetts General Laws Ch. 40A, s. 5; provided that the
applicant proceeds diligently to obtain such permit and provided further that the USE or
construction is commenced within six (6) months after the issuance of the permit and
the expiration of all applicable appeal periods. In cases involving construction, such
construction shall be continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously
as is reasonable, provided however that if such construction has ceased for a period of
two or more years it shall be considered abandoned pursuant to Section 8.2.4.
8.6 Special Provisions to Enhance Access for Handicapped Persons – The minimum
number of required parking spaces, the minimum required OPEN SPACE, and the
minimum front, side and rear yard requirements of this bylaw may be reduced, but only
to the extent necessary to install handicapped access parking spaces, ramps or other
facilities designed in accordance with the requirements of the Massachusetts
Architectural Access Board and intended to provide handicapped access to any existing
STRUCTURE or USE on any LOT. No site plan special permit or other special permit
shall be required for such facilities, but they shall be approved by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer prior to installation.
8.7 Special Permit to Reconstruct Nonconforming Two-Family or Multifamily Dwelling
– The Planning Board may authorize by Special Permit the reconstruction or rebuilding
of a Two-Family or Multifamily Dwelling, as defined in Sections 3.3.2. and 3.3.4, which
are nonconforming as to USE, LOT size or other applicable dimensional requirements,
when such BUILDING was destroyed by fire or natural disaster, or by voluntary
demolition, and it may authorize the continuation or resumption of the USE as a Two-
Family Dwelling or Multifamily Dwelling after completion of reconstruction. The following
standards shall apply:
8.7.1 To the extent possible, the new BUILDING shall comply with the dimensional
requirements applicable in the zoning district in which the BUILDING is located.
However, the Planning Board may authorize or require smaller or larger dimensions as
it finds appropriate to address public interest considerations, such as but not limited to
the preservation or improvement of neighborhood character, historic architectural
features or the spatial relationship between buildings, and to address public safety and
health concerns.
8.7.2 The Planning Board shall consider an application for a Special Permit under this section
only if it is filed before or within 1 year from the date of the issuance of a demolition
permit by the Building Commissioner or within one year from the date of the fire or
natural disaster which caused the destruction of the BUILDING.
8.7.3 The number of DWELLING UNITS shall not be increased as a result of reconstruction.
8.7.4 The Planning Board may impose conditions and require plan changes for the
reconstruction as it deems appropriate and necessary to further the purpose of this
Bylaw, including but not limited to conditions and changes affecting the architectural
design and layout of the BUILDING, garages, driveways and other improvements.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 129
8.8 Public Acquisition – If the area, FRONTAGE, width or other dimensions of a LOT,
parcel or TRACT OF LAND is altered by a taking or acquisition of part of such land by
the Town of Acton or the Water Supply District of Acton for public purposes, no such
LOT, parcel or TRACT OF LAND nor any existing USE, BUILDING or STRUCTURE
located on, or dependent upon the existing area or other dimensions of such LOT,
parcel or TRACT OF LAND for compliance with the requirements of this Zoning Bylaw,
shall be rendered non-compliant, nonconforming, or more nonconforming solely by
reason of such taking or acquisition.
8.9 Planned Unit Development (PUD) - Notwithstanding the repeal of Section 9A of this
Bylaw, any TRACT OF LAND for which a special permit for a Planned Unit
Development (PUD) has been granted shall continue to be governed by such special
permit and the provisions of Section 9A which were applicable to such special permit as
of the date of issuance of such special permit.
In addition, the following minimum setbacks to the PUD boundary line shall apply to
Single FAMILY Dwellings with or without one apartment within a PUD, including
accessory STRUCTURES and facilities thereto:
8.9.1 30 feet where the PUD boundary line coincides with a STREET sideline.
8.9.2 20 feet to any other PUD boundary line.
Note: Section 9A - Planned Unit Development (PUD) was repealed on April 1, 2002. Section 9A
still governs existing PUDs in conjunction with the above Section 8.9. Section 9A as in effect just
before its repeal can be found in the Appendix.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 130
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 131
SECTION 9.
PLANNED CONSERVATION RESIDENTIAL COMMUNITY (PCRC)
9.1 Purpose – The primary purpose of the Planned Conservation Residential Community
(PCRC) is to allow residential development that encourages the preservation of open
space, and thus allows within it the preservation of significant land, water, historic,
archeological and natural resources, in a manner consistent with the goals of the
Master Plan and the Open Space and Recreation Plan, as amended from time to time.
The secondary purpose is to facilitate and encourage the construction and maintenance
of streets, utilities, and public services in a more economical and efficient manner than
in a standard subdivision.
9.2 Special Permit – The Planning Board may grant a special permit for the development
and construction of a PCRC on all land and parcels previously incorporated into a
PCRC zoning district, as well as in the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8 and R-10 Districts
in accordance with this Section and MGL Ch. 40A, s. 9.
9.3 Contents of Application for a PCRC Special Permit – The application for a PCRC
Special Permit shall be accompanied by a "PCRC Site Plan", showing the information
required by the Rules and Regulations for PCRCs. The information shall include but
not be limited to: the topography; soil characteristics as shown on the Soil Conservation
Service Maps; wetlands as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40; vernal pools,
riverfront areas, buffer zones and setbacks as defined in Chapter F of the Bylaws of the
Town of Acton - Wetland Protection; Flood Plain boundary lines; existing types of
vegetation; any other unique natural, historical, archeological, and aesthetic resources;
the proposed layout of the LOTS; proposed locations of DWELLING UNITS and
accessory BUILDINGS; the proposed diversity and cost range for the DWELLING
UNITS; dimensions, STREETS, garages, driveways, wells, utilities, wastewater disposal
systems; the proposed finished grades of the land; the proposed vegetation and
landscaping including where existing vegetation is retained; proposed features
designed for energy and water conservation and pollution control; the proposed layout
and land use plan of the Common Land in the PCRC; the proposed form of ownership
of the Common Land and any improvements proposed thereon.
9.4 Procedural Requirements – If the PCRC requires approval under the Subdivision
Control Law, M.G.L., Chapter 41, the "PCRC Site Plan" shall contain a plan in the form
and with the contents required of a Definitive Subdivision Plan by the Acton Subdivision
Rules and Regulations. The applications for a PCRC Special Permit and for approval of
a Definitive Subdivision Plan shall be filed concurrently. To the extent permitted by law,
the Planning Board shall consider both applications at the same time.
9.5 Planning Board Action – In evaluating the proposed PCRC, the Planning Board shall
consider the general purpose and objectives of this Bylaw; the existing and probable
future development of surrounding areas; the appropriateness of the proposed layout of
STREETS, ways, LOTS, and STRUCTURES; the proposed layout and USE of the
Common Land; the topography; soil; and other characteristics and resources of the
TRACT OF LAND in question. The Planning Board may grant a special permit for a
PCRC if it finds that the PCRC:
a) complies in all respects with the applicable requirements of this Bylaw;
b) enhances the purpose and intent of PCRC Development;
c) enhances the goals of the Open Space and Recreation Plan;
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 132
d) is in harmony with the character of the surrounding area and neighborhood; and
e) complies with the requirements of Section 10.3.5.
9.5.1 The Planning Board shall consider the recommendations, if any, of the Board of Health,
the Conservation Commission, and other town boards and staff in making said findings.
9.5.2 The Planning Board may require changes to the "PCRC Site Plan" and impose
additional conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems necessary to secure the
objectives of this Bylaw, including without limitation, any conditions, safeguards or
limitations listed in Section 10.3.6.
9.6 Standards for PCRCs
9.6.1 Permitted USES – Permitted USES in a PCRC shall be any use permitted in the
underlying Zoning District as well as ACCESSORY USES typically associated with
residential USES. Permitted USES in a PCRC shall also include community facilities
owned and operated by the owner of the PCRC or the residents within the PCRC, such
as building and grounds maintenance facilities, waste water disposal facilities,
recreational facilities, or club houses. Community facilities shall be for the use by the
residents within the PCRC and their guests. They may also be used for commercial
instruction, education and training in skills of all kinds for the residents within the PCRC
and the public at large.
9.6.2 Area and Dimensional Regulations:
9.6.2.1 PCRC Site Area – The TRACT OF LAND for a PCRC must contain a minimum area of
8 acres within the Town of Acton.
a) The Planning Board may permit LOTS on directly opposite sides of a STREET to
qualify as a single TRACT OF LAND. To permit such division of a TRACT OF
LAND by a STREET, the Planning Board must find that this would enhance the
purposes of PCRC and not result in any more DWELLING UNITS than would be
possible in accordance with the provisions of this Bylaw if the LOTS on either side of
the STREET were developed separately. If the Board approves a TRACT OF LAND
divided by a STREET, it may permit the total number of permitted DWELLING
UNITS to be constructed on either side of the STREET. AFFORDABLE DWELLING
UNITS generated on the TRACT OF LAND under the provisions of Section 4.4.3
may be sited along with the other DWELLING UNITS whether or not the location of
the AFFORDABLE DWELLINGS UNITS is within the AFFORDABLE Housing
Overlay District. The DWELLING UNITS shall be constructed in accordance with
the applicable PCRC requirements and the required Common Land may consist of
land located on either side of the STREET.
b) Where a TRACT OF LAND is divided by a zoning district boundary between any of
the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-10 or R-10/8 districts the total number of DWELLING UNITS
permitted shall not exceed the number permitted in each district considered
separately. AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS generated on the TRACT OF LAND
under the provisions of Section 4.4.3 may be sited along with the other DWELLING
UNITS whether or not the location of the AFFORDABLE DWELLINGS UNITS is
within the AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District. The DWELLING UNITS may be
located in either district and shall be constructed in accordance with PCRC
requirements.
9.6.2.2 Dimensional Requirements for BUILDINGS – There shall be no minimum LOT area,
FRONTAGE, LOT width, or yard requirements within a PCRC, except as follows:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 133
a) No BUILDINGS or STRUCTURES shall be located within 45 feet of a pre-existing
STREET, or within 15 feet of a new STREET, way, or common drive within the
PCRC.
b) No BUILDINGS or STRUCTURES shall be located within 30 feet of the boundary
line of the PCRC or the Common Land.
c) The minimum distance between residential BUILDINGS shall be 20 feet.
d) Where a residential BUILDING measures more than 3,000 square feet of GROSS
FLOOR AREA per DWELLING UNIT, including any attached garages, the minimum
setback from a street, way, or common drive within the PCRC shall be 30 feet, and
the minimum separation to the next residential BUILDING shall be 40 feet.
e) The Planning Board may impose other conditions on the locations of BUILDINGS
and STRUCTURES, as it deems appropriate to enhance the purpose and intent of
PCRC.
9.6.2.3 Number of DWELLING UNITS – The maximum number of DWELLING UNITS permitted
in a PCRC shall be 80% of the following, rounded up to the next integer:
a) In the R-2 District: 1 DWELLING UNIT per 20,000 square feet of area of the TRACT
OF LAND on which the PCRC is located, including the Common Land.
b) In the R-4 and R-8/4 Districts: 1 DWELLING UNIT per 40,000 square feet of area of
the TRACT OF LAND on which the PCRC is located, including the Common Land.
c) In the R-8 and R-10/8 Districts: 1 DWELLING UNIT per 80,000 square feet of area
of the TRACT OF LAND on which the PCRC is located, including the Common
Land.
d) In the R-10 District: 1 DWELLING UNIT per 100,000 square feet of area of the
TRACT OF LAND on which the PCRC is located, including the Common Land.
e) In the AFFORDABLE Housing Overlay District - Sub-Districts A and B: The number
of DWELLING UNITS may be increased pursuant to the formulas provided in
Section 4.4.3.1 and subject to the requirements of Sections 4.4.5, 4.4.6, 4.4.7, 4.4.8
and 4.4.9. The inclusion of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS in compliance with
the above referenced Sections of this Bylaw shall be authorized under a Special
Permit for a PCRC.
9.6.2.4 BUILDING Requirements – There shall be no more than four DWELLING UNITS in any
residential BUILDING. Except in the case of detached single family dwellings, there
shall be not more than two garage spaces per DWELLING UNIT in any residential
BUILDING. The overall length of any residential BUILDING shall not exceed 200 feet.
Each DWELLING UNIT shall have two separate exterior entrances at ground level.
9.6.2.5 Parking Requirements – A minimum of 2 parking spaces per DWELLING UNIT
including garages shall be provided.
9.6.2.6 Stormwater Runoff - An adequate drainage design shall be provided meeting the design
standards and submission requirements of Acton General Bylaw Chapter X and the
Rules and Regulations adopted thereunder.
9.6.3 Common Land Standards:
9.6.3.1 Dimensional Requirements for the Common Land – In a PCRC, at least sixty percent
(60%) of the TRACT OF LAND within Acton shall be set aside as Common Land within
Acton for the use of the PCRC residents or the general public. The following additional
requirements shall apply:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 134
a) The minimum required area of the Common Land shall not contain a greater
percentage of wetlands, as defined in M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40, than the
percentage of wetlands found in the overall TRACT OF LAND on which the PCRC is
located.
b) The minimum Common Land shall be laid out as one or more large, contiguous
parcels that are distinct from parcels dedicated for other purposes and USES. Each
Common Land parcel shall contain at least one access corridor to a STREET or way
that shall be not less than 40 feet wide.
c) If the TRACT OF LAND of the PCRC abuts adjacent Common Land or undeveloped
LOTS, the Common Land shall be laid out to abut the adjacent Common Land or
undeveloped LOTS.
9.6.3.2 USE of the Common Land – The Common Land shall be dedicated and used for
conservation, historic preservation and education, outdoor education, recreation, park
purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or for a combination of those USES. No
other USES shall be allowed in the Common Land, except as provided for herein:
a) The proposed USE of the Common Land shall be specified on a Land Use Plan and
appropriate dedications and restrictions shall be part of the deed to the Common
Land. The Planning Board shall have the authority to approve or disapprove
particular USES proposed for the Common Land in accordance with the purposes of
this Bylaw.
b) The Common Land shall remain unbuilt upon, except that the Planning Board may
approve as part of the special permit the location and area of pavement or
STRUCTURES accessory to the approved USE or USES of the Common Land.
c) A portion of the Common Land may also be used for the construction of leaching
areas, if associated with septic disposal systems serving the PCRC, and if such
USE, in the opinion of the Planning Board, enhances the specific purpose of PCRC
Development and promotes better overall site planning. Septic disposal easements
shall be no larger than reasonably necessary. If any portion of the Common Land is
used for the purpose of such leaching areas, the Planning Board shall require
adequate assurances and covenants that such facilities shall be maintained by the
LOT owners within the PCRC.
d) A portion of the Common Land may also be used for ways serving as pedestrian
walks, bicycle paths, and emergency access or egress to the PCRC or adjacent
land, if such a USE, in the opinion of the Planning Board, enhances the general
purpose of this Bylaw and enhances better site and community planning, and if the
Planning Board finds that adequate assurances and covenants exist, to ensure
proper maintenance of such facilities by the owner of the Common Land.
e) Portions of the Common Land that are in excess of the minimum Common Land
total area and upland area as calculated in accordance with Section 9.6.3.1,
including its subsection a), may be used for storm water detention and retention
facilities serving the LOTS, STREETS and ways in the PCRC, including
infrastructure such as pipes, swales, catch basins, and manholes, and parcels and
easements associated with such facilities.
f) No portion of the Common Land as shown on the approved PCRC Site Plan,
including any portion that exceeds minimum zoning requirements, shall be used to
meet area, setback, or any other zoning requirements for any development or
improvement that is not shown on the approved PCRC Site Plan. No portion of the
Common Land shall be used to meet minimum Common Land requirements in any
adjacent or expanded PCRC.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 135
9.6.3.3 Ownership of the Common Land – The Common Land shall be conveyed in whole or in
part to the Town of Acton and accepted by it, or to a non-profit organization, the
principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space and/or any of the purposes
and USES to which the Common Land may be dedicated. The Common Land may
also be conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of
DWELLING UNITS within the PCRC. The Planning Board shall approve the form of
ownership of the Common Land. If the Common Land or any portion thereof is not
conveyed to the Town of Acton, a perpetual restriction, approved by the Planning Board
and enforceable by the Town of Acton, shall be imposed on the USE of such land,
providing in substance that the land be kept in its open or natural state and that the land
shall not be built upon or developed or used except in accordance with the provisions of
a PCRC as set forth herein and, if applicable, as further specified in the decision of the
Planning Board governing the individual PCRC. The proposed ownership of all
Common Land shall be shown on the Land Use Plan for the PCRC. At the time of its
conveyance, the Common Land shall be free of all encumbrances, mortgages, tax liens
or other claims, except as to easements, restrictions and encumbrances required or
permitted by this Bylaw.
9.7 STREETS, Utilities and Lighting – Whether or not the Planned Conservation
Residential Community is a subdivision, all STREETS and ways whether public or
private, wastewater disposal and drainage facilities and utilities shall be designed and
constructed in compliance with the Town of Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations,
as amended. Special exception(s) to the Subdivision Rules and Regulations may be
authorized by the Planning Board in granting a special permit hereunder provided the
Board determines such exception(s) is in the public interest and is not inconsistent with
the purposes of Section 9.1. The Planning Board may impose appropriate standards
for all outdoor lighting within a PCRC.
9.8 Revisions and Amendments of "PCRC Site Plans" – Any change in the layout of
STREETS and ways, in the configuration of the Common Land, in the ownership or
USE of the Common Land, or any other change which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, would significantly alter the character of the PCRC, shall require
the written approval of the Planning Board. The Planning Board may, upon its own
determination, require a new special permit and hold a public hearing pursuant to
Section 10.3 of this Bylaw, if it finds that the proposed changes are substantial in nature
and of public concern.
9.9 Previously Approved PCRC Developments – Nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the orderly completion of any previously approved PCRC development. Any
previously approved PCRC development shall be subject to the Zoning Bylaw in effect
at the time when it was approved. However, the Planning Board may authorize
BUILDING setbacks, BUILDING dimensions, and arrangement of garages in
accordance with Sections 9.6.2.2 and 9.6.2.4 of this Bylaw.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 136
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 137
SECTION 9A.
Intentionally Deleted
Note: Section 9A - Planned Unit Development (PUD) was repealed on April 1, 2002. Section 9A
still governs existing PUDs in conjunction with the Section 8.9 of this Bylaw. Section 9A as in effect
just before its repeal can be found in the Appendix.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 138
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 139
SECTION 9B.
SENIOR RESIDENCE
9B.1 Purpose – The purpose of SENIOR Residence is to enhance the public welfare by:
a) encouraging the development of choices of independent living accommodations for
SENIORS in general;
b) encouraging the development of housing that is suitable for SENIORS with
disabilities;
c) encouraging the development of affordable housing for SENIORS with low and
moderate income;
While:
d) protecting Acton’s New England character by development of land in clusters and
villages, which is in greater harmony with Acton’s historic development patterns and
less demanding on its natural resources;
e) preserving land for conservation, open space, recreation, agriculture and forestry;
f) preserving significant land and water resources, natural areas, scenic vistas, and
historic or archeological sites;
g) reducing the typical costs of providing municipal services to residential
developments.
9B.2 Special Permit – The Planning Board may grant special permits for the development
and construction of a SENIOR Residence development in the R-2, R-4, R-8, R-8/4, and
R-10/8 Districts in accordance with this Section and MGL, Ch. 40A, s. 9.
9B.2.1 Application for a Special Permit – Any person who desires a SENIOR Residence
Special Permit shall submit a written application with a site plan that meets the
requirements set forth herein and in the Rules and Regulations for SENIOR Residence
special permits.
9B.2.2 Subdivision – If a SENIOR Residence development requires approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, MGL, Ch. 41, the application shall contain a definitive
subdivision plan as required by the Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The
applications for a SENIOR Residence special permit and a definitive subdivision
approval plan shall be filed concurrently. To the extent permitted by law, the Planning
Board shall consider both applications at the same time.
9B.2.3 Underlying Zoning District – Where the Planning Board grants a special permit for a
Senior Residence, the USE, dimensional, and parking requirements applicable to the
underlying zoning district shall not apply.
9B.3 Planning Board Action – In evaluating a proposed SENIOR Residence development,
the Planning Board shall consider the general objectives of this Bylaw and of this
section 9B in particular; the existing and probable future development of surrounding
areas; and the appropriateness of the proposed site plan in relation to the topography,
soils and other characteristics and resources of the TRACT OF LAND in question. The
Planning Board may grant a special permit for a SENIOR Residence development if it
finds that it:
a) protects and enhances Acton's New England character, its environmental and
historic resources, and scenic vistas;
b) provides Common Land that benefits the residents of the Town and the SENIOR
Residence development;
c) provides quality housing for SENIORS with a range of incomes and physical
abilities;
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 140
d) provides for the safety of vehicular movement, and for the safety and convenience
of pedestrians in a manner that is compatible with Acton's New England character
and the needs of SENIORS;
e) is consistent with the Acton Master Plan as amended;
f) is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Bylaw;
g) will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood in which it is to take place;
h) is appropriate for the site in question;
i) complies with the applicable requirements of the Bylaw; and
j) meets the purpose of this Section 9B.
The Planning Board may require changes to the SENIOR Residence site plan and
impose additional conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems necessary to
secure the objectives of this Bylaw.
9B.4 Allowed USES – Only the following USES shall be allowed in a SENIOR Residence
development:
9B.4.1 Single FAMILY dwellings.
9B.4.2 Two-FAMILY dwellings.
9B.4.3 Multifamily dwellings.
9B.4.4 ACCESSORY USES typically associated with residential USES.
9B.4.5 Support services to meet SENIORS' needs, such as skilled nursing service, medical
and other health service, food service, recreation and leisure facilities, or a community
center; including the use of recreation, leisure, and community center facilities for
commercial instruction, education and training in skills of all kinds for SENIORS and the
public at large.
9B.4.6 Convenience services intended primarily for its residents, such as Retail Stores, Banks,
Restaurants, and Services provided that not more than 10% of the total NET FLOOR
AREA of the development is dedicated to such uses.
9B.4.7 Allowed USES on the Common Land as set forth herein.
9B.5 Dimensional Regulations – A SENIOR Residence development shall comply with the
following dimensional regulations for the area of the TRACT OF LAND, density,
BUILDINGS, and STRUCTURES:
9B.5.1 Minimum TRACT OF LAND area: 8 acres within the Town of Acton. For the purpose of
this section, the Planning Board may consider LOTS on directly opposite sides of a
STREET as a single TRACT OF LAND.
9B.5.2 Maximum density: 4 DWELLING UNITS per acre in the R-2 District, and 3 DWELLING
UNITS per acre in the R-4, R-8, R-8/4, and R-10/8 Districts, based on the total
development site including the Common Land.
9B.5.3 Minimum setbacks for BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES: 45 feet from any existing
STREET; 15 feet from a STREET within the site; 30 feet from any TRACT OF LAND
boundary; and 10 feet from the Common Land boundary, except that the Planning
Board may require larger setbacks.
9B.5.4 Minimum separation of BUILDINGS: 20 feet for exterior walls with doors, otherwise 10
feet.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 141
9B.5.5 Maximum height of BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES: 36 feet.
9B.5.6 Maximum horizontal dimension of a BUILDING: 200 feet.
9B.5.7 The Planning Board may impose other dimensional requirements as it deems
appropriate to enhance the purpose and intent of this Bylaw.
9B.6 Parking Requirements – 2 vehicular parking spaces per principal DWELLING UNIT,
plus sufficient parking spaces for visitors, accessory facilities, and services as
determined by the Planning Board.
9B.7 Stormwater Runoff - An adequate drainage design shall be provided meeting the
design standards and submission requirements of Acton General Bylaw Chapter X and
the Rules and Regulations adopted thereunder.
9B.8 Environmental Protection – The Planning Board, in granting a Special Permit for a
SENIOR Residence, may impose reasonable conditions to protect the environment, and
the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood, of residents in the proposed
development, and of the general public. Such conditions may include, but shall not
necessarily be limited to, requirements for the advanced treatment of wastewater
effluent, the location of wastewater effluent disposal, and necessary limitations on the
total number of DWELLING UNITS to prevent negative impacts on the groundwater and
other existing or potential public water resources.
9B.9 Common Land Standards
9B.9.1 Dimensional Requirements for the Common Land – In a SENIOR Residence
development, except for the conversion to a Senior Residence development of a project
approved under MGL Chapter 40B before January 1, 2006, at least fifty percent (50%)
of the TRACT OF LAND in Acton shall be set aside as Common Land in Acton for the
use of the SENIOR residents or the general public. The following additional
requirements shall apply:
9B.9.1.1 The minimum required area of the Common Land shall not contain a greater
percentage of wetlands, as defined in MGL Chapter 131, Section 40, than the
percentage of wetlands found in the overall TRACT OF LAND on which the SENIOR
Residence development is located.
9B.9.1.2 Eighty percent (80%) of the minimum required Common Land shall be laid out as one or
more large, contiguous parcels that are distinct from parcels dedicated for other
purposes or USES. Each such Common Land parcel shall contain at least one access
corridor to a STREET or way that shall be not less than 40 feet wide. The other twenty
percent (20%) of the Common Land may be scattered throughout the development site
for buffer, screening, or park purposes.
9B.9.1.3 If the TRACT OF LAND of the SENIOR Residence development abuts adjacent
Common Land or undeveloped LOTS, the Common Land shall be laid out to abut the
adjacent Common Land or undeveloped LOTS.
9B.9.2 USE of the Common Land – The Common Land shall be dedicated and used for
conservation, historic preservation and education, outdoor education, recreation, park
purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry, or for a combination of those USES. No
other USES shall be allowed in the Common Land, except as provided for herein:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 142
9B.9.2.1 The proposed USE of the Common Land shall be specified on a Land Use Plan and
appropriate dedications and restrictions shall be part of the deed to the Common Land.
The Planning Board shall have the authority to approve or disapprove particular USES
proposed for the Common Land in order to enhance the specific purposes of this
Section 9B.
9B.9.2.2 The Common Land shall remain unbuilt upon, provided that an overall maximum of five
(5) percent of such land may be subject to pavement and STRUCTURES accessory to
the dedicated USE or USES of the Common Land.
9B.9.2.3 In addition, a portion of the Common Land may also be used for the construction of
leaching areas, if associated with septic disposal systems serving the SENIOR
Residence development, and if such use, in the opinion of the Planning Board,
enhances the specific purpose of this Section 9B and promotes better overall site
planning. Septic disposal easements shall be no larger than reasonably necessary. If
any portion of the Common Land is used for the purpose of such leaching areas, the
Planning Board shall require adequate assurances and covenants that such facilities
shall be maintained by the owners of the DWELLING UNITS in the SENIOR Residence
development.
9B.9.2.4 In addition, a portion of the Common Land may also be used for ways serving as
pedestrian walks, bicycle paths, and emergency access or egress to the SENIOR
Residence development or adjacent land, if such a use, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, enhances the general purpose of this Bylaw and enhances better site and
community planning, and if the Planning Board finds that adequate assurances and
covenants exist, to ensure proper maintenance of such facilities by the owner of the
Common Land.
9B.9.2.5 Portions of the Common Land that are in excess of the minimum Common Land total
area and upland area as calculated in accordance with Section 9B.9.1, including its
subsection 9B.9.1.1, may be used for storm water detention and retention facilities
serving the STREETS and ways in the SENIOR Residence development, including
infrastructure such as pipes, swales, catch basins, and manholes, and parcels and
easements associated with such facilities.
9B.9.3 Ownership of the Common Land - The Common Land shall be conveyed in whole or in
part to the Town of Acton and accepted by it, or to a non-profit organization, the
principal purpose of which is the conservation of open space and/or any of the purposes
and USES to which the Common Land may be dedicated. The Common Land may also
be conveyed to a corporation or trust owned or to be owned by the owners of
DWELLING UNITS within the SENIOR Residence development. The Planning Board
shall approve the form of ownership of the Common Land. If the Common Land or any
portion thereof is not conveyed to the Town of Acton, a perpetual restriction, approved
by the Planning Board and enforceable by the Town of Acton, shall be imposed on the
use of such land, providing in substance that the land be kept in its open or natural state
and that the land shall not be built upon or developed or used except in accordance with
the provisions for a SENIOR Residence development as set forth herein and, if
applicable, as further specified in the decision of the Planning Board governing the
individual SENIOR Residence development. At the time of its conveyance, the Common
Land shall be free of all encumbrances, mortgages, tax liens or other claims, except as
to easements, restrictions and encumbrances required or permitted by this Bylaw.
9B.10 Accessibility – All DWELLING UNITS in a SENIOR Residence development shall be
designed and constructed to be adaptable with only minor structural changes to meet
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 143
the requirements for Group 2B residences as set forth in the Massachusetts Building
Code, 521CMR (Architectural Access Board), as amended.
9B.11 Age Restriction – All DWELLING UNITS in a SENIOR Residence development shall
be subject to an age restriction described in a deed, deed rider, restrictive covenant, or
other document that shall be recorded at the Registry of Deeds or the Land Court. The
age restriction shall limit the DWELLING UNITS to occupancy by SENIORS, age 55 or
older, or their spouses of any age; provide for reasonable, time-limited guest visitation
rights; and authorize special exceptions that allow persons of all ages to live in a
DWELLING UNIT together with a SENIOR resident as the Planning Board shall further
define and specify in its special permit. The age restriction shall run with the land in
perpetuity and shall be enforceable by any or all of the owners of DWELLING UNITS in
the SENIOR Residence development or by the Town of Acton.
9B.12 Affordability – Some of the DWELLING UNITS in a SENIOR Residence development
shall be sold, rented, or leased at prices and rates that are affordable to LOW and
MODERATE INCOME SENIORS, as more specifically set forth in the following:
9B.12.1 AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE defined – The term AFFORDABLE SENIOR
RESIDENCE as used in this section 9B shall refer to DWELLING UNITS, which are
restricted to sale, lease or rental (1) to SENIORS within specific income and asset
limitations, and (2) at specific price limits, both in accordance with provisions set forth in
any State or Federal rental assistance programs, subsidy programs for reducing
mortgage payments, or other programs that provide for affordable housing for low and
moderate income SENIORS, and that are in effect at the time that the project
application is made to the Planning Board.
9B.12.2 Basic Affordability Component – At least 5% of the DWELLING UNITS in a SENIOR
Residence development, rounded to the next integer, shall be AFFORDABLE SENIOR
RESIDENCES. When rounding, fractions of .5 shall be rounded up.
9B.12.3 Density Bonus Option -
9B.12.3.1 The total number of allowable DWELLING UNITS in a SENIOR Residence development
may be increased to 6 per acre in the R-2 District, and to 4 per acre in the R-4, R-8, R-
8/4 and R-10/8 Districts provided that at least 10% of the DWELLING UNITS in the
SENIOR Residence development are AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES.
9B.12.3.2 The total number of allowable DWELLING UNITS in a SENIOR Residence development
may be increased to 7 per acre in the R-2 District, and to 5 per acre in the R-4, R-8, R-
8/4 and R-10/8 Districts provided that at least 15% of the DWELLING UNITS in the
SENIOR Residence development are AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES.
9B.12.3.3 Rounding to whole unit numbers shall be made to the nearest integer. When rounding,
fractions of .5 shall be rounded up.
9B.12.3.4 The Planning Board may further adjust or waive the dimensional requirements of
section 9B.5, the parking requirements of section 9B.6, and the Common Land
requirements of 9B.9 to the extent reasonable and necessary to facilitate the production
of affordable DWELLING UNITS under this density bonus option.
9B.12.4 Affordability Standards – Subject to Planning Board approval, an applicant for a
SENIOR Residence special permit may utilize an available State or Federal assistance
program or choose to meet the AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE requirements by
utilizing income and asset standards, and by establishing rents, leases, sales prices,
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 144
entry fees, condominium fees, and other costs for AFFORDABLE SENIOR
RESIDENCES that are generally consistent with available affordable housing
assistance programs.
9B.12.5 Affordability Restrictions – AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES shall be maintained
as such for the life of the SENIOR Residence development. Each AFFORDABLE
SENIOR RESIDENCE shall be rented or sold to its initial and all subsequent buyers or
tenants subject to deed riders, restrictive covenants, contractual agreements, or other
mechanisms restricting the USE and occupancy, rent levels, sales prices, resale prices,
and other cost factors to assure their long term affordability. These restrictions shall be
in force for such maximum time as may be permitted under applicable state law
governing such restrictions. They shall be enforceable and renewable by the Town of
Acton through standard procedures provided by applicable law.
9B.12.5.1 The Planning Board may require that the restrictions for AFFORDABLE SENIOR
RESIDENCES contain a right of first refusal to the Town of Acton or its designee at the
restricted resale value, and that the owner provides notice of such right of first refusal to
the Town of Acton or its designee prior to selling the AFFORDABLE SENIOR
RESIDENCE with adequate time for the Town or its designee to exercise the right of
first refusal.
9B.12.5.2 Nothing in this Section shall be construed to cause eviction of an owner or tenant of an
AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE due to loss of his/her income eligibility status
during the time of ownership or tenancy. Rather, the restrictions governing an
AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE shall be enforced upon resale, re-rental, or release
of the AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE. The mechanisms and remedies to
enforce the restrictions governing an AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE upon
resale, re-rental, or re-lease shall be set forth in its deed restrictions.
9B.12.5.3 All contractual agreements with the Town of Acton and other documents necessary to
insure the long term affordability of an AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE shall be
executed prior to the issuance of any building permit for it.
9B.12.6 Locations and compatibility of AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES – AFFORDABLE
SENIOR RESIDENCES shall be dispersed throughout the development to insure a true
mix of market-rate and AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES. The exterior of
AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES shall be compatible with, and as much as
possible indistinguishable from, market-rate DWELLING UNITS in the SENIOR
Residence development. All internal design features of AFFORDABLE SENIOR
RESIDENCES shall be substantially the same as those of market-rate DWELLING
UNITS.
9B.12.7 Local Preference – Unless otherwise regulated by an applicable Federal or State
agency under a financing or other subsidy program, at least sixty-five percent (65%) of
the AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES shall be initially offered to Acton SENIORS.
9B.12.7.1 Residency in Acton shall be established through Town Clerk certification based on the
Town Census, voter registration, or other acceptable evidence.
9B.12.7.2 Purchaser/tenant selection – Procedures for the selection of purchasers and/or tenants
shall be subject to approval by the Town of Acton or its designee.
9B.12.7.3 These restrictions shall be in force for 120 days from the date of the first offering of sale
or rental of a particular AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE. The developer of the
SENIOR Residence shall make a diligent effort to locate eligible purchasers or renters
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 145
for the AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCE who meet the local preference criteria and
the applicable income requirements.
9B.12.8 Timing of construction – As a condition of the issuance of a special permit under this
Section, the Planning Board may set a time or development schedule for the
construction of AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES and market-rate DWELLING
UNITS in the SENIOR Residence.
9B.12.9 Affordable Housing Alternatives - The Planning Board in its special permit may
authorize or require the substitution of required AFFORDABLE SENIOR RESIDENCES
with:
9B.12.9.1 Off-site AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS, which shall be in suitable condition for
family or individual persons’ housing as the Planning Board may determine, and eligible
for inclusion in Acton’s subsidized housing inventory under M.G.L. Chapter 40B; or
9B.12.9.2 Monetary contributions in support of affordable housing made to the Acton Community
Housing Program Fund. To be eligible for this alternative, the Planning Board, upon
recommendation from the Acton Community Housing Corporation, must determine that
there will be an extraordinary benefit or advantage to achieving the Town’s affordable
housing objectives as a result of allowing a monetary contribution rather than providing
the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS as otherwise required herein. The amount of the
contribution shall be determined as the total of (a) the amount equal to the product of
the otherwise required number of AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS times the
difference in sale price between the AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS and the
equivalent market-rate units, plus (b) all avoided costs associated with that number of
otherwise required AFFORDABLE DWELLING UNITS including, but not limited to (1)
preparation and recording of affordable housing restrictions or deed riders, (2)
preparation of cost, income and eligibility certifications, (3) marketing and lottery
administration, (4) closing costs, and (5) costs to obtain the inclusion of those units in
Acton’s subsidized housing inventory under M.G.L. Chapter 40B.
9B.13 Streets, Utilities and Lighting – Generally, all STREETS and ways, drainage facilities,
and utilities shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the Acton Subdivision
Rules and Regulations whether or not the SENIOR Residence development is a
subdivision. The Planning Board may approve exceptions to the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations provided the Board determines such exceptions are consistent with the
purposes of this Bylaw. The Planning Board may impose appropriate standards for all
outdoor lighting within a SENIOR Residence development.
9B.14 Performance Guarantee – Before the issuance of any building permits for SENIOR
Residences, the applicant shall secure the required improvements for STREETS, ways,
drainage, erosion control and other items specified by the Planning Board with a
performance guarantee consistent with the Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
9B.15 Revisions and Amendments – Following the approval of a SENIOR Residence
development, any change in the layout of STREETS and ways; in the configuration,
ownership or use of the Common Land; or any other change which, in the opinion of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer, would significantly alter the character of the SENIOR
Residence development, shall require the written approval of the Planning Board. The
Planning Board may, upon its own determination, require a new Special Permit and
hold a public hearing pursuant to the requirements of this Bylaw if it finds that the
proposed changes are substantial in nature and of public concern.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 146
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 147
SECTION 10.
ADMINISTRATION
10.1 Board of Appeals – The Town of Acton Board of Appeals is hereby designated as the
Board of Appeals required by "The Zoning Act" of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Chapter 40A of The General Laws. The Board of Appeals shall act on all matters over
which it has jurisdiction and in the manner prescribed by the following provisions:
10.1.1 To hear and decide appeals from any decisions of the Zoning Enforcement Officer;
10.1.2 To hear and decide applications for special permits except as otherwise provided in this
Bylaw;
10.1.3 To hear and decide petitions for variances from this Bylaw.
10.2 Building Permit – No building permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner
unless the construction, alteration or relocation for which the permit is sought complies
with the provisions of this Bylaw.
10.2.1 Application – Any application for a building permit shall be accompanied by:
1) a description of the existing and the proposed USE of land or STRUCTURES on the
development site;
2) a plan drawn to scale and prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer or a
Registered Land Surveyor, as appropriate to the data, showing the dimensions of
the development site, the location and dimensions of all existing and proposed
STRUCTURES and the dimensions of all setbacks; and
3) such further information as the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require to ensure
enforcement of this Bylaw. The Zoning Enforcement Officer may waive the
requirements of the preceding sentence, if the Zoning Enforcement Officer
determines that the proposed work is of a minor nature.
10.3 Special Permit – Certain USES are designated in this Bylaw as requiring a special
permit. The Board of Appeals or the Board of Selectmen or the Planning Board are
herein designated as Special Permit Granting Authorities. The Board of Appeals or the
Board of Selectmen or the Planning Board where this Bylaw specifically authorizes may
grant special permits for such designated USES in accordance with the standards of
this Bylaw.
10.3.1 Rules and Regulations and Fees – The Special Permit Granting Authority shall adopt,
and from time to time amend, Rules and Regulations, not inconsistent with the
provisions of this Bylaw or Chapter 40A of the General Laws or other applicable
provision of the General Laws, and shall file a copy of said Rules and Regulations with
the Town Clerk. Such Rules shall prescribe as a minimum the size, form, contents,
style and number of copies of plans and specifications, the town boards or agencies
from which the Special Permit Granting Authority shall request written reports and the
procedure for submission and approval of such permits. The Special Permit Granting
Authority may adopt, and from time to time amend, fees sufficient to cover reasonable
costs incurred by the town in the review and administration of special permits.
10.3.2 Application – Any person who desires to obtain a special permit shall file a written
application with the Office of the Town Clerk. On the same day, the Petitioner shall
submit said application, including the date and time of filing, certified by the Town Clerk,
to the Office of the Special Permit Granting Authority. Each application shall be
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 148
completed on a form and accompanied by the information required by the Special
Permit Granting Authority.
10.3.3 Reports from Town Boards or Agencies – The Special Permit Granting Authority shall
transmit forthwith a copy of the application and plan(s) to other boards, departments, or
committees as it may deem necessary or appropriate for their written reports. Any such
board or agency to which petitions are referred for review shall make such
recommendation or submit such reports as they deem appropriate and shall send a
copy thereof to the Special Permit Granting Authority and to the applicant. Failure of
any such board or agency to make a recommendation or submit a report within 35 days
of receipt of the petition shall be deemed a lack of opposition.
10.3.4 Public Hearing and Decision – The Special Permit Granting Authority shall hold a public
hearing no later than 65 days after the filing of an application. The decision of the
Special Permit Granting Authority shall be made within 90 days following the date of the
public hearing. The Special Permit Granting Authority shall have the power to continue
a public hearing if it finds that such continuance is necessary to gather additional
information in order to make an informed decision. Such continuance shall not
automatically extend the required time limits set forth herein. The required time limits
for a public hearing and/or a decision by the Special Permit Granting Authority may be
extended by written agreement between the Petitioner and the Special Permit Granting
Authority. A copy of such agreement shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk.
Failure by the Special Permit Granting Authority to take final action within said 90 days
or extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be a grant of the special permit
subject to the applicable provisions of Chapter 40A, Section 9, of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
10.3.5 Mandatory Findings by Special Permit Granting Authority – Except for a Site Plan
Special Permit, the Special Permit Granting Authority shall not issue a special permit
unless without exception it shall find that the proposed USE:
10.3.5.1 Is consistent with the Master Plan.
10.3.5.2 Is in harmony with the purpose and intent of this Bylaw.
10.3.5.3 Will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood in which it is to take place.
10.3.5.4 Is appropriate for the site in question.
10.3.5.5 Complies with all applicable requirements of this Bylaw.
10.3.6 Special Permit Conditions – The Special Permit Granting Authority may impose such
conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems appropriate to protect the
neighborhood or the Town including, but not limited to:
10.3.6.1 Dimensional requirements greater than the minimum required by this Bylaw;
10.3.6.2 Screening of parking areas or other parts of the premises from adjoining premises or
from the STREET by specified walls, fences, plantings or other devices;
10.3.6.3 Modification of the exterior features or appearances of the STRUCTURE(S);
10.3.6.4 Limitation of size, number of occupants, method and time of operation, and extent of
facilities;
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 149
10.3.6.5 Regulation of number, design and location of ACCESS drives, drive-up windows and
other traffic features;
10.3.6.6 Requirement of off-STREET parking and other special features;
10.3.6.7 Requirement for performance bonds or other security; and
10.3.6.8 Installation and certification of mechanical or other devices to limit present or potential
hazard to human health, safety, welfare or the environment resulting from smoke, odor,
particulate matter, toxic matter, fire or explosive hazard, glare, noise, vibration or any
other objectionable impact generated by any given USE of land.
10.3.6.9 Installation of sidewalks along the entire FRONTAGE of a LOT and of other walkways
and paths as it deems necessary to accommodate the safe movement of pedestrians
and bicyclists. Such a sidewalk or other walkways or paths may be located on the LOT
or within the layout of the STREET and shall be designed to connect with existing
sidewalks on adjacent LOTS, if any. Sidewalks, walkways or paths shall be designed
and constructed according to standards established in the Town of Acton Subdivision
Rules and Regulations, except when otherwise approved by the Special Permit
Granting Authority.
10.3.7 Time Limitation on Special Permit – A special permit shall lapse if a substantial use
thereof has not commenced except for good cause or, in the case of a permit for
construction, if construction has not commenced except for good cause within a period
of time to be specified by the special permit granting authority, not to exceed two years
from the date of grant thereof.
10.3.8 Effective Date of Special Permit – No special permit or any modification, extension or
renewal thereof shall take effect until a copy of the decision has been recorded in the
Middlesex County South District Registry of Deeds. Such decision shall bear the
certification of the Town Clerk that 20 days has elapsed after the decision has been
filed in the office of the Town Clerk and no appeal has been filed, or that if such an
appeal has been filed, it has been dismissed or denied.
10.3.9 Planning Board Associate Members – When the Planning Board is acting as a Special
Permit Granting Authority under this Bylaw, the Chairman of the Planning Board may
designate an associate member, duly appointed by the Board of Selectmen, to sit on
the Board for the purposes of acting on a special permit application in the case of
absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest on the part of any regular member of the
Planning Board or in the event of a vacancy on the Planning Board.
10.4 Site Plan Special Permit – The Board of Selectmen may grant a Site Plan Special
Permit in accordance with the standards of this Bylaw.
10.4.1 Applicability – A Site Plan Special Permit shall be required as follows:
10.4.1.1 In the EAV, SAV, and WAV Districts, a Site Plan Special Permit shall be required in all
instances
1) for the initial development of land specified in Section 3, Table of PRINCIPAL USES
as requiring a Site Plan Special Permit and for all ACCESSORY USES thereto, or
2) where the NET FLOOR AREA of an existing BUILDING is increased 500 square
feet or more for USES designated as requiring a Site Plan Special Permit on the
Table of PRINCIPAL USES, or
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 150
3) where a USE designated as requiring a Site Plan Special Permit on the Table of
PRINCIPAL USES is expanded in ground area by 500 square feet or more of either
impervious material, open storage or any area of the site devoted to the conduct of
the PRINCIPAL or ACCESSORY USE.
10.4.1.2 In all other zoning districts, a Site Plan Special Permit shall be required in all instances
1) for the initial development of land specified in Section 3, Table of PRINCIPAL USES
as requiring a Site Plan Special Permit and for all ACCESSORY USES thereto, or
2) where the NET FLOOR AREA of an existing BUILDING is increased 1,200 square
feet or more for USES designated as requiring a Site Plan Special Permit on the
Table of PRINCIPAL USES, or
3) where a USE designated as requiring a Site Plan Special Permit on the Table of
PRINCIPAL USES is expanded in ground area by 1,200 square feet or more of
either impervious material, open storage or any area of the site devoted to the
conduct of the PRINCIPAL or ACCESSORY USE.
10.4.1.3 Any activity, construction or installation conducted solely for the purpose of
environmental clean-up or remediation, and required or approved by the United States
Environmental Protection Agency or the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection shall not require a Site Plan Special Permit.
10.4.2 Administration – Except as provided in Section 10.3.5, all of the requirements of Section
10.3 shall apply to a Site Plan Special Permit.
10.4.3 Site Design Standards for Site Plan Special Permits – The purpose of the following site
design standards is to ensure that adequate consideration will be given to the natural
resources and characteristics of a site, to its topographic, hydrologic and geologic
conditions, to public convenience and safety and to the suitability of a proposed USE on
a site. Before the granting of any Site Plan Special Permit, the Board of Selectmen
shall assure that each site plan submitted for its review shall comply in full with the
following site design standards:
10.4.3.1 Stormwater Runoff - An adequate drainage design shall be provided meeting the design
standards and submission requirements of Acton General Bylaw Chapter X and the
Rules and Regulations adopted thereunder.
The Board of Selectmen may authorize the use of storm water drainage facilities
located off the development site and designed to serve one or more LOTS provided it
finds that the applicant has retained the rights and powers necessary to assure that the
off-site storm water drainage facilities will be properly maintained in good working order.
10.4.3.2 Outdoor Lighting – Developments and redevelopments requiring a Site Plan Special
Permit or an amendment thereof, shall comply with the standards for outdoor lighting
set forth in section 10.6.
10.4.3.3 Common Driveway – The Board of Selectmen may permit a common driveway to serve
two or more LOTS. Such common driveway shall be defined as a driveway that is
shared by two or more LOTS and located wholly within the required setback areas of
such LOTS. Such a common driveway can be either a shared ACCESS driveway to a
STREET or a driveway to a STREET or a driveway connecting such LOTS with each
other. The common driveway shall not be wider than 24 feet except where, in the
opinion of the Board of Selectmen, a greater width is necessary in order to provide
adequate room for safe vehicular turning movements and circulation. The Board of
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 151
Selectmen shall ensure that the common driveway enhances the objectives of
improving circulation within and between business and industrial establishments and of
reducing the number of curb-cuts onto STREETS. The Board of Selectmen shall also
ensure that common driveways will not derogate from the intent of the Bylaw to provide
adequate OPEN SPACE on each LOT, except that the Board of Selectmen may
authorize that the area of one such common driveway on each LOT be designated as
OPEN SPACE. If a common driveway is authorized under a Site Plan Special Permit to
lead onto an adjacent LOT which is not subject to such Site Plan Special Permit, no
separate Site Plan Special Permit shall be required for the adjacent LOT in order to
permit the construction of the common driveway.
10.4.3.4 Sidewalks – A sidewalk shall be required along the entire FRONTAGE of a LOT. The
Board of Selectmen may also require other walkways and paths as it deems necessary
to accommodate the safe movement of pedestrians and bicyclists.
a) Such a sidewalk or other walkways or paths may be located on the LOT or within
the layout of the STREET and shall be designed to connect with existing sidewalks
on adjacent LOTS, if any.
b) If a sidewalk or other walkway or path is authorized under a Site Plan Special Permit
to lead onto an adjacent LOT, which is not subject to such Site Plan Special Permit,
no separate Site Plan Special Permit shall be required for the adjacent LOT in order
to permit the construction of such sidewalk or walkway or path.
c) Sidewalks, walkways or paths shall be designed and constructed according to
standards established in the Town of Acton Subdivision Rules and Regulations,
except when otherwise approved by the Board of Selectmen.
d) The Board of Selectmen may waive the sidewalk requirement provided it finds that
such a sidewalk is not necessary for the safe movement of pedestrians and
bicyclists.
e) Sidewalks, walkways or paths authorized under a Site Plan Special Permit and
located on a LOT shall be OPEN SPACE.
f) The voluntary installation of sidewalks along the FRONTAGE of LOTS in the
Business, Village and Industrial Districts shall not require a Site Plan Special Permit,
although other permits may be required.
g) In the Kelley’s Corner District, the Board of Selectmen shall require on-site and offsite
sidewalks, walkways, bikeways and crosswalks consistent with the planning
objectives set forth in the 1995 Kelley’s Corner Plan, as amended. The Kelley’s
Corner Plan identifies necessary improvements designed to accommodate future
growth in the Kelley’s Corner District. Off-site improvements hereunder shall be
made as determined by the Board of Selectmen to encourage pedestrian circulation
and bicycle use within the Kelley’s Corner District and to adjacent areas as a direct
measure to help minimize traffic impacts from the proposed development. Off-site
improvements shall be located on ways and land owned or controlled by the Town
of Acton, or in other locations where their owner allows and agrees to the
improvements. The cost of the required off-site improvements shall be kept in
reasonable proportion to the anticipated pedestrian and vehicular traffic from the
development.
10.4.3.5 OPEN SPACE Landscaping Standards - Any landscaping on OPEN SPACE shall be
designed to enhance the visual impact of the USE upon the LOT and adjacent property.
Where appropriate, existing vegetation may be retained and used to satisfy the
landscaping requirements. OPEN SPACE areas shall be kept free of encroachment by
all BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, storage areas or parking. OPEN SPACE landscaping
shall be maintained as open planted areas and used to (1) ensure buffers between
properties, (2) provide landscaped areas between BUILDINGS, (3) minimize the visual
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 152
effect of the bulk and height of BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, parking areas, lights or
signs and (4) minimize the impact of the USE of the property on land and water
resources.
1) In the Industrial Districts where a business or industrial USE abuts a Residential
District, a landscape buffer up to a maximum of 30 feet in depth designed to mitigate
the impact of the business or industrial USE on abutting Residential Districts may be
required by the Board of Selectmen.
2) In the Kelley’s Corner District where a business or industrial USE abuts a
Residential District, the Board of Selectmen shall require a substantially opaque
landscape buffer of at least 20 feet in depth that is designed to reduce noise and
other impacts of the business or industrial USE on abutting Residential Districts.
a) Where deemed appropriate and necessary to protect abutting residential USES,
the Board of Selectmen may require an increase in the width of this landscape
buffer to 30 feet.
b) In areas where abutting LOTS in Residential Districts have single family
dwellings on them, the Board of Selectmen may require that this buffer shall
include a fence, up to eight feet in height, designed to prevent access to abutting
LOTS.
10.4.3.6 Special Landscaping Provisions Applicable to the Limited Business District, Office
Districts, Small Manufacturing Districts, and the Light Industrial-1 District.
1) No STRUCTURE, pavement, display of goods, materials or vehicles, or other
impervious materials, other than allowed ACCESS driveways, walkways, sidewalks,
bikeways, landscaping elements and signs, shall be placed within the minimum front
yard.
2) Landscaped Buffer Areas – The required front yard of any nonresidential USE, and
the required side and rear yards of any nonresidential USE on a LOT abutting a
Residential District, whether abutting it directly or separated by a public or railroad
right-of-way, shall contain a landscaped buffer strip which shall be no less than thirty
(30) feet in width. The landscaped buffer strip shall comply with the following
standards and must be approved by the Board of Selectmen as part of the Site Plan
Special Permit:
i) Front yards of nonresidential USES shall include a semi-opaque screen. Said
screen shall be opaque from the ground to a height of three feet, with
intermittent visual obstruction from above the opaque portion to a height of at
least 20 feet. The semi-opaque screen is intended to block visual contact
between uses and to create a strong impression of the separation of spaces.
The opaque screen may be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm
or densely planted vegetation. The semi-opaque screen may be composed of
planted vegetation or existing vegetation. At maturity, the portion of intermittent
visual obstructions should not contain any completely unobstructed openings
more than ten (10) feet wide. The zone of intermittent visual obstruction may
contain deciduous plants. Examples of screens meeting this standard include
combinations of the following:
- small trees planted 30 feet on center, or large shade trees planted 40 feet on
center; and
- a 3-foot high stone wall or landscaped earth berm, or 3-foot high evergreen
hedge shrubbery planted 3 feet on center.
ii) A landscaped buffer strip separating a nonresidential USE from a Residential
District shall include an opaque screen. Said screen shall be opaque from the
ground to a height of at least six (6) feet, with intermittent visual obstruction to a
height of at least 20 feet. An opaque screen is intended to exclude all visual
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 153
contact between uses and to create a strong impression of spatial separation.
The opaque screen may be composed of a wall, fence, landscaped earth berm
or densely planted vegetation. The semi-opaque screen may be composed of
planted vegetation or existing vegetation. The opaque portion of the screen
must be opaque in all seasons of the year. At maturity, the portion of
intermittent visual obstructions should not contain any completely unobstructed
openings more than ten (10) feet wide. Examples of screens meeting this
standard include combinations of the following:
- small trees planted 30 feet on center, or large shade trees planted 40 feet on
center; and
- 6-foot high evergreen shrubbery planted 4 feet on center; or
- tall evergreen trees, stagger-planted, with branches touching the ground.
iii) Landscaped buffer areas shall not interfere with adequate sight distance at
driveway curb cuts.
3) See also Section 6.7.9 for Flexible Parking Plans and potential waivers from this
Section 10.4.3.6.
10.4.3.7 DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA – The DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA shall be calculated by
subtracting from the LOT area all land which is located in:
1) a wetland, which shall mean a "freshwater wetland" as defined in M.G.L. Chapter
131, Section 40;
2) a Flood Plain District as defined in Section 4.1 of the Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw;
3) another zoning district in which the PRINCIPAL USE of the LOT is not also
permitted, subject to the provision of Section 2.3.4;
4) an ACCESS or right-of-way easement.
10.4.3.8 Maximum NET FLOOR AREA – The maximum NET FLOOR AREA on a LOT shall not
exceed the product of the DEVELOPABLE SITE AREA and the maximum FLOOR
AREA RATIO set forth in the Table of Standard Dimensional Regulations.
10.4.3.9 Special Provisions Applicable to the WAV and SAV Districts – In the WAV and SAV
Districts, the design and placement of BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES and other site
improvements shall be carefully considered to ensure the retention and enhancement of
the village character and environment. Proposed BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES shall
be related harmoniously to the terrain and to the scale and architecture of existing
BUILDINGS in the village, which have a functional or visual relationship to the proposed
BUILDINGS or STRUCTURES. Proposed BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES shall be
compatible with their surroundings with respect to: height; facade facing the STREET;
rhythm of solid surfaces and openings; spacing of BUILDINGS or STRUCTURES; roof
slopes; and scale. To minimize the impact of mechanical equipment on the village
environment and character, window air-conditioning units, condenser elements, and
heating units shall not be located on the front facades. A certificate issued by the Acton
Historic District Commission for development activity proposed on a LOT that is located
within a Local Historic District shall be deemed to satisfy this section.
10.4.3.10 Special Provisions Applicable to the KC District – In the KC District the site and
BUILDING design shall be in compliance with Section 5.6 of this Bylaw.
10.4.3.11 Special Provisions Applicable to the EAV District – In the EAV District the site and
BUILDING design shall be in compliance with Section 5.5B of this Bylaw.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 154
10.4.3.12 Special Provisions Applicable to the SM District – On LOTS in the Small Manufacturing
(SM) District the Board of Selectmen, when granting a new or amended Site Plan
Special Permit, may increase the Maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO and the Maximum
Height above the limits set forth for BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES in the Table of
Standard Dimensional Regulations, subject to the following conditions and limitations:
10.4.3.12.1 To be eligible under this Section 10.4.3.12, a LOT shall have on it IMPERVIOUS
COVER as defined in Section 4.3 – GROUNDWATER Protection District of this
Bylaw, which by its size or coverage may or may not be conforming to the
limitations of this Bylaw, but shall have been installed or constructed legally in
accordance with the zoning bylaw standards in effect at the time of installation or
construction.
10.4.3.12.2 To be eligible under this Section 10.4.3.12 and to retain ongoing eligibility, the
amount and percentage on the LOT of OPEN SPACE, and of UNDISTURBED
OPEN SPACE as defined in Section 4.3 – GROUNDWATER Protection District of
this Bylaw, shall not be reduced below the amount and percentage existing on the
LOT on or before January 1, 2006; and the amount and percentage on the LOT of
IMPERVIOUS COVER as defined in Section 4.3 – GROUNDWATER Protection
District of this Bylaw shall not be increased above the amount and percentage
existing on the LOT on or before January 1, 2006.
10.4.3.12.3 Eligibility under this Section 10.4.3.12 shall be limited to the following USES on
the LOT, provided they are otherwise allowed in the SM District, and subject to
the applicable regulations of the Groundwater Protection District Zone that
overlays the LOT: Municipal; Child Care Facility; Industrial USES; and Business
USES except Office, Health Care Facility, Hospital, Medical Center, and
Commercial Recreation.
10.4.3.12.4 Any Maximum Height increases under this section shall not result in a height of
BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES greater than 45 feet, plus 12 feet for appurtenant
roof STRUCTURES that in aggregate may not occupy more than 20% of the roof
plan area.
10.4.3.12.5 Any NET FLOOR AREA increases under this section shall not increase the
Maximum FLOOR AREA RATIO above 0.50.
10.4.3.12.6 There shall remain adequate space for vehicular parking on the site that meets
the applicable requirements of Section 6 of this Bylaw for the USE or USES on
the LOT.
10.4.4 Reserve Parking Spaces – Under a Site Plan Special Permit, the Board of Selectmen
may authorize a decrease in the number of parking spaces and shall have the authority
to require an increase in the number of parking spaces required under Section 6, in
accordance with the following:
10.4.4.1 The Board of Selectmen may authorize a decrease in the number of parking spaces
required under Section 6 provided that:
1) The decrease in the number of parking spaces is no more than 75% of the total
number of spaces required under Section 6. The waived parking shall be set aside
and shall not be intended for immediate construction. Such spaces shall be labeled
as "Reserve Parking" on the site plan.
2) Any such decrease in the number of required parking spaces shall be based upon
documentation of the special nature of a USE or BUILDING.
3) The parking facility in question has made optimum use of the small car parking provision
as prescribed in Section 6.6, if applicable.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 155
4) The parking spaces labeled "Reserve Parking" on the site plan shall be properly
designed as an integral part of the overall parking layout, located on land suitable
for parking development and in no case located within area counted as buffer,
parking setback or OPEN SPACE.
5) The decrease in the number of required spaces will not create undue congestion or
traffic hazards and that such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to
the neighborhood and without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
6) Such relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the neighborhood and
without derogating from the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
10.4.4.2 If, at any time after the Certificate of Occupancy is issued for the BUILDING or USE, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer determines that additional parking spaces are needed, the
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the Board of Selectmen, in writing, of such
finding and the Board of Selectmen may require that all or any portion of the spaces
shown on the approved site plan as "Reserve Parking" be constructed.
10.4.4.3 The Board of Selectmen may require provisions for an increase in the number of
parking spaces required under Section 6 provided that:
1) The increase in the number of parking spaces is no more than 20% of the total
number of spaces required under Section 6 for the USE in question.
2) Any such increase in the number of required parking spaces shall be based upon
the special nature of a USE or BUILDING.
3) The increased number of parking spaces shall be labeled "Increased Reserve
Parking" on the site plan and shall be properly designed as an integral part of the
overall parking layout, located on land suitable for parking development and in no
case located within area counted as buffer or parking setback. The applicant shall
not be required to construct any of the parking spaces labeled as "Increased
Reserve Parking" for at least one year following the issuance of a Certificate of
Occupancy. Where the "Increased Reserve Parking" area is required and the
applicant has otherwise provided the number of parking spaces required under
Section 6, the area of land reserved for the increased number of parking spaces
may be deducted from the minimum OPEN SPACE required under Section 5.
10.4.4.4 If after one year after the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy the Zoning
Enforcement Officer finds that all or any of the "Increased Reserve Spaces" are
needed, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify the Board of Selectmen, in writing,
of such finding and the Board of Selectmen may require that all or any portion of the
spaces identified as "Increased Reserve Spaces" on the site plan be constructed within
a reasonable time period as specified by the Board of Selectmen.
10.4.5 Action by the Board of Selectmen – The Board of Selectmen, in considering a site plan,
shall ensure a USE of the site consistent with the USES permitted in the district in which
the site is located and shall give due consideration to the reports received under
Section 10.3.3. Prior to the granting of any special permit, the Board of Selectmen shall
find that, to the degree reasonable, the site plan:
10.4.5.1 Is consistent with the Master Plan.
10.4.5.2 Protects the neighborhood and the Town against seriously detrimental or offensive
USES on the site and against adverse effects on the natural environment.
10.4.5.3 Provides for convenient and safe vehicular and pedestrian movement and that the
locations of driveway openings are convenient and safe in relation to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic circulation, including emergency vehicles, on or adjoining the site.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 156
10.4.5.4 Provides an adequate arrangement of parking and loading spaces in relation to the
proposed USES of the premises.
10.4.5.5 Provides adequate methods of disposal of refuse or other wastes resulting from the
USES permitted on the site.
10.4.5.6 Will not derogate from the intent of this Bylaw to limit the adverse effects of the USE
and development of land on the surface and groundwater resources of the Town of
Acton. If a proposed USE has obtained a special permit from the Planning Board under
Section 4.3 of this Bylaw, the requirement of this Section shall be deemed to have been
met.
10.4.5.7 Complies with all applicable requirements of this Bylaw.
10.4.6 When granting a Site Plan Special Permit or when approving an amendment thereto,
the Board of Selectmen shall require, and in reviewing an application for a building
permit, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall require that any repair, replacement, or
reconstruction of improvements to the site, including but not limited to, drainage,
exterior lighting, landscaping, pedestrian and vehicular circulation or parking facilities,
required or approved by the Site Plan Special Permit, shall, to the extent practicable,
comply with the currently applicable standards of this Bylaw, whether or not such repair,
replacement or reconstruction requires a new Site Plan Special Permit. When
evaluating an application for such repair, replacement, or reconstruction of existing
facilities, the Board of Selectmen or the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall consider the
practicability of compliance with currently applicable standards in light of the existing
site configuration, and the cost of compliance compared to the increase in public safety
or convenience achieved thereby.
10.5 Variance – Variances from the specific requirements of this Bylaw may be authorized
by the Board of Appeals, except that variances authorizing a USE not otherwise
permitted in a particular zoning district shall not be granted.
10.5.1 Rules and Regulations and Fees – The Board of Appeals shall adopt, and from time to
time amend, Rules and Regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this Bylaw or
Chapter 40A of the General Laws or other applicable provision of the General Laws,
and shall file a copy of said Rules and Regulations with the Town Clerk. Such Rules
shall prescribe as a minimum the size, form, contents, style and number of copies of
plans and specifications, the Town boards or agencies from which the Board of Appeals
shall request written reports and the procedure for submission and approval of such
permits. The Board of Appeals may adopt, and from time to time amend, fees sufficient
to cover reasonable costs incurred by the Town in the review and administration of
variances.
10.5.2 Application – Any person who desires to obtain a variance from the requirements of this
Bylaw shall file a written application with the Office of the Town Clerk on a form
prescribed by the Board of Appeals. One the same day, the Petitioner shall submit said
application, including the date and time of filing, certified by the Town Clerk, to the
Board of Appeals. Each application shall be completed on a form and accompanied by
the information required by the Board of Appeals.
10.5.3 Reports from Town Boards or Agencies – The Board of Appeals shall transmit forthwith
a copy of the application and plan(s) to other boards, departments, or committees as it
may deem necessary or appropriate for their written reports.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 157
10.5.4 Public Hearing and Decision – The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing no later
than 65 days after the filing of an application. The decision of the Board of Appeals
shall be made within 100 days following the date of the filing of such application. The
Board of Appeals shall have the power to continue a public hearing if it finds that such
continuance is necessary to gather additional information in order to make an informed
decision. Such continuance shall not automatically extend the required time limits set
forth herein. The required time limits for a public hearing and/or a decision by the Board
of Appeals may be extended by written agreement between the Petitioner and the
Board of Appeals. A copy of such agreement shall be filed in the Office of the Town
Clerk. Failure by the Board of Appeals to take final action within said 100 days or
extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be a grant of the variance subject to
the applicable provisions of Chapter 40A, Section 15, of the Massachusetts General
Law.
10.5.5 Mandatory Findings – Before granting any variance from the requirements of this Bylaw,
the Board of Appeals must specifically find:
10.5.5.1 That owing to circumstances relating to the soil conditions, shape, or topography of the
LOT or STRUCTURES in question and especially affecting such LOT or STRUCTURES
but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement
of the provisions of this Bylaw would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise,
to the Petitioner; and
10.5.5.2 That desirable relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good
and without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purpose of this
Bylaw. In deciding whether the requested variance nullifies or substantially derogates
from the intent or purpose of this Bylaw, the Board of Appeals shall consider whether
the granting of such variance is consistent with the Master Plan.
10.5.6 Conditions and Safeguards – The Board of Appeals may impose such conditions,
safeguards and limitations as it deems appropriate upon the grant of any variance.
10.5.7 Time Limitation on Variance – Any rights authorized by a variance which are not
exercised within one year from the date of grant of such variance shall lapse and may
be reestablished only after notice and a new hearing pursuant to this Section.
10.5.8 Effective Date of a Variance – No variance or any modification, extension or renewal
thereof shall take effect until a copy of the decision has been recorded in the Middlesex
County South District Registry of Deeds. Such decision shall bear the certification of
the Town Clerk that 20 days has elapsed after the decision has been filed in the Office
of the Town Clerk and no appeal has been filed, or that if such an appeal has been
filed, it has been dismissed or denied.
10.6 Outdoor Lighting Regulations for Site Plan Special Permit – This section uses
defined terms that apply specifically in this section. These terms are defined in section
10.6.6 below and are capitalized in addition to the terms defined in section 1.3 of this
bylaw. Figures and Tables referred to in this section are located in section 10.6.7 below.
10.6.1 Applicability –
10.6.1.1 The following regulations shall apply to all LUMINAIRES, including existing
LUMINAIRES, whose LAMP wattage exceeds the values contained in Table 1, Column
A, on any LOT undergoing new development, or a major modification or expansion
under a Site Plan Special Permit. A major modification, as used here, shall mean that
more than 25% of the LUMINAIRES on the LOT are modified, moved or replaced. A
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 158
major expansion, as used here, shall mean that the number of LUMINAIRES on a LOT
increases by more than 25% of the original number.
10.6.1.2 LUMINAIRES installed before the effective date of this bylaw shall be maintained or, if
necessary, modified, to meet the zoning bylaw applicable at the time of their installation.
10.6.2 Standards
10.6.2.1 LUMINAIRE design and shielding – Any LUMINAIRE whose LAMP wattage exceeds the
values in Table 1, Column A, shall be SHIELDED. Any LUMINAIRE whose LAMP
wattage exceeds the values in Table 1, Column B shall be FULLY SHIELDED (Figure 1).
10.6.2.2 Control of LIGHT TRESPASS and GLARE –
a) Any LUMINAIRE whose distance from a LOT line is less than three times its height
(3xH) shall be additionally SHIELDED so that all DIRECT LIGHT cast in the
direction of STREETS, or abutting LOTS that are in Residential or Conservation
USE, is cut off at an angle no more than 70 degrees measured from a vertical line
directly below the LUMINAIRE (Figure 2). This requirement shall apply to all sides
of the LUMINAIRE that emit light toward a LOT line that is less than 3xH away from
the LUMINAIRE. The cut-off may be accomplished either by the LUMINAIRE
photometric properties, or by a supplementary external shield.
b) Additional shields that are installed to control LIGHT TRESPASS and GLARE as
required herein shall be designed so that the parts of the shields that are exposed to
the DIRECT LIGHT of the LUMINAIRE and visible from STREETS, or abutting
LOTS that are in Residential or Conservation USE, shall have a flat-black, lowreflectivity
finish.
c) LUMINAIRES shall be SHIELDED so that LIGHT TRESPASS onto STREETS is
less than 0.8 fc, and onto abutting LOTS that are in Residential or Conservation
USE, including such LOTS abutting on the opposite side of a STREET, is less than
0.3 fc. This measurement shall be made with a photometer placed horizontally on
the ground at points at the LOT lines. The Lighting Plan (Section 10.6.4) shall
include calculations demonstrating that this LIGHT TRESPASS criterion will be met.
d) LUMINAIRES installed on one LOT to illuminate another LOT, or installed in a
STREET, railroad, utility, or other right-of-way to illuminate an adjacent LOT, are
prohibited. As used in this subsection, LOT shall always mean LOT as defined in
section 1.3 of this Bylaw.
e) No single LUMINAIRE shall employ LAMP(S) exceeding a total of 400 watts, not
including power for ballast or transformer.
f) Strobe and flashing lights, and laser illumination, are prohibited except as allowed
under Section 10.6.5 (Exemptions).
g) Any installation of LED LUMINAIRES shall use LEDs with nominal color ratings of
3000K or lower. LEDs with color ratings higher than 3000K are not permitted.
Whenever possible, LEDs with the lowest possible color rating are recommended.
LUMINAIRES shall be shielded from LOTS that are in Residential and Conservation
USE, and STREETS so that no direct observation of the LED source shall be visible
on the adjacent LOT, area or STREET.
h) Any replacement of formerly used Incandescent, Halogen, Metal Halide, Mercury
Vapor, or High- or Low-Pressure Sodium LAMPS with new LED lighting shall require
the submission of a certified lighting plan to the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to
installation. All such replacements shall comply with paragraph g) above.
i) All sites that have already installed LUMINAIRES using LEDs that are greater than
color temperature 3000K shall be required to conform with paragraph g) above
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 159
within 5 years (by October 5, 2021), or for any source replacement that needs to
occur prior to 5 years. A certified lighting plan with the appropriate color
temperature LEDs shall be submitted to the Zoning Enforcement Officer prior to
installation.
10.6.2.3 Hours of operation –
a) All non-residential OUTDOOR LIGHTING, with the exception of STREETLIGHTS
and safety or security lighting as defined herein, may be turned on no earlier than
one hour before business hours and shall be turned off no later than 11 PM or one
half an hour after close of business, whichever is later.
i. Business hours, as used here, is defined as the period of time during which at
least one person is present for the purpose of conducting or concluding
business on the LOT or in a STRUCTURE on the LOT.
ii. Safety lighting, as used here, is defined as lighting to safeguard the movement
of persons by foot or by non-motorized vehicles or by vehicles for disabled
persons over hazardous footing or in areas that conflict with vehicle traffic, or
lighting for the purpose of aiding the visible detection and recognition of other
persons. Safety lighting includes lighting for stairs, pedestrian ramps and
tunnels, and pedestrian routes that are reasonably expected to be used after
business hours.
iii. Security lighting, as used here, is defined as lighting to protect BUILDINGS, and
property stored outdoors.
b) Lighting controlled by motion detectors or infrared sensors with an on-time of no
more than 10 minutes per activation is exempt from the hours-of-operation
restriction. The motion detector shall be adjusted so that normal movement of
vehicles and traffic along a STREET or public right of way shall not cause its
activation.
c) Lighting of recreational facilities must be turned off no later than one half-hour after
the end of use.
d) Lighting of the United States Flag and public monuments is exempt from these
hours of operation provisions.
10.6.2.4 Special Provisions –
a) Externally Illuminated Signs – Lighting for externally illuminated signs shall be
projected downward from above. The LUMINAIRE shall be SHIELDED and shall
comply with Section 10.6.2.2 (Control of LIGHT TRESPASS and GLARE). It shall be
focused directly at the SIGN DISPLAY AREA and SHIELDED so that the LAMP is
not visible from STREETS, or abutting LOTS that are in Residential or Conservation
USE (Figure 3).
b) UP-LIGHTING – UP-LIGHTING is prohibited, except for illumination of the United
States Flag, a BUILDING façade, or a public monument. For any UP-LIGHTING, the
LUMINAIRE shall be equipped with shields as necessary and shall comply with
Section 10.6.2.2 including subsections b) through f). It shall be focused directly at
the area of the target and SHIELDED so that the LAMP is not visible from a
STREET, or a LOT that is in Residential or Conservation USE. Building facade
illumination shall not exceed 0.25 watts of LAMP power per square foot of facade
surface. The Lighting Plan shall specifically demonstrate compliance for any facade
or monument UP-LIGHTING.
c) Illuminated Outdoor Recreation Facilities – Notwithstanding the requirement of
Section 10.6.2.1 (LUMINAIRE design and shielding), the illumination of outdoor
recreational facilities such as, but not limited to playing fields, pools, rinks, tennis
courts, driving ranges, ski areas, or skateboard parks, shall be by either SHIELDED
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 160
or FULLY SHIELDED LUMINAIRES. Such lighting shall be exempt from Sections
10.6.2.2.a) (seventy degree cut-off), 10.6.2.2.c) (LIGHT TRESPASS), and
10.6.2.2.e) (LAMPS not to exceed 400 watts per LUMINAIRE). The following
requirements shall apply to illuminated outdoor recreation facilities:
i. Such SHIELDED LUMINAIRES shall be mounted at sufficient height and aimed
so that the brightest part of the beam is elevated no more than 60 degrees
above a point directly vertically below the LUMINAIRE (Figure 4). Light poles for
recreation facilities may be as high as necessary to adequately illuminate the
facility in compliance with the maximum 60-degree elevation angle, but shall not
exceed a height of 85 feet. See section 5.3.5.3 of this Bylaw for a special permit
to increase pole height.
ii. The LUMINAIRES shall be SHIELDED so that LIGHT TRESPASS onto
STREETS, or abutting LOTS in Residential or Conservation USE, is less than
0.8 fc. This measurement shall be made with a photometer positioned at the
boundary and aimed directly at the LUMINAIRE. The Lighting Plan shall include
calculations demonstrating that the LIGHT TRESPASS requirement will be
satisfied.
iii. The LAMP shall not be visible from a STREET, or an abutting LOT that is in
Residential or Conservation USE. Alternatively, the installer may retain a
qualified independent lighting consultant to measure the maximum luminance
visible from STREETS, or abutting LOTS that are in Residential or Conservation
USE. The measurement report shall be delivered to the Zoning Enforcement
Officer and shall demonstrate that the maximum luminance apparent from a
STREET, or an abutting LOT that is in Residential or Conservation USE, is not
more than 2500 cd/sq.m.
d) LUMINAIRES in a Local Historic Districts – In Local Historic Districts, LUMINAIRES
may be exempted from Section 10.6.2.1 (LUMINAIRE design and shielding) if the
Historic District Commission specifically requires LUMINAIRES of a type that is not
available in a version that meets the FULLY SHIELDED criterion. In such cases,
such LUMINAIRES shall comply with IESNA CUTOFF light distribution standards.
Illumination for externally illuminated signs in a Local Historic District may be from
below using UP-LIGHTING from SHIELDED LUMINAIRES. In this case, the LAMP
shall not be visible from a STREET, or from an abutting LOT that is in Residential or
Conservation USE, and shields shall comply with Section 10.6.2.2 b) (Visible part of
shield has flat-black finish).
10.6.3 Total Site Power Limits
10.6.3.1 This section regulates the total amount of lighting that may be used on a LOT. For
simplicity, this is accomplished through regulation of the total amount of outdoor LAMP
watts installed on the LOT, instead of the total lumen output. An OUTDOOR LIGHTING
installation complies with this section if the actual Total Installed Watt Ratings of all
LAMPS is no greater than the Allowed Lighting Power. Ballast and transformer power
is not counted in this total.
10.6.3.2 The Allowed Lighting Power shall be the sum of contributions calculated according to
the Activity Areas listed in sections 10.6.3.2 a) through f) below. Only those spaces on a
LOT, which are covered with impervious materials, shall be counted towards Activity
Areas. Activity Areas on a LOT shall be clearly marked and labeled on the Site Plan.
There shall be no overlapping Activity Areas. For a space to be included in the total of
an Activity Area, a LUMINAIRE must be within 100 feet of any such space.
a) Parking lots, driveways, walkways, bikeways – 0.1 watts per square foot of the area
of parking lots, driveways, walkways, bikeways, and any other outdoor impervious
surfaces on the LOT. These Activity Areas include a 5-foot wide margin of grade or
landscaping around the impervious surfaces.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 161
b) BUILDING entrance areas – 13 watts per linear foot of the width of all doors, plus
six feet per door.
c) BUILDING CANOPIES – 0.4 watts per square foot of the ceiling area of walkway
CANOPIES. For portions of BUILDING walkway CANOPIES extending over an
entrance area, the Allowed Lighting Power may be regulated by section 10.6.3.2.b)
above.
d) Retail sales CANOPIES - 0.9 watts per square foot of the ceiling area of service
station and retail sales CANOPIES. Retail sales CANOPIES are covered spaces
that are used for display or dispensing of products for sale.
e) Retail sales frontage – 20 watts per linear foot of sales frontage. Sales frontage is
measured along the edge, as viewed from a STREET, of a paved or otherwise
improved area used exclusively for the display of vehicles or other large objects for
sale. For this purpose, sales frontage shall be assumed to be 20 feet deep.
f) OUTDOOR SALES AREA – 0.8 watts per square foot times the area of the
OUTDOOR SALES AREA. This area shall be specifically for the display and
storage of vehicles, structures, or other large objects offered for sale, and shall not
include driveways, walkways, service areas, storage, or other uses.
10.6.3.3 Unlit areas of the LOT may not be used to calculate Allowed Lighting Power. An
illuminated area of the LOT is defined as within 100 feet of a LUMINAIRE on the LOT,
or, if under a CANOPY, within 25 feet of a LUMINAIRE mounted under the CANOPY.
10.6.4 Lighting Plan
10.6.4.1 A Lighting Plan shall be included in all applications for a Site Plan Special Permit that
proposes new or replacement lighting installations. For initial developments of land, a
major modification (more than 25% of LUMINAIRES being modified or replaced), or a
major addition (more than 25% increase in the number of LUMINAIRES), this lighting
plan shall be certified to be valid and correct by its designer. The Lighting Plan shall
contain:
a) On the site plan – the location, height, shielding type of all existing and proposed
outdoor LUMINAIRES, and the wattage rating of all LAMPS in each LUMINAIRE,
including BUILDING or CANOPY mounted LUMINAIRES. Any existing off-site
LUMINAIRES used to illuminate the LOT shall be included in the Lighting Plan.
Activity areas (Section 10.6.3) shall be clearly marked on the Site Plan.
b) Manufacturer’s data – For all LUMINAIRES, whose LAMP wattage is greater than
Table 1, Column B, the manufacturer's specification data and technical drawings,
including the LUMINAIRE LAMP wattage; photometric data showing that the
LUMINAIRE is FULLY SHIELDED, including an electronic copy of the IES
photometric file, or a reference to the file location on the manufacturer’s web site.
Manufacturer’s photometric specification that the LUMINAIRE is rated IESNA Full
Cutoff (FCO) is sufficient to show that it is FULLY SHIELDED. For all
LUMINAIRES whose LAMP wattage is less than values shown in Table 1,
Column B but greater than values shown in Table 1, Column A, the
manufacturer’s specification data and technical drawings showing that it meets
the definition of SHIELDED LUMINAIRE.
c) The data of previous sections a) and b) shall be organized into a table, with one
line per LUMINAIRE.
d) Calculations showing that the maximum LIGHT TRESPASS allowed, Sections
10.6.2.2.c) (Light Trespass) and 10.6.2.4.c) (Outdoor Recreational Facilities), will
be satisfied by the design.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 162
e) Calculation of the Allowed Lighting Power for the LOT according to Section
10.6.3 (Total Site Energy [Power] Limits). Activity areas (Section 10.6.3) shall be
clearly marked on the Site Plan.
f) Calculation of the Total Installed Lighting Power from the LUMINAIRES proposed
for installation on the Lighting Plan plus any existing LUMINAIRES intended to
remain in use, and demonstration that Total Installed Lighting Power does not
exceed the Allowed Lighting Power.
10.6.4.2 Submission and subsequent approval of a plan does not relieve the applicant of
responsibility to demonstrate conformity to all sections of this bylaw, both in the
individual LUMINAIRES as built, and for the entire LOT as built. The designer shall
submit an as-built plan that correctly reflects the as-built installation, and shall certify
that the as-built installation conforms to the requirements of this Bylaw.
10.6.5 Exemptions – The following lights shall be exempt from the standards of this Bylaw:
10.6.5.1 Internally illuminated signs.
10.6.5.2 Temporary holiday lighting.
10.6.5.3 Emergency lighting such as used by the Police, Fire Department, or other official or
utility emergency personnel. Placement of longer-term emergency lighting shall, to the
largest extent possible, take into consideration the detrimental effects of GLARE on
passing motorists and pedestrians, and on residential LOTS.
10.6.5.4 Temporary lighting used on construction sites. All such lighting shall be placed and
directed to minimize the detrimental effects of GLARE on passing motorists and
pedestrians, and on residential LOTS.
10.6.5.5 Lighting during special events such as fairs, celebrations, or concerts sponsored by the
Town of Acton or authorized by the Acton Board of Selectmen. Lighting for festivals
and carnivals is exempt but should be in keeping with the intent of this Bylaw.
10.6.5.6 Warning and alarm lights that alert to a malfunction or emergency situation.
10.6.6 Definitions
? CANOPY - an opaque ceiling over installed lighting.
? CUTOFF (CO) – A LUMINAIRE light distribution, specified by the IESNA, where
the intensity in candela per 1000 LAMP lumens does not numerically exceed 25
(2.5%) at a vertical angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and 100 (10%) at a vertical
angle of 80 degrees above nadir. Nadir is the point directly vertically below the
LUMINAIRE. A FULL CUTOFF (FCO) LUMINAIRE is also a CUTOFF
LUMINAIRE.
? DIRECT LIGHT – Light emitted directly from the LAMP, from the reflector or
reflector diffuser, or through the refractor or diffuser lens of a LUMINAIRE.
? FOOT CANDLE (fc) – Unit of ILLUMINANCE; One lumen per square foot.
? FULL CUTOFF (FCO) – A LUMINAIRE light distribution, specified by the IESNA,
where zero candela intensity occurs at an angle of 90 degrees above nadir, and at
all greater angles from nadir. Additionally, the candela per 1000 LAMP lumens
does not numerically exceed 100 (10%) at a vertical angle of 80 degrees above
nadir. Nadir is the point directly vertically below the LUMINAIRE. A FCO
LUMINAIRE is FULLY SHIELDED.
? FULLY SHIELDED – Constructed in such a manner that no light emitted by the
fixture, either directly from the LAMP or a diffusing element, or indirectly by
reflection or refraction from any part of the LUMINAIRE, is projected above a
horizontal plane passing through the lowest direct-light-emitting part of the
LUMINAIRE (Figure 1). BUILDING CANOPIES, overhangs, roof eaves and similar
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 163
types of construction shall not be considered as the means for providing the FULLY
SHIELDED light cut-off characteristic. This shall be achieved by the LUMINAIRE
itself (Figure 5).
? GLARE – The sensation of visual discomfort or loss in visual performance and
visibility produced by luminance within the visual field that is sufficiently greater
than the luminance to which the eyes are adapted.
? INDIRECT LIGHT – DIRECT LIGHT that has been reflected off the surface of any
permanently constructed object other than the source LUMINAIRE.
? IESNA or IES – Illuminating Engineering Society of North America. A professional
association of lighting engineers and lighting manufacturers generally recognized
as the definitive source for illumination recommendations in the United States. An
IES photometric file is defined by IESNA standards.
? ILLUMINANCE – The luminous flux incident per unit area, expressed in FOOT
CANDLE (one LUMEN per square foot). Horizontal or vertical ILLUMINANCE is
that measured with a photometer cell mounted horizontally or vertically.
? LAMP – The light source component of a LUMINAIRE that produces the actual
light.
? LIGHT EMITTING DIODE (LED) - Any LUMINAIRE composed on an array of
LEDs, typically a bank of 30, 60 or 90, used as a light source.
? LIGHT TRESPASS – DIRECT or INDIRECT LIGHT produced by an artificial light
source and which shines outside the boundaries of the LOT containing the
LUMINAIRE.
? LUMINAIRE – A complete OUTDOOR LIGHTING unit or fixture including a LAMP
or LAMPS, together with the parts designed to distribute the light, to position and
protect the LAMPS, and to connect the LAMPS to the power supply, but not
including a pole on which the LUMINAIRE may be mounted.
? OUTDOOR LIGHTING – The night-time illumination of an outside area or object by
a LUMINAIRE located outdoors. LUMINAIRES under a CANOPY are considered
outdoor lights and are regulated by this Bylaw.
? OUTDOOR SALES AREA – A static display of goods for sale at night, such as
automobile sales lots, landscaping and nursery businesses, outdoor construction
materials sales lots, and outdoor activity areas such as miniature golf, family fun
centers, and permanent swap meets. An OUTDOOR SALES AREA location is not
covered by CANOPIES or other STRUCTURES.
? SHIELDED – A LUMINAIRE employing a shield to prevent GLARE. The
LUMINAIRE shall have a generally downward distribution of light and must have a
top shield to minimize upward light.
? STREETLIGHTS – LUMINAIRES installed within a STREET and intended primarily
for the illumination of the STREET.
? UP-LIGHTING – DIRECT LIGHT illumination distributed above a 90 degree
horizontal plane through the lowest DIRECT LIGHT emitting part of the
LUMINAIRE.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 164
10.6.7 Figures and Tables
Horizontal plane
Figure 1A. FULLY SHIELDED. No light emitted
above a horizontal plane through the lowest
DIRECT-LIGHT-EMITTING part of LUMINAIRE.
Figure 1B. Not FULLY SHIELDED. Light is
emitted above a horizontal plane through
the lowest DIRECT-LIGHT-EMITTING part
of LUMINAIRE.
Examples of FULLY SHIELDED LUMINAIRES
Examples of LUMINAIRES that are
NOT FULLY SHIELDED
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 165
DIRECT LIGHT
toward LOT
boundary less than
3xH away
Elevation angle no more
than 70 degrees
LUMINAIRE
Additional SHIELD. Part of shield visible
from residential or conservation LOT or
public right of way has flat-black finish.
Figure 2. Any outdoor LUMINAIRE whose distance from the LOT boundary is less than three times
its height shall be shielded so that all DIRECT LIGHT cast in the direction of residential or
conservation LOTS and public rights-of-way is cut-off at an angle no more than 70 degrees
measured from a vertical line directly below the LUMINAIRE.
Figure 3. Lighting for externally illuminated signs shall
be projected downward from above. The LUMINAIRE
shall be SHIELDED and shall comply with Section 3.2
(Control of LIGHT TRESPASS and GLARE).
Figure 4. Illumination for outdoor
recreational facilities shall be SHIELDED
LUMINAIRES and shall be mounted at
sufficient height and aimed so that the
brightest part of the beam is elevated no
more than 60 degrees above a point
directly vertically below the LUMINAIRE
Figure 5. Building canopies, overhangs, roof eaves and similar types of construction
shall not be considered as the means for providing the light cutoff. The cutoff
characteristics shall be achieved by the LUIMINAIRE itself.
Sign: end view
Brightest part of beam
60 degrees
Vertical
CANOP Y
FULLY SHIELDED
LUMINAIRE- Yes
Unshielded LUMINAIRE – No
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 166
Table 1. LUMINAIRES whose LAMP wattage exceeds the values in Column A of this table shall
be SHIELDED. LUMINAIRES whose LAMP wattage exceeds the values in Column B of this table
shall be FULLY SHIELDED.
Lamp type A – SHIELDED B – FULLY SHIELDED
Incandescent, Halogen 60 w 120 w
High Pressure Sodium,
Metal Halide, Mercury
Vapor, other HID
35 w 35 w
Fluorescent,
Low Pressure Sodium
13 w 20 w
LED30 (<3000K) - 70 W
LED60 (<3000K) - 135 W
LED90 (<3000K) - 205 W
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 167
SECTION 11.
ENFORCEMENT
11.1 Enforcement – The Zoning Enforcement Officer of the Town of Acton, as appointed by
the Town Manager, is hereby designated as the officer charged with the enforcement of
this Bylaw. During any period of temporary absence or disability of the Zoning
Enforcement Officer, the Town Manager may appoint an inspector of buildings, building
commissioner, local inspector, planning director or assistant town planner as the officer
charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw. All zoning enforcement actions initiated and
decisions made by the officer charged with the enforcement of this Bylaw prior to the
appointment of the Zoning Enforcement Officer or during any temporary absence or
disability of the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall continue unabated in the name of the
Zoning Enforcement Officer.
11.1.1 Enforcement Action – The Zoning Enforcement Officer, upon a written complaint of any
citizen of Acton, or owner of property within Acton or upon such Zoning Enforcement
Officer's own initiative, shall institute any appropriate action or proceedings in the name
of the Town of Acton to prevent, correct, restrain or abate violation of this Bylaw. In the
case where the Zoning Enforcement Officer is requested in writing to enforce this Bylaw
against any person allegedly in violation of same and the Zoning Enforcement Officer
declines to act, the Zoning Enforcement Officer shall notify, in writing, the party
requesting such enforcement of any action or refusal to act, and the reasons therefore,
within 14 days of receipt of such request.
11.1.2 Fine – Each day that a violation of this Bylaw continues shall constitute a separate
offense. Violation of this Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of $300.00 for each
offense, except that violation of Section 7 of this Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine of
$50.00 for each offense for the first 7 days, and $300.00 for each offense thereafter.
11.2 Other Laws or Regulations – This Bylaw shall not be construed to authorize the USE
of any land or STRUCTURE for any purpose that is prohibited by any other provision of
the General Laws or by any other Bylaw, rule or regulation of the Town; nor shall
compliance with any such provision authorize the USE of any land or STRUCTURE in
any manner inconsistent with this Bylaw, except as required by the General Laws.
11.3 Validity and Separability – The invalidity of one or more Sections, subsections,
sentences, clauses or provisions of this Bylaw shall not invalidate or impair the Bylaw
as a whole or any other part thereof.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page 168
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page A 1
Appendix
SECTION 9A.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD)
Note: Section 9A - Planned Unit Development (PUD) was repealed on April 1, 2002. Section 9A
still governs existing PUDs in conjunction with the Section 8.9 of the Zoning Bylaw. This Appendix
shows Section 9A as in effect just before its repeal.
9A.1 Purpose – The purpose of the Planned Unit Development provisions is to provide for a
mixture of land USES at designated locations at greater density and intensity than would
normally be allowed provided that said LAND uses:
a) do not detract from the livability and aesthetic qualities of the environment;
b) are consistent with the objectives of the Zoning Bylaw;
c) promote more efficient use of land while protecting natural resources, such as water
resources, wetlands, flood plains and wildlife;
d) promote diverse, energy-efficient housing at a variety of costs.
9A.2 Definitions – For the purpose of this Section, the following terms shall have the following
meaning. The terms defined below are capitalized in this Section 9A in addition to the
terms defined in Section 1.
9A.2.1 PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD) - A TRACT OF LAND, designed and developed
as a single entity, in a way that departs from the zoning regulations conventionally
required in the district concerning USE of land or BUILDINGS, LOT size, density, bulk or
type of STRUCTURES, LOT coverage, or other requirements. A PUD may include a
range of compatible land USES, including various types of single FAMILY and multifamily
dwellings, commercial, industrial and office USES, and common OPEN SPACE.
9A.2.2 USABLE OPEN SPACE - A parcel of land or an area of open water, or a combination of
land and water within the TRACT OF LAND designated for a PUD, maintained and
preserved for OPEN SPACE USES, and designed and intended for the use and
enjoyment of residents or users of the PUD or of the general public. USABLE OPEN
SPACE shall be dedicated and used for conservation, historic preservation, and
education, recreation, park purposes, agriculture, horticulture, forestry or for a
combination of these USES. USABLE OPEN SPACE shall be planned as contiguous
parcels. USABLE OPEN SPACE may contain such complementary STRUCTURES and
improvements as are necessary and appropriate for the benefit and enjoyment of the
USABLE OPEN SPACE, but shall not include STREETS or parking areas except those
incidental to OPEN SPACE USES.
9A.3 Special Permit – The Planning Board may grant a special permit for the development
and construction of a PUD in the Village and Business Districts, and the OP-1, LI, GI, LI-1
and SM Districts in accordance with this Section and M.G.L., Ch. 40A, s. 9.
9A.4 Contents of Application for a PUD Special Permit – The application for a PUD Special
Permit shall be accompanied by a "PUD Site Plan", showing the information required by
the Rules and Regulations for PUD. The information shall include but not be limited to:
the topography; soil characteristics as shown on the Soil Conservation Service Maps;
wetlands as defined by M.G.L. Chapter 131, Section 40; Flood Plain boundary lines;
existing types of vegetation; any other unique natural, historical, archeological, and
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page A 2
aesthetic resources; the proposed layout of the LOTS; the proposed distribution of the
various land USES; proposed locations of DWELLING UNITS and nonresidential
BUILDINGS; the proposed diversity and cost range for the DWELLING UNITS;
dimensions, STREETS, garages, driveways, wells, utilities, wastewater disposal systems;
the proposed finished grades of the land; the proposed vegetation and landscaping
including where existing vegetation is retained; proposed features designed for energy
and water conservation and pollution control; the proposed layout and land use plan of
the USABLE OPEN SPACE in the PUD; the proposed form of ownership of the USABLE
OPEN SPACE and any improvements proposed thereon.
9A.5 Procedural Requirements – If the PUD requires approval under the Subdivision Control
Law, M.G.L., Chapter 41, the "PUD Site Plan" shall contain a plan in the form and with the
contents required of a Definitive Subdivision Plan by the Acton Subdivision Rules and
Regulations. The applications for a PUD Special Permit and for approval of a Definitive
Subdivision Plan shall be filed concurrently. To the extent permitted by law, the Planning
Board shall consider both applications at the same time.
9A.6 Planning Board Action – In evaluating the proposed PUD, the Planning Board shall
consider the general purpose and objectives of this Bylaw and of Planned Unit
Development in particular; the existing and probable future development of surrounding
areas; the appropriateness of the proposed layout of the LOTS and the distribution of the
proposed land USES; the proposed layout and USE of the USABLE OPEN SPACE in
relation to the proposed USES in the PUD, the topography, soils and other characteristics
and resources of the TRACT OF LAND in question. The Planning Board may grant a
special permit for a PUD if it finds that the PUD and the proposed USES:
a) comply in all respects to the requirements of the Bylaw and enhance the purpose and
intent of Planned Unit Development;
b) are in harmony with the existing and probable future USES of the area and with the
character of the surrounding area and neighborhood; and
c) comply with the requirements of Section 10.3.5.
The Planning Board may require changes to the "PUD Site Plan" and impose additional
conditions, safeguards and limitations as it deems necessary to secure the objectives of
this Bylaw, including without limitation, any conditions, safeguards or limitations listed in
Section 10.3.6.
9A.7 Standards for PUDs – Where the requirements and standards of a PUD differ from or
conflict with other requirements and standards of this Bylaw, the requirements and
standards established for PUDs shall prevail except that a PUD shall comply with the
requirements set forth in the Groundwater Protection and Flood Plain Districts. No Site
Plan Special Permit shall be required for a PUD or any uses within a PUD.
9A.7.1 Permitted USES – The following USES are permitted in a PUD. As listed hereinafter, the
permitted USES correspond to the listing in the Table of PRINCIPAL USES in Section 3,
and except as provided otherwise in this Section, the definitions of PRINCIPAL USES as
set forth in Section 3 shall apply.
3.2 GENERAL USES
3.2.1 Agriculture
3.2.2 Conservation
3.2.3 Recreation
3.3 RESIDENTIAL USES
3.3.1 Single Family Dwelling
3.3.2 Single Family Dwelling with Apartment
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page A 3
3.3.3 Dwelling Conversions
3.3.4 Multifamily Dwelling
3.4 GOVERNMENTAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND PUBLIC SERVICE USES
3.4.1 Municipal
3.4.2 Educational
3.4.3 Religious
3.4.4 Nursing Home
3.4.5 Public or Private Utility Facilities
3.4.6 Child Care Facility
3.4.7 Other Public Use
3.4.8 Full Service Retirement Community
3.4.9 Assisted Living Residence
3.4.10 Wireless Communication Facility in accordance with the criteria and
standards set forth in section 3.4.10 of this bylaw.
3.4.11 Commercial Education or Instruction
3.5 BUSINESS USES
3.5.1 Retail Store
3.5.2 Office
3.5.3 Health Care Facility
3.5.4 Hospital, Medical Center
3.5.5 Restaurant
3.5.6 Combined Business and Dwelling
3.5.7 Hotel, Motel, Inn, Conference Center
3.5.8 Bed & Breakfast
3.5.10 Veterinary Care
3.5.12 Services
3.5.13 Repair Shop, Technical Shop, Studio
3.5.14 Building Trade Shop
3.5.15 Commercial Recreation
3.5.23 Parking Facility
3.6 INDUSTRIAL USES
3.6.1 Warehouse
3.6.2 Distribution Plant
3.6.3 Manufacturing
3.6.4 Scientific
9A.7.2 Area and Dimensional Regulations – There shall be no minimum LOT area, FRONTAGE,
OPEN SPACE, FLOOR AREA RATIO, LOT width or yard requirements within a PUD or
for any LOT or BUILDING within a PUD except as provided in this section. However a
PUD shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Groundwater Protection and
Flood Plain Districts. The Planning Board may impose appropriate conditions on the
location, layout and size of BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES and OPEN SPACE.
9A.7.2.1 PUD Site Area – The TRACT OF LAND proposed for a PUD must contain a minimum
area of 15 acres.
9A.7.2.2 USABLE OPEN SPACE – In all PUDs, at least 25 % of the land shall be set aside as
permanent USABLE OPEN SPACE for the use of the PUD residents, or for all PUD
users, or for the community. The required USABLE OPEN SPACE shall, at the option of
the Planning Board, be conveyed to the Conservation Commission or to a non-profit
conservation organization, or to a corporation or trust representing persons responsible
for the PUD, and shall be protected by a conservation restriction as required by M.G.L.
Ch. 40A, s. 9 for common open land in cluster developments. A covenant shall be placed
on the land such that no part of the PUD can be built, sold or occupied until such time as
a satisfactory written agreement has been executed and recorded for protection of the
USABLE OPEN SPACE.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page A 4
9A.7.2.3 Setback Requirements:
a) All BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, and facilities within a PUD shall maintain a minimum
setback of 20 feet from the PUD boundary, and 30 feet where the PUD boundary
coincides with a STREET sideline. Except for single family dwellings with or without
one apartment, including accessory STRUCTURES and facilities thereto, all
BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES and facilities shall be set back at least 50 feet from the
PUD boundary where the adjacent land or the land on the opposite STREET side is
within a Residential District. All BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, and facilities within a
PUD shall be separated or shielded from adjacent property lines by means of a buffer,
adequate in the opinion of the Planning Board, which shall include landscaping
elements.
b) The minimum separation of BUILDINGS within a PUD shall be 20 feet. The Planning
Board may require larger separation of BUILDINGS in order to diffuse the bulk of
large BUILDINGS, or may permit a smaller separation, if it finds that a separation of
less than 20 feet will not detract from the purpose and intent of Planned Unit
Development.
c) The minimum front yard set back to a STREET or way within the PUD shall be 20
feet. The Planning Board may require a larger front yard setback in order to allow
better screening of large BUILDINGS.
d) BUILDINGS dedicated to business USES only and larger than 20,000 sq. ft., and
industrial USES shall be located on separate LOTS within a PUD and shall be
screened from other USES within a PUD. The minimum front, side and rear yard
requirements set forth in the Light Industrial District shall apply to industrial USES in a
PUD; the front, rear and side yards of such BUILDINGS and USES shall be
landscaped in accordance with the standards set forth in Section 10.4.3.
9A.7.2.4 FLOOR AREA RATIO – The FLOOR AREA RATIO of all BUILDINGS in a PUD shall not
exceed 0.30.
9A.7.2.5 Mix of USES – Residential USES shall comprise at least 40% but not more than 60% of
the NET FLOOR AREA of all BUILDINGS in a PUD. If the PUD contains warehouses,
the NET FLOOR AREA of residential USES may be reduced to 25%. Industrial USES
shall not exceed 30% of the NET FLOOR AREA of all BUILDINGS in the PUD.
9A.7.2.6 BUILDING Height – The maximum height of any BUILDING in a PUD shall be 40 feet.
9A.7.2.7 Special Standards for Combined Business and Dwelling – A BUILDING in a PUD used for
combined business and dwelling, shall not contain more than 50% business USES,
measured in NET FLOOR AREA, and no business USE shall be located above a
DWELLING UNIT.
9A.7.2.8 BUILDING Requirements for Multifamily Dwellings – There shall be no more than four
DWELLING UNITS, plus two garage spaces per DWELLING UNIT in any residential
BUILDING. The overall length of any residential BUILDING shall not exceed 200 feet.
9A.7.3 STREETS, Utilities and Lighting – Whether or not the PUD is a subdivision, all STREETS
and ways whether public or private, wastewater disposal and drainage facilities and
utilities shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the Town of Acton
Subdivision Rules and Regulations, as amended. Special exceptions to the Subdivision
Rules and Regulations may be authorized by the Planning Board in granting a special
permit hereunder provided the Board determines that such exceptions are in the public
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, April 2019 Page A 5
interest and are not inconsistent with the purposes and intent of Planned Unit
Development. The Planning Board may impose appropriate standards for all outdoor
lighting within a PUD.
9A.7.4 Traffic Generation – The total amount of traffic to be generated by the PUD at full
development shall not exceed 1.8 trip-ends per 1,000 square feet of DEVELOPABLE
SITE AREA per day. The determination of projected traffic generation shall be based on
the most recent trip generation rates published by the Institute of Transportation
Engineers in the publication "Trip Generation". If a PRINCIPAL USE is not listed in said
publication, the Planning Board may approve the use of trip generation rates for another
listed USE that is similar, in terms of traffic generation, to the proposed PRINCIPAL USE.
If no such listed USE is sufficiently similar, a detailed traffic generation estimate, along
with the methodology used, prepared by a Registered Professional Engineer experienced
and qualified in traffic engineering, shall be submitted.
9A.7.5 Parking Standards – The number of parking spaces to be provided for a PUD shall be
equal to 85 percent of the sum of the number of parking spaces for each USE in the PUD,
determined separately for each USE based upon the standards set forth in Section 6.
The parking lot design standards of Section 6.7 shall apply. The Planning Board may
authorize a decrease in the number of parking spaces required herein provided that such
decrease in the number of required parking spaces shall be based upon documentation of
the special nature of a use or mix of uses within a PUD and further provided that the
waived parking shall be set aside and shall not be intended for immediate construction.
Such spaces shall be labeled as "Reserve Parking" on the "PUD Site Plan".
9A.7.6 Storm Water Runoff – The peak rate of storm water runoff from a PUD shall not exceed
the rate existing prior to the new construction based on a 10 year design storm.
9A.8 Revisions and Amendments of "PUD Site Plans" – Any change in the layout of
STREETS; in the configuration of the USABLE OPEN SPACE; in the ownership or USE
of the USABLE OPEN SPACE; or any other change which, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner, would significantly alter the character of the PUD, shall require the written
approval of the Planning Board. The Planning Board may, upon its own determination,
require a new special permit and hold a public hearing pursuant to Section 10.3 of this
Bylaw, if it finds that the proposed changes are substantial in nature and of public
concern.
9A.9 Building Permits – No building permit for any STRUCTURE shall be issued without the
written approval of the Planning Board or its designee.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 109
SECTION 7.
SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES
7.1 Purpose – Signs are a necessary means of communicating information. Generally,
signs are intended to be highly visible. They attract attention and are one of the most
visible and apparent aspects of a town's character. They tend to produce a lasting
impression on residents and visitors and they provide an indication of the commercial
health of a business area and a town as a whole. Simplicity in design and restrained
use of signs are necessary to prevent a sign overload which creates clutter and is as
confusing as no signs at all. The purposes of this section are:
7.1.1 To promote the safety and welfare of residents, businesses and visitors;
7.1.2 To enhance the safety of all traffic participants by encouraging simple messages and by
preventing sign overload, clutter and confusion;
7.1.3 To encourage the effective use of signs as a means of communication, information and
advertisement;
7.1.4 To foster free and effective expression and advertising, through creative and distinctive
design;
7.1.5 To maintain and enhance the aesthetics of the built environment and the character of
the Town;
7.1.6 To encourage signs which by their location, size and design are in harmony and
compatible with the surrounding BUILDINGS and environment;
7.1.7 To maintain and promote economic health and stability;
7.1.8 To further the general purposes of this Bylaw.
7.2 Definitions – For the purposes of this Section, the following terms shall have the
following meaning. The terms defined below are capitalized in the following parts of this
Section in addition to the terms defined in Section 1.
7.2.1 AWNING SIGN – A permanent SIGN which is affixed to or consists of a permanent or
retractable awning or marquee permanently mounted to the exterior surface of a
BUILDING.
7.2.2 BILLBOARD SIGN – A SIGN which advertises a business, service, product, commodity,
entertainment or similar object or activity which is conducted, sold or offered on a LOT
other than the LOT on which the SIGN is ERECTED.
7.2.3 BUSINESS CENTER – For the purpose of this Section, BUSINESS CENTER shall be
defined as a business development occupied by or available for occupancy to at least
two distinctly separate businesses on one or more adjacent LOTS sharing common
facilities such as driveways and parking areas.
7.2.4 DISPLAY AREA – The total surface area of a SIGN, including all lettering, wording,
designs, symbols, background and frame, but not including any support structure or
bracing incidental to the SIGN. The DISPLAY AREA of an INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN,
AWNING SIGN or irregularly shaped SIGN shall be the area of the smallest rectangle
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 110
into which the letters, designs or symbols will fit. Where SIGN faces are placed back to
back and face in opposite directions, the DISPLAY AREA shall be defined as the area
of one face of the SIGN.
7.2.5 ERECTING – Any installing, constructing, reconstructing, replacing, relocating or
extending of a SIGN, but ERECTING shall not include repairing, maintaining, relettering,
or repainting of an existing SIGN.
7.2.6 EXTERIOR SIGN – A WALL SIGN, PROJECTING SIGN or AWNING SIGN.
7.2.7 FREESTANDING SIGN – A non-movable SIGN not affixed to any BUILDING but
constructed in a permanently fixed location on the ground with its own support structure,
including a MONUMENT SIGN, and displaying a SIGN face on not more than two sides.
7.2.8 INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGN – A WALL SIGN consisting of individual letters mounted to
a BUILDING surface without any background or frame.
7.2.9 MONUMENT SIGN – A form of a FREESTANDING SIGN which is attached to and in
contact with the ground over the full width of its DISPLAY AREA.
7.2.10 NEON SIGN – A SIGN which features exposed glass tubing filled with fluorescent gas.
7.2.11 LED SIGN – A SIGN that features light emitting diodes arranged in a pattern to create
pictures, symbols or letters.
7.2.12 OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK – For the purpose of this Section, OFFICE
PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK shall be defined as a development of two or more
BUILDINGS on one or more adjacent LOTS totaling at least 50,000 square feet of NET
FLOOR AREA and available for occupancy by users of office or industrial BUILDING
space.
7.2.13 MOVABLE SIGN – Any SIGN not permanently attached to the ground or to a
BUILDING or permanent STRUCTURE, which is designed to be portable such as an Aframe,
H-frame or T-frame SIGN placed on the surface of the ground or temporarily
staked into the ground.
7.2.14 PROJECTING SIGN – A SIGN which is permanently affixed to the exterior surface of a
BUILDING or STRUCTURE with the DISPLAY AREA positioned perpendicular to the
wall to which the SIGN is mounted.
7.2.15 ROOF SIGN – A SIGN which is painted, mounted or in any way projected above the
lowest point of the eaves of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE, not including any SIGN
defined as a WALL SIGN and not including any WALL SIGN mounted on a vertical
BUILDING wall located above the eaves of any lower portion or wing of a BUILDING.
7.2.16 SIGN – Any symbol, design or device used to identify or advertise any place, business,
product, activity, service, person, idea or statement.
7.2.17 WALL SIGN – A SIGN which is painted or otherwise permanently affixed to a vertical
exterior surface of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE with the DISPLAY AREA positioned
parallel with the wall to which the SIGN is mounted, and including such a SIGN affixed
to a parapet or to the lower slope of a gambrel or mansard roof.
7.2.18 WINDOW SIGN – A SIGN, picture, symbol or message visible from the window’s
exterior side, either hung or otherwise attached directly to the inside of a window, or
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 111
painted or etched on either side of the window pane or glass, not including any part of a
customary window display of merchandise or other product.
7.2.19 TEMPORARY or SPECIAL EVENT SIGN – A temporary SIGN to announce a church
bazaar, fair, circus, festival, business or shop opening, special sale by a store or
business, or similar event; or a temporary SIGN for a business in place of a permanent
sign.
7.3 SIGNS Prohibited in All Districts
7.3.1 Any SIGN ERECTED in violation of this Bylaw.
7.3.2 BILLBOARD SIGNS unless specifically authorized herein; and SIGNS on utility poles,
communication towers, water towers, fences, trees, shrubs or other natural features,
except for directional SIGNS listed in Section 7.5.3.
7.3.3 Any SIGN ERECTED within or above a STREET or affixed to public property, except for
permitted EXTERIOR SIGNS above a sidewalk and except for SIGNS within or above a
STREET or affixed to public property for which written approval has been issued by the
Board of Selectmen or its designee. The Board of Selectmen may adopt and from time
to time amend policies and regulations regarding SIGNS within or above a STREET or
affixed to public property.
7.3.4 MOVABLE SIGNS except as specifically provided herein. Any SIGN designed to be
transported by means of wheels, and SIGNS attached to or painted on vehicles parked
and visible from a STREET or a right of way customarily used by the general public,
unless said vehicle is registered and used, as a vehicle, in the normal day-to-day
operations of the business.
7.3.5 ROOF SIGNS, and any other SIGNS on a LOT which in any way are projected above a
BUILDING or STRUCTURE.
7.3.6 Except as specifically provided herein, any SIGN consisting of or containing pennants;
ribbons; streamers; spinners; balloons; strings of lights not associated with a specific
religious holiday; flags other than those identifying a nation, state, city or town or
located on land owned by the Town of Acton; revolving beacons; searchlights;
animation.
7.3.7 SIGNS that change or rearrange characters or letters or illustrations, except as
specifically provided herein; or flash, rotate, or make noise; or sparkle, twinkle or
purposely reflect sunlight; or move, or give the illusion of moving, except for indicators
of time and temperature or barber poles.
7.3.8 Where this Bylaw requires minimum side or rear yards for BUILDINGS AND
STRUCTURES, any FREESTANDING SIGN ERECTED in such minimum yard, unless
such SIGN is a directional SIGN listed in Section 7.5.3.
7.3.9 Any SIGN or advertising device which due to its shape or combination and arrangement
of colors and/or words resemble traffic SIGNS and traffic control devices.
7.3.10 Any SIGN which in any way creates a hazard to traffic participants, obscures or
confuses traffic controls or blocks safe sight distance.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 112
7.3.11 Any SIGN which in any way obstructs free entrance or egress from a door, window or
fire escape.
7.3.12 Any SIGN advertising or identifying a business, service, product, commodity,
entertainment or similar object or activity which has been discontinued. Such SIGN
shall be removed promptly, in any case within 30 days after notice by the Zoning
Enforcement Officer.
7.3.13 Any SIGN that depicts, describes or relates to nudity or sexual conduct as defined in
M.G.L., Ch. 272, s. 31, and that is visible from the outside of a BUILDING.
7.4 General Regulations – Except where stated otherwise, the following provisions shall
apply to SIGNS in all Zoning Districts.
7.4.1 Design – In the Village Districts no visible portion or exterior surface of any EXTERIOR
or FREESTANDING SIGN shall be made of plastic, other petroleum based products, or
sheet metal, except that in the EAV District such materials may be used provided that
the visible portions and exterior surfaces of a SIGN have a wooden appearance.
7.4.2 Construction and Maintenance – SIGNS shall be constructed of durable and
weatherproof materials. They shall be maintained in safe structural condition and good
visual appearance at all times and no SIGN shall be left in a dangerous or defective
state. All electrical equipment associated with a SIGN shall be installed and maintained
in accordance with the National Electrical Code. The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall
have the authority to inspect any SIGN and order the owner to paint, repair or remove a
SIGN which constitutes a hazard, or a nuisance due to improper or illegal installation,
dilapidation, obsolescence or inadequate maintenance.
7.4.3 Illumination
7.4.3.1 No SIGN shall be illuminated longer than 30 minutes before opening or after closing of
any store or business.
7.4.3.2 No SIGN shall incorporate or be lighted by flashing or blinking lights, or by lights
changing in intensity.
7.4.3.3 Except as otherwise provided herein, illumination for any SIGN shall be provided
through a stationary external light source, with the light projected downward from above
and in compliance with section 10.6.2.4.a) of this Bylaw. In no case shall the
illumination of a SIGN cause blinding or otherwise obstruct the safe vision of any traffic
participant anywhere. SIGN illumination through an external source shall always be
white or off-white.
7.4.3.4 The following types of SIGNS with internal or quasi-internal illumination shall be
permitted, provided that they comply with all applicable standards of the previous
section. The word “opaque” as used in the following Sub-Sections shall mean that the
opaque object shall appear black when the sign is lit at night.
a) NEON or LED SIGNS, subject to Sections 7.5.17 and 7.13.1.6.
b) Opaque INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGNS or symbols, back-lit with a white and
concealed light source, thereby creating an effect by which the letters or symbols
are silhouetted against a wall illuminated by said light source.
c) SIGNS featuring individual letters or symbols which are cut out from an opaque
facing and back-lit with a white and concealed light source, thereby creating an
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 113
effect by which the facing, from which the letters or symbols are cut out, is
silhouetted against a wall illuminated by said light source.
d) Back-lit AWNING SIGNS with the light source internal or concealed from public
view. Such SIGNS shall not be permitted in a Village District.
e) INDIVIDUAL LETTER SIGNS with translucent letter faces, internally illuminated with
a soft-glow light source; or SIGNS with an opaque SIGN face with cutout translucent
letter surfaces which are internally illuminated with a soft-glow light source. Such
SIGNS shall not be permitted in a Village District.
7.4.3.5 In the EAV District, PROJECTING SIGNS, AWNING SIGNS, WALL SIGNS and
FREESTANDING SIGNS shall not be illuminated except as described in Sections
7.4.3.4 b) or c), or from an external light source with the light projected downward from
above.
7.4.3.6 In all other Village Districts:
a) PROJECTING SIGNS and AWNING SIGNS shall not be illuminated.
b) WALL SIGNS shall not be illuminated except as described in Sections 7.4.3.4 b) or
c), or from an external light source with the light projected downward from above.
c) FREESTANDING SIGNS shall not be illuminated except as described in Sections
7.4.3.4 b) or c) or from an external light source.
7.4.3.7 The DISPLAY AREA of an illuminated SIGN shall not exceed an average illuminance of
50 foot-candles measured directly on the surface of the SIGN.
7.4.3.8 Where possible, the light fixtures used for SIGN illumination should be classified as
"energy efficient", as defined by the power utility company serving the LOT.
7.4.4 Other Regulations
7.4.4.1 Where more than one SIGN is permitted for a PRINCIPAL USE, a combination of not
more than two of the following types of SIGNS shall be permitted per PRINCIPAL USE:
WALL SIGN, PROJECTING SIGN, AWNING SIGN, and FREESTANDING SIGN.
However, in the EAV District, a combination of up to three such SIGN types shall be
permitted per PRINCIPAL USE. This section does not apply to any SIGN that does not
require a SIGN Permit as listed in Section 7.5, or to an off-premises directional SIGN
permitted under Section 7.9, or to a Temporary or Special Event Signs(s) permitted
under Section 7.10.
7.4.4.2 The height, width and thickness of a SIGN shall be determined as the maximum vertical
and horizontal dimensions of a SIGN including all support structures and bracing.
7.5 SIGNS Which Do Not Require a SIGN Permit – The following SIGNS do not require a
SIGN Permit or Special Permit, nevertheless such SIGNS shall comply with Sections
7.3 and 7.4 above unless specifically provided otherwise in this section. No such SIGN
shall be ERECTED within 5 feet of the sideline of a STREET or any other right of way
customarily used by the general public, unless such SIGN is a traffic SIGN, landmark
SIGN, directional SIGN, or an EXTERIOR SIGN.
7.5.1 Agricultural SIGNS – A SIGN associated with an agricultural USE as referenced in
Section 3 of M.G.L., Ch. 40A, offering for sale produce and other farm products,
provided that such a SIGN indicates only the name and price of farm products which
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 114
are for sale at the time the SIGN is displayed. The maximum DISPLAY AREA of such
SIGN shall be 10 square feet. Such SIGN may be a MOVABLE SIGN.
7.5.2 Construction SIGNS – One SIGN on the LOT of a new project identifying the proposed
BUILDING, the owner or intended occupant and the contractor, architect and engineers.
Its DISPLAY AREA shall not to exceed 8 square feet in the Residential and Village
Districts, nor 20 square feet in any other District. Such SIGNS shall not be illuminated
and shall not be ERECTED prior to the issuance of a building permit, and it shall be
removed upon completion of the construction or prior to issuance of the occupancy
permit, whichever occurs sooner.
7.5.3 Directional SIGNS – Unless otherwise specified herein, a directional SIGN may be
ERECTED on a LOT wherever appropriate and functional to serve its specific purpose
and where it is not in violation of Section 7.3. A directional SIGN may be a SIGN
necessary for the safety and direction of vehicular and pedestrian traffic; a SIGN
identifying handicapped parking and access; a SIGN giving direction to a public service
facility or accommodation; an official inspection station SIGN; a SIGN displaying a
STREET name or number or a house, block, unit or BUILDING number; a SIGN
required for occupational safety and health reasons; a SIGN posted to prohibit
trespassing, hunting, or certain other activities on private property; or any other SIGN
providing essential direction or guidance. Except as may otherwise be required by
local, state or federal regulations, the DISPLAY AREA of a directional SIGN shall not
exceed two square feet and no directional SIGN shall be ERECTED more than six feet
above the ground level if mounted on a wall of a STRUCTURE or more than four feet
above the ground if freestanding. Directional SIGNS shall not be illuminated, nor
advertise, identify or promote any business, business service, product, commodity,
entertainment or similar object or activity.
7.5.4 Directory SIGNS – One directory SIGN listing the name and location of the occupants of
a BUILDING may be ERECTED on the exterior wall of a BUILDING at each entrance or
at one other appropriate location on the wall of a BUILDING, provided that: (1) in the
Business, Industrial and Office Districts the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed one
square foot for each occupant identified on the directory SIGN, nor more than a total of
12 square feet; and (2) in any other Zoning District the DISPLAY AREA shall not
exceed one half square foot for each occupant identified on the directory SIGN, nor
more than a total of 6 square feet. Such SIGNS shall not be illuminated.
7.5.5 Fuel Pump SIGNS – Fuel pump SIGNS located on service station fuel pumps
identifying the name or type of fuel and price thereof.
7.5.6 Governmental SIGNS – SIGNS, including MOVABLE SIGNS, ERECTED and
maintained by the Town of Acton, the Water Supply District of Acton, the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, or the Federal Government on any land, BUILDING
or STRUCTURE in use by such governmental entity. Any other signs erected by such
governmental entity at any location required for public or environmental health, safety or
notification purposes, or announcing the date, time and place of elections or town
meeting.
7.5.7 Identification SIGNS – For single and two FAMILY residential USES in any Zoning
District, one SIGN on a LOT identifying the occupants of the dwelling, an authorized
home occupation and/or any other USE which is conducted on the LOT and is permitted
in a Residential District. In a Residential District, one SIGN on a LOT identifying a nonconforming
USE. All such SIGNS shall not exceed two square feet of DISPLAY AREA
and shall not be illuminated, except when coincidental to the illumination of a
BUILDING, driveway or similar feature.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 115
7.5.8 Landmark SIGNS – Any SIGN determined by the Board of Selectmen to be of particular
artistic or historic merit that is unique or extraordinarily significant to the Town and its
residents. Such a SIGN may be new or old, it may or may not comply with this Bylaw, it
may be a picture, mural, statue, sculpture or other form of artistic expression, it may
warrant preservation in its original form or may be in need of restoration, or it may be a
marker to identify or commemorate a particular significant location, a historic event or
person, or a natural feature.
7.5.9 Menu SIGNS – One menu SIGN per restaurant, affixed to the exterior wall of a
restaurant with a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 2 square feet.
7.5.10 Multifamily Dwelling SIGNS – A SIGN identifying the name of a multifamily residential
dwelling, not exceeding 6 square feet in DISPLAY AREA. If freestanding its height shall
not exceed 4 feet above ground level and if mounted to the exterior wall of a BUILDING
no portion thereof shall be higher than 6 feet from the ground.
7.5.11 Residential Development SIGNS – A SIGN identifying the name of a residential
development, not exceeding 6 square feet in DISPLAY AREA. If freestanding, its height
shall not exceed 4 feet above ground level, and if mounted to the exterior wall of a
BUILDING, no portion thereof shall be higher than 6 feet from the ground. Any such
SIGN in existence prior to January 1, 1995, which does not meet these standards, shall
nevertheless be deemed to comply herewith.
7.5.12 Political SIGNS – In addition to WINDOW SIGNS, SIGNS may be ERECTED on a LOT
displaying political messages. Such SIGNS shall be stationary and shall not be
illuminated. The height of such SIGNS shall not exceed 4 feet and the DISPLAY AREA
of each sign shall not exceed 6 square feet. SIGNS associated with a political event
such as elections, primaries, balloting, or voter registration shall be removed within 5
days after the event.
7.5.13 Religious SIGNS – SIGNS identifying a religious USE and ERECTED on the same LOT
as the religious USE. Such SIGNS shall not be illuminated and shall be limited to one
WALL SIGN with a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 12 square feet, and one
FREESTANDING SIGN with a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 8 square feet and a
maximum height of 5 feet.
7.5.14 Sale, Rent or Lease SIGNS – A For Sale, Rent or Lease SIGNS shall not require a
SIGN permit provided that its DISPLAY AREA does not exceed 20 square feet for
property located in a Business, Office or Industrial Zoning District and 8 square feet for
property located in any other district. In a Residential District, one For Sale, Rent or
Lease SIGN shall be allowed per LOT, and one such SIGN shall be permitted for each
business or establishment in any other Zoning District. Such a SIGN shall not be
illuminated. Such SIGN may be a MOVABLE SIGN and it shall be removed
immediately following the closing of a sale, lease or rental agreement.
7.5.15 Traffic SIGNS – Standard traffic SIGNS and control devices.
7.5.16 WINDOW SIGNS – WINDOW SIGNS, other than a NEON or LED SIGN, in the
Business, Village, Industrial and Office Districts shall not require a SIGN Permit
provided that their aggregate DISPLAY AREA covers no more than 25 percent of the
window in which they are ERECTED. Such SIGN shall not be illuminated. WINDOW
SIGNS promoting a public service or charitable event shall not be calculated in the
allowable 25 percent.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 116
7.5.17 NEON or LED WINDOW SIGNS – NEON or LED WINDOW SIGNS in the Business,
Village, Industrial, and Office Park Districts shall not require a SIGN Permit provided
that the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed ten square feet or cover more than 25% of
the window in which they are ERECTED, whichever is less. There shall be not more
than one such SIGN allowed per PRINCIPAL USE. In the Village Districts, a NEON or
LED WINDOW SIGN may only be placed in a ground floor window. As with any other
SIGN, a NEON or LED WINDOW SIGN shall not be illuminated longer than 30 minutes
before opening of after closing of the store or business.
7.5.18 Yard sale or garage sale SIGNS – One SIGN, which may be a MOVABLE SIGN, on the
LOT where the sale occurs, displaying only the words "Yard Sale" or "Garage Sale"
together with the date of the event. Such SIGN shall not exceed 6 square feet in
DISPLAY AREA and shall not be illuminated. Such SIGN shall not be ERECTED
sooner than 3 days before the sale and it shall be removed not later than 1 day after the
sale. In no case shall such a SIGN be ERECTED on a LOT for more than 5 days per
calendar year.
7.5.19 “OPEN” SIGNS - One SIGN, other than a WINDOW SIGN, associated with a
PRINCIPAL USE indicating that the establishment is open for business. Such a SIGN
shall be either affixed to the BUILDING as near as practically possible to the entrance of
the establishment or to a FREESTANDING SIGN otherwise permitted under this Bylaw.
Such a SIGN shall not exceed 6 square feet in DISPLAY AREA. The DISPLAY AREA of
such an “OPEN” SIGN shall not count towards the DISPLAY AREA of any other SIGN
on the premises. Notwithstanding Section 7.3.6, an “OPEN” SIGN may be a flag or a
banner.
7.6 SIGN Permits – Any SIGN permitted under the following Sections 7.7 through 7.13
shall require a SIGN Permit from the Zoning Enforcement Officer and no such SIGN
shall be ERECTED except in conformity with such a SIGN Permit and in the exact
location and manner described in the SIGN Permit.
7.6.1 Application – All applications for SIGNS requiring a SIGN Permit shall be made to the
Zoning Enforcement Officer in such form as he may require, and such applications shall
include at least: 1) the location, by STREET number, of the proposed SIGN; 2) the
name and address of the SIGN owner and the owner of the LOT where the SIGN is to
be ERECTED, if other than the SIGN owner; 3) a scale drawing showing the proposed
construction, method of installation or support, colors, display, dimensions, location of
the SIGN on the site, and method of illumination; 4) such other pertinent information as
the Zoning Enforcement Officer may require to ensure compliance with the Bylaw and
any other applicable law; and 5) the application must be signed by the owner of the
SIGN and the owner of the LOT where the SIGN is to be ERECTED; the Lot owner’s
signature shall not be required for TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS. The
Zoning Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to reject any SIGN Permit
application which is not complete when submitted.
7.6.2 Time Limitations – The Zoning Enforcement Officer shall approve or disapprove any
application for a SIGN Permit within 45 days of receipt of the application. If the Zoning
Enforcement Officer should fail to approve or disapprove an application for a SIGN
Permit within such 45 day period, the application shall be deemed to be approved.
7.6.3 Fees – The Board of Selectmen shall establish and from time to time review a SIGN
Permit fee which shall be published as part of a SIGN Permit application form.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 117
7.7 EXTERIOR SIGNS – Any PRINCIPAL USE permitted in a Business, Industrial, Office or
Village District may ERECT an EXTERIOR SIGN subject to the following:
7.7.1 Except as may otherwise be provided, one EXTERIOR SIGN shall be permitted for
each PRINCIPAL USE. Such EXTERIOR SIGN may be a WALL SIGN, a
PROJECTING SIGN or an AWNING SIGN.
7.7.2 Except as specifically provided for certain WALL SIGNS, an EXTERIOR SIGN may only
be ERECTED on the exterior wall of the ground floor and up to 1 foot below the level of
the bottom sills of the windows of the story above the ground floor of a BUILDING.
7.7.3 An EXTERIOR SIGN shall not be ERECTED within 6 inches of any horizontal edge of a
BUILDING or STRUCTURE nor extend beyond such horizontal edge. Except for
AWNING SIGNS, an EXTERIOR SIGN shall not obscure or cover architectural features
such as but not limited to arches, sills, eaves moldings, cornices, transoms, lintels and
windows, and shall not be ERECTED within 6 inches from any such architectural
features.
7.7.4 WALL SIGNS – A WALL SIGN may be ERECTED on a BUILDING, or on an arcade
STRUCTURE attached to the ground floor of a BUILDING, or on a permanent canopy
STRUCTURE associated with a motor vehicle service station or a bank drive-up
window.
7.7.4.1 The maximum DISPLAY AREA of a WALL SIGN affixed to the exterior wall of a
BUILDING in conformance with Section 7.7.2, or to an arcade, canopy, parapet, or
gambrel or mansard roof, shall not exceed 1 square foot for each lineal foot of wall(*).
{(*) The wall front or store front occupied by a business, or the width of the canopy side
to which the SIGN is attached.}
7.7.4.2 The height of a WALL SIGN shall not exceed 4.5 feet in the Business, Industrial, and
Office Districts, 3 feet in the EAV and EAV-2 Districts, and 2 feet in all other Village
Districts.
7.7.4.3 The maximum width of a WALL SIGN affixed to the exterior wall of a BUILDING in
conformance with Section 7.7.2, or to an arcade, canopy, parapet, or gambrel or
mansard roof, shall not exceed 1 foot for each 2 lineal feet of wall(*) up to 30 feet in the
Business, Industrial and Office Districts, and 1 foot for each 3 lineal feet of wall(*) up to
20 feet in the Village Districts. {(*) The wall front or store front occupied by a business,
or the width of the canopy side to which the SIGN is attached.}
7.7.4.4 A business occupying a floor other than the first floor of a BUILDING may ERECT a
WALL SIGN at a BUILDING elevation higher than the one permitted in Section 7.7.2,
provided that the maximum width shall not exceed 8 feet in the Business, Industrial and
Office Districts, and 6 feet in the Village Districts.
7.7.4.5 A WALL SIGN may be affixed to a parapet or to a gambrel or mansard roof of a single
story BUILDING. In addition to any other applicable requirements, such a WALL SIGN
shall maintain a minimum distance of 1 foot from the top of the parapet or from the top
of the lower slope of the gambrel or mansard roof.
7.7.4.6 A WALL SIGN shall not project more than 1 foot from the surface to which it is attached.
7.7.4.7 A WALL SIGN shall not be ERECTED within 2 feet from the vertical edge of the
BUILDING, arcade or canopy surface to which it is attached nor extend beyond such
vertical edge.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 118
7.7.4.8 A WALL SIGN shall be affixed to a more or less flat exterior surface in a location where
the symmetry of the BUILDING, arcade or canopy and their features will be maintained.
7.7.5 PROJECTING SIGNS – A PROJECTING SIGN may be ERECTED on a BUILDING
provided that the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed 12 square feet in the Business,
Industrial and Office Districts, and 6 square feet in the Village Districts. The thickness
between the SIGN faces shall not exceed 1 foot. A PROJECTING SIGN shall not
project more than 3 feet from the face of the wall and shall maintain a minimum
clearance of 8 feet above a walkway or sidewalk.
7.7.6 AWNING SIGNS – An AWNING SIGN may be ERECTED on a BUILDING. Such
AWNING SIGN may consist of letters or symbols affixed to an awning in a parallel,
perpendicular and/or convex position to the wall onto which the awning is mounted,
except that in the Village Districts the convex position of letters to the wall shall not be
permitted. Letters and symbols on an AWNING SIGN shall be flush with the surface of
the awning. The maximum DISPLAY AREA of an AWNING SIGN shall be 12 square
feet for surfaces positioned parallel or convex to the BUILDING wall, and 6 square feet
for surfaces positioned perpendicular to the BUILDING wall. Except in the EAV District,
if the AWNING SIGN is ERECTED on an awning manufactured with canvas on a frame
that is retractable to the wall, one additional EXTERIOR SIGN, which may be a WALL
SIGN or a PROJECTING SIGN, shall be permitted on the BUILDING for the same
PRINCIPAL USE. An AWNING SIGN shall not project more than 3 feet from the wall
and shall maintain a minimum clearance of 8 feet above a walkway or sidewalk. Where
an AWNING SIGN is ERECTED on the wall of a BUILDING, all other awnings without a
SIGN located on the same BUILDING shall be subject to the same dimensional
requirements as the AWNING SIGN.
7.7.7 Secondary EXTERIOR SIGNS – If a business has a direct entrance into the business in
a wall other than the front wall, there may be a secondary WALL SIGN, PROJECTING
SIGN or AWNING SIGN affixed to such wall at such entrance; and if the business has a
wall other than the front wall without a direct entrance to the business that faces upon a
STREET or parking area, there may be a secondary WALL SIGN affixed to such wall;
provided, however, that no business shall have more than two secondary EXTERIOR
SIGNS in any event. In the EAV District, an additional secondary EXTERIOR SIGN
shall be permitted on the front wall of the PRINCIPAL USE, provided that it is of a
different type (WALL SIGN, PROJECTING SIGN, or AWNING SIGN) than any other
SIGN on the front wall. The DISPLAY AREA of any secondary EXTERIOR SIGN shall
not exceed 6 square feet.
7.7.8 One EXTERIOR SIGN shall be permitted for a BUSINESS CENTER in addition to any
other permitted EXTERIOR SIGNS. Such EXTERIOR SIGN shall conform to the
dimensional requirements for EXTERIOR SIGNS and identify only the BUSINESS
CENTER. If such EXTERIOR SIGN is ERECTED in a Village Districts, no
FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted on the same LOT, nor within the same
BUSINESS CENTER.
7.8 FREESTANDING SIGNS – Any PRINCIPAL USE permitted in a Business, Industrial,
Office or Village District may ERECT a FREESTANDING SIGN identifying a business or
a BUSINESS CENTER, subject to the following:
7.8.1 One FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted on a LOT identifying a business located
on the same LOT.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 119
7.8.2 No FREESTANDING SIGN shall be ERECTED within 5 feet of the sideline of a
STREET or any right of way customarily used by the general public, or within such
greater distance that is equal to the height of the FREESTANDING SIGN, and no
portion of a FREESTANDING SIGN shall be located within the airspace above any such
minimum required distance.
7.8.3 A FREESTANDING SIGN shall be integrated into the landscape design of the LOT or
parcel. It shall be centered within a landscaped area located on the LOT or parcel with
a minimum area in square feet to be equal to the overall height of the SIGN multiplied
by two, by the power of two. (Example - SIGN height = 6 feet: 6 ft. x 2 = 12 ft.;
12 ft. x 12 ft. = 144 sq. ft. = minimum landscaped area). Such landscaped area shall be
planted and maintained with suitable vegetation including shrubs and flowering
perennials surrounding the base of the FREESTANDING SIGN. The landscaped area
required under this section may be provided as part of a landscaped area required
under any other section of this Bylaw.
7.8.4 If a FREESTANDING SIGN is a MONUMENT SIGN where the exterior surface of the
support structure consists of masonry material which remains in its natural color other
than plain gray concrete, the area below the lowest portion of any letter, symbol or
illustration consisting of such masonry surface shall not be counted as DISPLAY AREA.
7.8.5 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in the Business,
Industrial and Office Districts:
7.8.5.1 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a business, such FREESTANDING SIGN
shall be permitted in addition to any EXTERIOR SIGN permitted on the same LOT. The
DISPLAY AREA of the FREESTANDING SIGN shall not exceed 12 square feet and the
height shall not exceed 7 feet. If such a FREESTANDING SIGN is a MONUMENT
SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be increased to 16 square feet, provided however that
the height of a MONUMENT SIGN shall not exceed 4 feet, or 6 feet if its width does not
exceed 3 feet. Where the FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a motor vehicle service
station the maximum permitted DISPLAY AREA may be increased to 24 square feet if
the additionally permitted DISPLAY AREA is used solely for the posting of current
prices of fuel and gasoline.
7.8.5.2 One FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted for a BUSINESS CENTER, provided
that no other FREESTANDING SIGN identifying an individual business shall be
permitted in the BUSINESS CENTER.
7.8.5.3 A BUSINESS CENTER is eligible for two FREESTANDING SIGNS when the LOT or
LOTS of the BUSINESS CENTER have more than 300 feet of combined FRONTAGE
on one or more STREETS, provided that not more than one FREESTANDING SIGN for
the BUSINESS CENTER shall be allowed along a continuous FRONTAGE on one
STREET that measures less than 300 feet.
7.8.5.4 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a BUSINESS CENTER, each business
located within such BUSINESS CENTER may display its identification on the
FREESTANDING SIGN together with the identification of the BUSINESS CENTER,
provided that such FREESTANDING SIGN remains of integrated and coherent design
and complies with all applicable standards. The DISPLAY AREA of such a
FREESTANDING SIGN shall not exceed a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 50 square
feet, and its height shall not exceed 12.5 feet. If a FREESTANDING SIGN under this
provision is a MONUMENT SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be increased to a maximum
DISPLAY AREA of 62.5 square feet. The height of such a MONUMENT SIGN shall not
exceed 10 feet.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 120
7.8.6 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in all Village Districts:
7.8.6.1 The DISPLAY AREA of a FREESTANDING SIGN identifying an individual business
shall not exceed 8 square feet and the height shall not exceed 5 feet. If such a
FREESTANDING SIGN is a MONUMENT SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be increased
to 12 square feet, provided however that the height shall not exceed 4 feet, or 5 feet if
its width does not exceed 3 feet. Where the FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a motor
vehicle service station, the maximum permitted DISPLAY AREA may be increased to
16 square feet if the additionally permitted DISPLAY AREA is used solely for the
posting of current prices of fuel and gasoline.
7.8.6.2 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a BUSINESS CENTER, each business
located within such BUSINESS CENTER may display its identification on the
FREESTANDING SIGN together with the identification of the BUSINESS CENTER,
provided that such FREESTANDING SIGN remains of integrated and coherent design
and complies with all applicable standards.
7.8.7 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in the NAV, SAV, and
WAV Districts:
7.8.7.1 One FREESTANDING SIGN may be ERECTED on a LOT provided that no BUILDING
on the LOT is located within 30 feet of the sideline of the STREET nearest which the
FREESTANDING SIGN is ERECTED.
7.8.7.2 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a business no EXTERIOR SIGN shall be
ERECTED on the same LOT.
7.8.7.3 The DISPLAY AREA of a FREESTANDING SIGN for a BUSINESS CENTER shall not
exceed a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 12 square feet, and its height shall not exceed 6
feet. If such a FREESTANDING SIGN under this provision is a MONUMENT SIGN, its
DISPLAY AREA may be a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 20 square feet. The height of
such MONUMENT SIGN shall not exceed 4 feet.
7.8.8 The following standards shall apply to FREESTANDING SIGNS in the EAV and EAV-2
Districts:
7.8.8.1 Where a FREESTANDING SIGN identifies a business, one EXTERIOR SIGN shall be
permitted.
7.8.8.2 One BUSINESS CENTER sign shall be permitted for a BUSINESS CENTER, provided
no other FREESTANDING SIGN identifying an individual business shall be permitted in
the BUSINESS CENTER.
7.8.8.3 A BUSINESS CENTER is eligible for two FREESTANDING SIGNS when the LOT or
LOTS have more than 300 feet of combined FRONTAGE on one or more STREETS,
provided that not more than one FREESTANDING SIGN for the BUSINESS CENTER
shall be allowed along a continuous FRONTAGE on one STREET that measures less
than 300 feet.
7.8.8.4 The DISPLAY AREA of a FREESTANDING SIGN identifying a BUSINESS CENTER
shall not exceed a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 27 square feet, and its height shall not
exceed 9 feet. If a FREESTANDING SIGN under this provision is a MONUMENT
SIGN, its DISPLAY AREA may be a maximum DISPLAY AREA of 40 square feet. The
height of such MONUMENT SIGN shall not exceed 8 feet.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 121
7.8.9 One FREESTANDING SIGN may be ERECTED on a LOT or parcel located in the
Business, Industrial or Office District identifying an OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL
PARK which may be located on more than one LOT, subject to the following:
7.8.9.1 Only one such SIGN shall be permitted for each OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK.
7.8.9.2 Such FREESTANDING SIGN shall only identify the OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL
PARK and shall be subject to the provisions applicable to FREESTANDING SIGNS
identifying a BUSINESS CENTER as they apply to the particular location in which the
SIGN is ERECTED. However, any DISPLAY AREA specifically provided to
accommodate the listing of individual business shall not be included in calculating the
maximum DISPLAY AREA hereunder and no display of individual establishments within
an OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK shall be permitted on a FREESTANDING
SIGN hereunder.
7.8.9.3 Such FREESTANDING SIGN may be permitted in addition to any permitted EXTERIOR
SIGNS on the same LOT but no other FREESTANDING SIGN shall be permitted on the
same LOT or parcel.
7.8.9.4 Such SIGN shall be ERECTED on a LOT or parcel which is clearly a part of the
BUSINESS CENTER, OFFICE PARK or INDUSTRIAL PARK which it identifies.
7.9 Off-premises Directional SIGNS – One off-premises directional SIGN shall be
permitted on a LOT assisting motorists in finding businesses, other than home
occupations, not located on the same LOT, provided that such SIGN identifies only the
name(s) of such businesses which are located on a LOT that does not have
FRONTAGE on any of the major numbered through STREETS: Routes 2, 2A, 27, 111,
and 62. Such SIGN shall not display any advertisement nor be illuminated. The
maximum DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed 1 square foot per business identified on the
SIGN, up to 4 square feet of combined DISPLAY AREA for multiple identifications on
such SIGN. The height of such SIGN shall not exceed 5 feet above the ground. There
shall be no more than two locations at which any particular business may be identified
hereunder. No SIGN permitted hereunder shall be ERECTED within a STREET or
within any right of way customarily used by the general public, and no such SIGN shall
be ERECTED within the R-2, R-4, R-8/4, R-8, R-10/8 or R-10 Districts.
7.10 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS
7.10.1 One SPECIAL EVENT SIGN may be ERECTED to announce a church bazaar, fair,
circus, festival, business or shop opening, special sale by a store or business, or similar
event. Such SIGN shall be ERECTED on the same LOT where the event is to occur. It
may identify the event and the date of the event, and it may display the event's sponsor,
organizer and main feature. Such a SIGN shall be removed not later than 1 day after
completion of the event. The display time of SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS, taken together,
shall be limited to 45 days per PRINCIPAL USE for each calendar year.
7.10.2 In addition to SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS, any PRINCIPAL USE permitted in a Business,
Industrial, Office or Village District that does not have a permanent FREESTANDING or
EXTERIOR SIGN may ERECT one TEMPORARY SIGN on the same LOT where the
PRINCIPAL USE is located for the duration between the application filing date for a
permanent SIGN permit or special permit pursuant to section 7.6 and 7.13 and, if
approved, up to 45 days after the issuance of a SIGN permit pursuant to section 7.6.
7.10.3 Only one TEMPORARY or SPECIAL EVENT SIGN shall be ERECTED per PRINCIPAL
USE at any given time.
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 122
7.10.4 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS shall not exceed 10 square feet in
DISPLAY AREA.
7.10.5 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS shall neither be ERECTED on a sidewalk,
walkway or driveway, nor within 5 feet from the sideline of a STREET or right of way
customarily used by the general public.
7.10.6 TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS shall comply with the provisions of Sections
7.3 and 7.4, except as set forth in this section, and they shall not be illuminated.
7.10.7 Notwithstanding subsections 7.3.4, 7.3.6, and 7.4.1, TEMPORARY and SPECIAL
EVENT SIGNS may be MOVABLE SIGNS, and in Village Districts may be made with
materials not otherwise allowed; and SPECIAL EVENT SIGNS may consist of a flag or
balloon, or may be decorated with ribbons, flags, streamers or balloons that remain
reasonably within the confines of the SIGNS.
7.10.8 No TEMPORARY or SPECIAL EVENT SIGN shall be ERECTED without a SIGN permit
issued by the office of the Zoning Enforcement Officer pursuant to section 7.6, which
may be a blanket SIGN permit that covers all TEMPORARY and SPECIAL EVENT
SIGNS for a PRINCIPAL USE for up to one calendar year. The SIGN permit shall state
the specific dates and time periods during which the TEMPORARY and SPECIAL
EVENT SIGNS may be ERECTED and the specific location or locations on a LOT.
7.11 SIGNS for Golf Courses and Cross-Country Skiing in Residential Districts – One
FREESTANDING SIGN may be ERECTED for a Golf Course or a Cross-Country Skiing
course that is located in a residential district. The FREESTANDING SIGN shall have a
maximum height of 5 feet and the DISPLAY AREA shall not exceed 8 square feet. In
addition, said USES may erect one WALL SIGN on the main building with a maximum
DISPLAY AREA of 20 square feet.
7.12 Non-Conforming SIGNS – Any non-conforming SIGN lawfully ERECTED may
continue, subject to the following:
7.12.1 Non-conforming SIGNS accessory to a USE or USES shall be removed or replaced
concurrently with any expansion of such USE or USES. Such non-conforming SIGNS
shall be replaced with a conforming SIGN or SIGNS prior to the issuance of an
occupancy permit for any BUILDING into which the USE or USES are to be expanded.
7.12.2 Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent orderly, regular, and timely maintenance,
repair, and repainting with the same original colors of a non-conforming SIGN, or the relettering,
re-facing, or changing of message of a non-conforming sign.
7.13 SIGNS Requiring a Special Permit from the Planning Board
7.13.1 The Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority under this Section,
may approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the following SIGNS and the
following deviations from the requirements of Sections 7.4, 7.7 and 7.8:
7.13.1.1 A greater number of SIGNS than allowed under Sections 7.7 and 7.8, but not more than
one SIGN in addition to the number of SIGNS otherwise permitted per LOT or per
PRINCIPAL USE, as the Planning Board finds appropriate to further the purpose of this
Section as stated in Section 7.1.
7.13.1.2 EXTERIOR SIGNS with dimensions in excess of those permitted under Section 7.7
subject to the following limitations:
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 123
a) no SIGN wider than one and one half times the maximum width otherwise permitted,
and
b) no SIGN larger than twice the otherwise permitted maximum DISPLAY AREA, and
c) any such other limitation as the Planning Board may find appropriate to further the
purpose of this Section as stated in Section 7.1.
7.13.1.3 A SIGN in a location or in a position not otherwise permitted, but not a ROOF SIGN, a
BILLBOARD, or a SIGN located within the minimum required distance from the sideline
of a STREET or right of way customarily used by the general public.
7.13.1.4 SIGNS made of materials not otherwise permitted.
7.13.1.5 A SIGN attached to a stone wall, retaining wall, fence or other landscaping feature on a
LOT, provided that such SIGN and feature are, in the opinion of the Planning Board, an
integral component of the landscape design and BUILDING architecture on the LOT.
7.13.1.6 Except in the Village Districts, a NEON or LED SIGN to be ERECTED on a LOT in
place of a SIGN otherwise permitted, provided it features an individualized, custom
made design showing only a drawing, logo, symbol or illustration, but not letters. A
NEON or LED SIGN hereunder shall comply with all applicable dimensional standards.
A NEON SIGN shall be composed of primarily single strand glass tubing with a
maximum 1 inch diameter.
7.13.1.7 One SIGN for a nonconforming, pre-existing business, industrial or office USE other
than a home occupation, ERECTED in a Residential District, conforming to the
applicable requirements for a SIGN in a Village District, not illuminated and not
exceeding six square feet in DISPLAY AREA.
7.13.1.8 A FREESTANDING SIGN with less than the required landscaped area, provided that, in
the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient landscape treatment is provided to
compensate for the reduction in area.
7.13.1.9 A type or method of SIGN illumination not otherwise permitted provided that it meets the
general objectives of Section 7.4.3.
7.13.2 A Special Permit under this section shall only be issued if the Planning Board, in
addition to the required findings of Section 10.3.5, finds that, in its opinion, the resulting
SIGN or the resulting deviation from the otherwise applicable requirements of this
Section 7 meet the following criteria:
7.13.2.1 The SIGN will be consistent with the intent and purpose of Section 7.
7.13.2.2 The SIGN will be consistent with the character and use of the area and with the Zoning
District in which it is ERECTED.
7.13.2.3 The SIGN will have appropriate scale and proportion in its design and in its visual
relationship to BUILDINGS in the area and to its general surroundings. It has been
attractively designed and located, and will be a compatible architectural element of the
BUILDING to which it principally relates and will be in harmony with other features in the
general area.
7.13.2.4 The proposed SIGN will provide continuity with other SIGNS, not including any nonconforming
SIGNS, on the same or adjacent BUILDINGS or LOTS with respect to most
Town of Acton Zoning Bylaw, October 2016 Page 124
but not necessarily all of the following criteria: dimension, proportion, mounting height,
materials, colors, and other important features as determined by the Planning Board.
7.13.2.5 The colors, materials and illumination of the proposed SIGN are restrained and
harmonious with the BUILDING and the site to which it principally relates.
7.13.2.6 The material used for the SIGN is appropriate and does not detract from the aesthetic
qualities of its surroundings.
7.13.2.7 The number of graphic elements on the proposed SIGN is held to the minimum needed
to convey the SIGN'S primary message and is in good proportion to the area of the
SIGN face.
7.13.2.8 The proposed SIGN will not unduly compete for attention with any other SIGN or
SIGNS.
7.13.2.9 In the case of a SIGN under Sections 7.13.1.1 through 7.13.1.3, the proposed SIGN is
necessary for adequate identification of a business which for site specific reasons would
not reasonably be possible under the otherwise applicable standards and available
options of this Bylaw.
7.13.3 When granting a special permit hereunder, the Planning Board, in order to mitigate
negative impacts of a SIGN and to help support any of its required findings under
Section 7.13.2, may impose reasonable conditions taking into consideration all aspects
of the SIGN and its impacts on the visual environment in the area, including but not
limited to design, construction, color, illumination, landscaping, and coordination with
BUILDINGS and other SIGNS in the area, it may require the removal of any nonconforming
SIGN or SIGNS on the LOT or in the same BUSINESS CENTER, and it
may impose such other conditions as it deems appropriate to further the purpose of this
Section as stated in Section 7.1.
7.13.4 The Planning Board shall promulgate Rules and Regulations governing the business of
the Planning Board under this Section, including but not limited to the contents of an
application and application fees, and it may adopt and from time to time amend design
guidelines for SIGNS as it finds appropriate.
7.13.5 Where a SIGN is located in a Local Historic District, the Planning Board shall have no
authority to require or grant a Special Permit under this Section 7.13. Instead, the
Historic District Commission shall have the power and discretion to issue a Certificate of
Appropriateness for such SIGN under the Acton Historic District Bylaw, Chapter P of the
Town Bylaws. However, any SIGN approved hereunder shall also comply with the
requirements of this Bylaw, including the requirements of Section 7.13.1.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
77
C H A P T E R P
LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT BYLAW
The Town of Acton hereby creates a Local Historic District, to be administered by an
Historic District Commission as provided for under Massachusetts General Laws,
Chapter 40C, as amended.
P1. Purpose
The purpose of this bylaw is to aid in the preservation and protection of the distinctive
characteristics and architecture of buildings and places significant in the history of the
Town of Acton, the maintenance and improvement of their settings and the
encouragement of new building designs compatible with the historically significant
architecture existing in the Local Historic District(s) when this Bylaw was first adopted in
1990. This Bylaw does not seek to establish an architectural museum, but instead to
inform concerning the historical process of architectural growth and adaptation to
heighten a sense of educated pride in our heritage.
P2. Definitions
The terms defined in this section shall be capitalized throughout this Bylaw. Where a
defined term has not been capitalized, it is intended that the meaning of the term be the
same as the meaning ascribed to it in this section unless another meaning is clearly
intended by its context. As used in this Bylaw the following terms shall have the
following meaning:
"Alteration” or "To Alter” The act of the fact of rebuilding, reconstruction,
restoration, replication, removal, demolition, and other similar activities.
“Building" A combination of materials forming a shelter for persons, animals or
property.
"Certificate" A Certificate of Appropriateness, a Certificate of Non-Applicability, or a
Certificate of Hardship as set forth in this Bylaw.
"Commission" The Historic District Commission as established in this Bylaw.
"Construction" or "To Construct” The act or the fact of building, erecting,
installing, enlarging, moving and other similar activities.
"Display Area" The total surface area of a SIGN, including all lettering, wording,
designs, symbols, background and frame, but not including any support structure or
bracing incidental to the SIGN. The DISPLAY AREA of an individual letter SIGN or
irregular shaped SIGN shall be the area of the smallest rectangle into which the
letters or shape will fit. Where SIGN faces are placed back to back and face in
opposite directions, the DISPLAY AREA shall be defined as the area of one face of
the SIGN.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
78
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P2. Definitions cont
"District" The Local Historic District as established in this Bylaw consisting of one
or more DISTRICT areas.
"Exterior Architectural Feature" Such portion of the exterior of a BUILDING or
STRUCTURE as is open to view from a public way or ways, including but not limited
to architectural style and general arrangement and setting thereof, the kind and
texture of exterior building materials, and the type and style of windows, doors, lights,
signs and other appurtenant exterior fixtures.
"Person Aggrieved" The applicant; an owner of adjoining property; an owner of
property within the same DISTRICT area; or an owner of property within 100 feet of
said DISTRICT area and any charitable corporation in which one of its purposes is
the preservation of historic structures or districts.
"Signs" Any symbol, design or device used to identify or advertise any place of
business, product, activity or person.
"Structure" A combination of materials other than a BUILDING, including but not
limited to a SIGN, fence, wall, terrace, walk or driveway.
“Substantially at Grade Level” Located at the existing or altered surface of the
earth or pavement which does not/will not exceed one foot in height above the
surface of the earth or pavement.
"Temporary Structure or Building” A BUILDING not to be in existence for a period
of more than two years. A STRUCTURE not to be in existence for a period of more
than one year.
P3. District
The DISTRICT shall consist of one or more DISTRICT areas as listed in Section 13
(Appendices) of this Bylaw.
P4. Commission
4.1.1 The COMMISSION shall consist of seven (7) regular members appointed
by the Board of Selectmen to staggered three (3) year terms, such that three
members’ terms will expire in one year and two members terms will expire in
the second and third year, and so forth.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
79
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P4. Commission - continued
4.2 The COMMISSION shall include among its regular or alternate members, if
practical, an Acton property owner who resides in each of the three DISTRICT
areas, one Acton resident chosen from two nominees put forward by the Board of
Realtors covering Acton, one Acton resident chosen from two nominees put
forward by the chapter of the American Institute of Architects covering Acton, and
one Acton resident chosen from two nominees put forward by the Acton Historical
Society. If within thirty days after submission of a written request for nominees to
any of the organizations herein named insufficient nominations have been made,
the Board of Selectmen may proceed to make appointments as it desires.
4.3 The Board of Selectmen may at its sole discretion, appoint up to a maximum of
four (4) alternate members to the COMMISSION for three (3) year terms. The
available alternate member(s) with the longest continuous length of service as an
alternate may be substituted and vote on a one for one basis, in place of any
regular member(s) who may be absent or has/have an actual or apparent conflict
of interest, or in the case of a vacancy in the regular memberships.
4.4 Each member shall continue to serve in office after the expiration date of his or
her term until a successor is duly appointed.
4.5 Meetings of the COMMISSION shall be held at the call of the Chairman, at the
request of two members and in such other manner as the COMMISSION shall
determine in its Rules and Regulations.
4.6 A quorum is necessary for the COMMISSION to conduct a meeting. At least four
(4) members of the COMMISSION (or Alternate Members with voting rights as to
a matter(s) under consideration) must be present.
P5. Commission Powers and Duties
5.1 The COMMISSION shall exercise its powers in administering and regulating the
CONSTRUCTION and ALTERATION of any STRUCTURES or BUILDINGS within
the DISTRICT as set forth under the procedures and criteria established in this
Bylaw. In exercising its powers and duties hereunder, the COMMISSION shall
pay due regard to the distinctive characteristics of each BUILDING, STRUCTURE
and DISTRICT area.
5.2 The COMMISSION, after public hearing, may by vote of two thirds (2/3rds) of its
regular members (not to include alternate members) from time to time adopt, and
from time to time amend, reasonable Rules and Regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this Bylaw or M.G.L. Chapter 40C, setting forth such forms and
procedures as it deems desirable and necessary for the regulation of its affairs
and the conduct of its business, including requirements for the contents and form
of applications for CERTIFICATES, fees, hearing procedures and other matters.
The COMMISSION shall file a copy of any such Rules and Regulations with the
office of the Town Clerk.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
80
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P5. Commission Powers and Duties - continued
5.3 The COMMISSION, after a public hearing duly posted and advertised at least 14
days in advance in a conspicuous place in Town Hall and in a newspaper of
general circulation in Acton, may adopt and from time to time amend guidelines
which set forth the designs for certain EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL
FEATURES which will meet the requirements of the DISTRICT. No such design
guidelines shall limit the right of an applicant for a CERTIFICATE to present other
designs to the COMMISSION for approval.
5.4 The COMMISSION shall at the beginning of each fiscal year hold an
organizational meeting and elect a Chairman, a Vice Chairman and Secretary,
and file notice of such election with the office of the Town Clerk.
5.5 The COMMISSION shall keep a permanent public record of its resolutions,
transactions, decisions and determinations and of the vote of each member
participating therein.
5.6 The COMMISSION shall undertake educational efforts to explain to the public
and property owners the merits and functions of a DISTRICT.
P6. Alterations and Construction Prohibited Without Certificate
6.1 No BUILDING or STRUCTURE, or any part thereof, which is within a DISTRICT
shall be CONSTRUCTED or ALTERED in any way which affects the EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES visible to the unaided eye from any point at a five
(5) foot elevation above the surface of the public way, on which the underlying lot
or property has frontage, that is no closer to the BUILDING or STRUCTURE than
the closest edge of pavement, or paved sidewalk if any unless the COMMISSION
shall have first issued a CERTIFICATE with respect to such CONSTRUCTION or
ALTERATION, except as this Bylaw otherwise provides
6.1.1 The following conceptual drawings are included to illustrate the review
jurisdiction limitation set forth in paragraph 6.1 above: The viewing areas
shown would be similarly applied to all buildings or structures on a property.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
81
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P6. Alterations and Construction Prohibited Without Certificate continued
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
82
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P6. Alterations and Construction Prohibited Without Certificate - continued
6.2 Where a lot containing such BUILDING or STRUCTURE has frontage on more
than one public way, the COMMISSION shall limit its review powers established
under this BYLAW to the public way from which the view of the BUILDING or
STRUCTURE is, in the opinion of the COMMISSION, most relevant to the
integrity of the DISTRICT. The COMMISSION may, with due notice to the owners
of those properties affected, make advance determinations of and provide the
Town Clerk a list of its determinations as to which public way views are generally
most relevant to the integrity of the various existing BUILDINGS in each
DISTRICT. In the event it is proposed to rely upon a different view than the
relevant and previously listed view when considering any particular application or
complaint as to any BUILDING, the burden is upon the COMMISSION, as part of
its decision, to adequately document in writing the reasons therefore.
6.3 No building permit for CONSTRUCTION of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE or for
ALTERATION of an EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE within a DISTRICT
and no demolition permit for demolition or removal of a BUILDING or
STRUCTURE within a DISTRICT shall be issued by the Town or any department
thereof until a CERTIFICATE as required under this Bylaw has been issued by the
COMMISSION.
P7. Procedures for Review of Applications
7.1 Any person who desires to obtain a CERTIFICATE from the COMMISSION shall
file with the Town Clerk and the COMMISSION an application for a CERTIFICATE
of Appropriateness, or non-Applicability or of Hardship as the case may be. The
application shall be accompanied by such plans, elevations, specifications,
material and other information, including in the case of demolition or removal a
statement of the proposed condition and appearance of the property thereafter, as
may be reasonably deemed necessary by the COMMISSION to enable it to make
a determination on the application. The date of the filing of an application shall be
the date on which a copy of such application is received by the office of the Town
Clerk.
7.2 The COMMISSION may appoint one or more of its members to initially and
privately screen applications for CERTIFICATES to informally determine whether
any application includes and/or is submitted with sufficient information upon which
the COMMISSION may reasonably take its required actions. Within fourteen (14)
days following the first filing of an application for a CERTIFICATE with the Town
Clerk, the COMMISSION or its appointee/s may determine without need for a
public hearing, that insufficient information has been provided, in which case the
application may be once returned to the submitting party, with written advice as to
what was considered to be lacking, and the applicant will then thereafter be
required to re-file the application before any further COMMISSION action is
required. Any second filing of essentially the same application must be formally
acted upon by the COMMISSION as is otherwise provided in this Bylaw.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
83
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P7. Procedures for Review of Applications - continued
7.3 The COMMISSION shall determine within fourteen (14) days of the filing of an
application for a CERTIFICATE whether said application involves any EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES which are within the jurisdiction of the
COMMISSION.
7.4 If the COMMISSION determines that an application for a CERTIFICATE does not
involve any EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES, or involves an
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE which is not subject to review by the
COMMISSION under the provisions of this Bylaw, the COMMISSION shall
forthwith issue a CERTIFICATE of Non-Applicability.
7.5 If the COMMISSION determines that such an application involves any EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE subject to review under this Bylaw, it shall hold a
public hearing on the application, except as may otherwise be provided in this
Bylaw. The COMMISSION shall hold such a public hearing within forty-five (45)
days from the date of the filing of the application. At least fourteen (14) days
before said public hearing, public notice shall be given by posting in a
conspicuous place in Town Hall and in a newspaper of general circulation in
Acton. Such notice shall identify the time, place and purpose of the public
hearing. Concurrently, a copy of said public notice shall be mailed to the
applicant, to the owners of all adjoining properties and of other properties deemed
by the COMMISSION to be materially affected thereby, all as they appear on the
most recent applicable tax list, to the Planning Board, to any person filing a written
request for notice of hearings, such request to be renewed yearly in December,
and to such other persons as the COMMISSION shall deem entitled to notice.
7.5.1 A public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE need not be held if
such hearing is waived in writing by all persons entitled to notice thereof.
In addition, a public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE may be
waived by the COMMISSION if the COMMISSION determines that the
EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE involved, or its category, is so
insubstantial in its effect on the DISTRICT that it may be reviewed by the
COMMISSION without a public hearing. If the COMMISSION dispenses
with a public hearing on an application for a CERTIFICATE, notice of such
application shall be given to the owners of all adjoining property and of
other property deemed by the COMMISSION to be materially affected
thereby as above provided, and ten (10) days shall elapse after the mailing
of such notice before the COMMISSION may act upon such application.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
84
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P7. Procedures for Review of Applications - continued
7.6 The COMMISSION shall grant a CERTIFICATE, or issue a written decision, within
sixty (60) days from the date the pertinent application was filed (or re-filed in the
event the application was once returned for lack of information), unless the
applicant consents in writing to a specific enlargement of time by which such an
issuance may occur. In the absence of any such enlargement of time, should an
issuance not be forthcoming within the prescribed time, the applicant is entitled as
of right to a CERTIFICATE of Hardship.
7.6.1 If the CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION for which an application for a
CERTIFICATE of Appropriateness has been filed shall be determined to be
inappropriate and therefore disapproved, or in the event of an application for
a CERTIFICATE of Hardship, the COMMISSION shall determine whether,
owning to conditions especially affecting the BUILDING or STRUCTURE
involved, but not affecting the DISTRICT generally, failure to approve an
application will involve a substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the
applicant and whether such application may be approved without substantial
detriment to the public welfare and without substantial derogation from the
intent and purposes of this Bylaw. If the Commission determines that owing
to such conditions failure to approve an application will involve substantial
hardship to the applicant and approval thereof may be made without such
substantial detriment or derogation, the COMMISSION shall issue a
CERTIFICATE of Hardship.
7.7 By the concurring vote of at least four members who were present throughout any
relevant public hearing and the COMMISSION’S discussion leading up to its
finding, the COMMISSION must adopt a specific written findings setting forth the
basis on which it was initially determined that the application in question involved
an EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE subject to approval by the
COMMISSION and may then:
A. Grant an appropriate CERTIFICATE for the work to be performed, to remain
effective regardless of any subsequent change in the ownership of the
property; or
B. Grant an appropriate CERTIFICATE for the work to be performed, to remain
effective regardless of any subsequent change in the ownership of the
property, with conditions and limitations requiring architectural or plan
modifications as to those matters not excluded under Section P9 of this Bylaw
which are within the COMMISSION’S review jurisdiction; or
C. Deny the application with a written statement of the basis for the denial, at
which time it may provide written recommendations for changes not excluded
from the jurisdiction of the COMMISSION by Section P9 of this Bylaw which,
in a subsequent application, might be acceptable to the COMMISSION; or
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
85
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P7.7 Procedures for Review of Applications - continued
D. Deny the application with a fact specific written statement of the basis for the
denial without further recommendations, if essentially the same application
has previously been the subject of a prior denial accompanied by written
recommendations pursuant to sub-paragraph 7.7C above.
7.8 Should the COMMISSION, during the course of reviewing an application, find that
it does not have review jurisdiction under this Bylaw it shall make an appropriate
finding of Non-Applicability.
7.9 Each CERTIFICATE or written decision upon an application by the COMMISSION
shall be dated and signed by the Chairperson or such other person as the
COMMISSION may designate and shall be deemed issued upon filing with the
Town Clerk.
7.10 Each CERTIFICATE or written decision upon an application by the COMMISSION
shall be promptly served on the applicant by the Town Clerk who shall promptly
forward a copy thereof to the applicant at the address shown on the application,
by first class mail, postage prepaid, and a copy shall be further provided to the
Building Commissioner, Planning Board and Board of Selectmen.
7.11 Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be deemed to preclude any person
contemplating construction or alteration of a BUILDING or STRUCTURE within a
DISTRICT from consulting informally with the COMMISSION before submitting
any application referred to in this bylaw on any matter which might possibly be
within the scope of the Bylaw. Nothing contained in this bylaw shall be deemed to
preclude the COMMISSION from offering informal advice to a potential applicant
prior to receiving an application. However, any such preliminary advice offered by
the COMMISSION shall not be deemed to set a precedent nor in any way limit the
COMMISSION in the exercise of its functions under this bylaw.
P8. Criteria for Determinations
8.1 In deliberating on applications for CERTIFICATES, the COMMISSION shall
consider, among other things, the historic and architectural value and significance
of the site, BUILDING or STRUCTURE; the general design, proportions, detailing,
mass, arrangement, texture, and material of the EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL
FEATURES involved; and the relation of such EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL
FEATURES to similar features of BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES in the
surrounding area.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
86
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P8. Criteria for Determinations - continued
8.2 In the case of new CONSTRUCTION or additions to existing BUILDINGS or
STRUCTURES, the COMMISSION shall consider the appropriateness of the
scale, shape and proportion of the BUILDINGS or STRUCTURE both in relation to
the land area upon which the BUILDING or STRUCTURE is situated and in
relation to BUILDINGS and STRUCTURES in the vicinity. The COMMISSION may
in appropriate cases impose dimensional and setback requirements in addition to
those required by applicable statute or bylaw, however, such requirements shall
not further limit the maximum floor area ratio and height of a BUILDING as defined
and permitted in the Acton Zoning Bylaw.
8.3 When ruling on applications for CERTIFICATES on solar energy systems as
defined in Section 1A of Chapter 40A, the COMMISSION shall consider the policy
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to encourage the use of solar energy
systems and to protect solar access.
8.4 The COMMISSION shall not consider interior arrangements or architectural
features not subject to public view.
8.5 The COMMISSION shall not make any recommendation or requirement except for
the purpose of preventing developments incongruous to the historic aspects or the
architectural characteristics of the surroundings and of the DISTRICT.
8.6 The COMMISSION may impose requirements on the screening and location of
above ground features of septage systems. Such requirements shall not conflict
with requirements of the Acton Board of Health.
P9. Exclusions
9.1 The COMMISSION’S review jurisdiction shall not include the following:
9.1.1 Temporary BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, seasonal decorations or SIGNS
subject, however, to conditions pertaining to the duration of existence and
use, location, lighting, removal and similar matters as the COMMISSION
may reasonably specify.
9.1.2 Terraces, walks, patios, driveways, sidewalks and similar STRUCTURES,
provided that any such STRUCTURE is SUBSTANTIALLY AT GRADE
LEVEL.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
87
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P9. Exclusions - continued
9.1.3 The number of the residents’ personally owned or leased and regularly used
motor vehicles which may be routinely parked within the boundaries of a
residential property. However, in those circumstances and not withstanding
the provisions of Section 9.1.2, the COMMISSION shall retain limited review
jurisdiction in regard to measures that would minimize the visual impact, as
viewed from the public way, of any expansion of, or portions of, driveways or
other STRUCTURES SUBSTANTIALLY AT GRADE LEVEL which are
intended as parking spaces for more than four (4) motor vehicles.
9.1.4 Storm windows and doors, screen windows and doors, and window air
conditioners.
9.1.5 The color of paint applied to the exterior surfaces of BUILDINGS or
STRUCTURES.
9.1.6 The color of materials used on roofs.
9.1.7 Signs of not more than two (2) square feet in DISPLAY AREA in connection
with use of a residence for a customary home occupation or for professional
purposes, provided only one such sign is displayed in connection with each
residence and if illuminated is illuminated only indirectly; and one sign in
connection with the nonresidential use of each BUILDING or STRUCTURE
which is not more than six (6) square feet in DISPLAY AREA, consists of
letters painted on wood without symbol or trademark and if illuminated is
illuminated indirectly.
9.1.8 The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a BUILDING,
STRUCTURE or EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE damaged or
destroyed by fire, storm, or other disaster, provided such reconstruction is
begun within one year thereafter and carried forward with due diligence.
9.1.9 The point of access served by handicapped access ramps designed solely for
the purpose of facilitating ingress or egress of a physically handicapped
person, as defined in M.G.L. c.22 s13A.
9.1.10 Non-traditional material(s), providing that the difference between such
material(s) and traditional material(s) cannot, upon review by the
COMMISSION, be reasonably discerned by the unaided eye from the
viewpoint(s) upon which the COMMISSION’s power of review is based.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
88
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P9. Exclusions - continued
9.2 Nothing in this Bylaw shall be construed to prevent the following;
9.2.1 Ordinary maintenance, repair or replacement of any EXTERIOR
ARCHITECTURAL FEATURE within a DISTRICT which does not Involve a
change in design, material or the outward appearance thereof.
9.2.2 Landscaping with plants, trees or shrubs.
9.2.3 The meeting of requirements certified by a duly authorized public officer to
be necessary for public safety because of an unsafe, unhealthful or
dangerous condition.
9.2.4 Any CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION under a permit duly issued prior to
the effective date of this Bylaw.
9.3 Upon request the COMMISSION shall issue a CERTIFICATE of Non-Applicability
with respect to CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION in any category not subject to
review by the COMMISSION in accordance with the above provisions.
P10. Categorical Approval
10.1 The COMMISSION may determine from time to time after a public hearing, duly
advertised and posted at least fourteen (14) days in advance in a conspicuous
place in Town Hall and in a newspaper of general circulation in Acton, that certain
categories of EXTERIOR ARCHITECTURAL FEATURES, STRUCTURES or
BUILDINGS under certain conditions may be CONSTRUCTED or ALTERED
without review by the COMMISSION without causing substantial derogation from
the intent and purpose of this Bylaw.
P11. Enforcement and Penalties
11.1 No Building Permit shall be issued for the CONSTRUCTION or ALTERATION of
any BUILDING or STRUCTURE wholly or partially in a DISTRICT unless a
CERTIFICATE has first been issued by the COMMISSION when such a
CERTIFICATE is required by this Bylaw.
11.2 No ALTERATION or CONSTRUCTION of any BUILDING or STRUCTURE
wholly or partially in a DISTRICT for which a CERTIFICATE is required by this
Bylaw shall deviate from the terms and conditions of such a CERTIFICATE.
11.3 The Building Commissioner of the Town of Acton shall enforce this Bylaw upon a
determination by the COMMISSION that a violation exists, and subject to the
approval of the Board of Selectmen, may institute proceedings in Superior Court
pursuant to M.G.L. c.40C § 13 for injunctive or other relief and/or imposition of
fines.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
89
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P11. Enforcement and Penalties - continued
11.4 The COMMISSION, upon a written complaint challenging some enforcement
action by the Building Commissioner, received by the Town Clerk within five (5)
days following such decision, by a PERSON AGGRIEVED, or other citizen of or
property owner in the Town of Acton, shall hold a timely public hearing to
determine whether or not the Building Commissioner’s action should be upheld,
in whole or in part.
11.5 Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Bylaw shall be punishable by a fine
of not less than $10.00 nor more than $500.00 for each offense under the
provisions of M.G.L. c.40C § 13, or alternatively under #E45 of the Town of
Acton Bylaws. Each day during any portion of which such violation continues to
exist shall constitute a separate offense.
P12. Appeals
12.1 An appeal of a determination of the COMMISSION, except as to the propriety of
a decision to invoke the provisions of M.G.L. c. 40C § 13 (institution of an action
in Superior Court) by the Building Commissioner, may be taken by a PERSON
AGGRIEVED by filing a written request with the Town Clerk, acting as an agent
of the COMMISSION, within twenty (20) days of the issuance of a CERTIFICATE
or a disapproval. In the event of such an appeal, the Acton Town Manager, or
his delegate, shall make a timely request to the Metropolitan Area Planning
Council that it promptly designate an arbitrator(s) with competence and
experience in such matters to hear such an appeal. If such a person(s) is/are so
designated he/she/they must hear the appeal in a timely manner and issue a
written decision within forty-five (45) days of the request as specified in M.G.L. c.
40C § 12. The arbitration decision shall be binding on the parties, unless a
Complaint seeking a further appeal is filed in Superior Court within twenty (20)
days from the filing of the arbitration decision with the Town Clerk, pursuant to
M.G.L. c. 40C § 12A.
P.13. Validity and Separability
13.1 The provisions of this Bylaw shall be deemed to be separable. If any of its
provisions, sections, subsections, sentences or clauses shall be held to be
invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of
this Bylaw shall continue to be in full force and effect.
BYLAWS of the TOWN of ACTON
Updated June 2013
90
CHAPTER P LOCAL HISTORIC DISTRICT CONTINUED
P14. Appendices
Appendix 1: South Acton District
The South Acton District shall be a DISTRICT area under this Bylaw. The location
and boundaries of the South Acton District are defined and shown on the Local
Historic District Map of the Town of Acton, Sheet 1 - 1990 which is a part of this bylaw.
Sheet 1 is based on the 1989 Town Atlas. The delineation of the DISTRICT area
boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein,
except as otherwise apparent on Sheet 1.
Appendix 2: Acton Centre District
The Acton Centre District shall be a DISTRICT area under this Bylaw. The location
and boundaries of the Acton Centre District are defined and shown on the Local
Historic District Map of the Town of Acton, Sheet 2 - 1990 which is a part of this bylaw.
Sheet 2 is based on the 1989 Town Atlas. The delineation of the DISTRICT area
boundaries is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein,
except as otherwise apparent on Sheet 2.
Appendix 3: West Acton District
The West Acton District shall be a DISTRICT area under this Bylaw. The location and
boundaries of the West Acton District are defined and shown on the Local Historic
District Map of the Town of Acton, Sheet 3 - 1990 which is a part of this Bylaw. Sheet
3 is based on the 1989 Town Atlas. The delineation of the DISTRICT area boundaries
is based on the parcel boundaries then in existence and shown therein, except as
otherwise apparent on Sheet 3.