Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
General provisions — See Charter, Article 9.
§ 1-1. Designation and citation of Code.
The ordinances, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and in the
chapters following shall constitute and be designated as "The Code of the
Town of Agawam," and may be so cited.1
§ 1-2. Definitions and rules of construction.
In the construction of this Code and of all other ordinances, rules or
regulations hereafter enacted, the following interpretations shall be
placed on the words and phrases hereinafter mentioned, unless such
construction or interpretation shall be manifestly inconsistent with the
evident intent of the Town Council or proper authority or the voters,
or repugnant to the context or to the evident purport of any ordinance,
rule or regulation.
Computation of time. In computing time under the Charter, if seven
days or less, "days" shall refer to secular days and shall not include
Sundays or legal holidays. If more than seven days, every day shall
be counted.
(1)
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender may apply to the
feminine or neither gender.
(2)
Joint authority. Words purporting to give joint authority to three
or more officers or other persons shall give such authority to a
majority of such officers or persons.
(3)
Plural; singular. Words importing the singular may apply to the
plural number.
(4)
Preceding; following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean
next before and next after, respectively.
(5)
Time. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present.
(6)
A.
As used in this chapter and in the Code of the Town of Agawam, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
B.
1. Editor's Note: The recodification of Town ordinances was approved 7-10-1989 by
TO-84-194.
1:1
§ 1-3. Catchlines of sections.
The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in bold-faced type
are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and
shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of
the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted.
§ 1-4. Severability.
It is hereby declared to be the intention to the Town that the sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and
if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall
be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court
of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of
the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this
Code, since the same would have been enacted without the incorporation in
this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph
or section.
§ 1-5. General penalty; prosecution of violations.
MONTH — A calendar month.
OWNER or OCCUPANT — Applied to a building or land, includes any
sole owner or occupant and any joint tenant in common of the whole or
any part of a building or lot of land.
PERSON — Includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization or any other group acting as a unit as well as a natural
person.
PUBLIC WAY — Includes any highway, Town way, road, bridge, street,
avenue, boulevard, roadway, parkway, lane, sidewalk or square having
been dedicated, accepted and open to public use.
TOWN — Means the Town of Agawam in the County of Hampden and
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Any person convicted of a violation of this Code or any other ordinance
or any rule or order made hereunder, except as otherwise provided,
shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense.2
A.
Prosecutions for the breach of any of the provisions of this Code or
other ordinances, rules or regulations shall be commenced within one
year from such breach.
B.
2. Editor's Note: See MGL C. 40, § 21, authorizing Town to affix penalty not exceeding $300
for each offense.
§ 1-2 AGAWAM CODE § 1-6
1:2
§ 1-6. Repeal or amendment.
Any or all the provisions of this Code or other ordinances may be repealed
or amended or other ordinances may be adopted from time to time as
provided in the Charter.
§ 1-7. Failure to pay municipal taxes or charges as grounds for
denial, suspension, revocation of license or permit. [Added
12-2-2002 by TOR-2002-5]
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The board, commission, department,
officer, or other Town entity which issues a permit or license.
MUNICIPAL CHARGE — Any charge established, required, or imposed
by any board, commission, department, officer, or other entity of the
Town of Agawam for services of personnel or equipment, use of
facilities, charges for utilities, goods/materials/equipment supplied or
used, or other activities performed by the Town, its employees or
agents.
OVERDUE OBLIGATION — Any local tax, assessment, betterment, fee,
or municipal charge which remains unpaid for 12 months or more after
its due date, unless said tax, etc. is the subject of a pending application
for abatement or of a pending appeal before the Appellate Tax Board.
A.
Any licensing authority of the Town may deny, suspend, or revoke
any license or permit issued by said licensing authority, including any
transfers or renewals of said license or permit, with the exception
of those licenses and permits set forth in Subsection G, infra, if the
applicant or holder thereof has any outstanding overdue obligation.
B.
The Town Collector shall annually, in the month of September, for all
municipal commitments which are under his control, issue a list of
all persons, corporations, or business entities which have an overdue
obligation to the Town. Any other official of the Town having control
of records of municipal charges not committed to the Town Collector
shall annually, in the month of June, issue a similar list of overdue
obligations. Said lists shall be supplied to all licensing authorities
within the Town.
C.
A licensing authority may deny, revoke, or suspend any license or
permit held by any person, corporation, or business entity appearing on
any list of overdue obligations. Prior to taking such action, the licensing
authority shall give written notice, as required by the applicable
provisions of law, to the party responsible for the overdue obligation
and to the tax collector of the intended action and shall give said party
a hearing on the proposed action, said hearing to be held not earlier
then 14 days after said notice. The list of overdue obligations shall be
prima facie evidence for denial, revocation, or suspension of the license
D.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:3
Chapter 3
ADMINISTRATION OF GOVERNMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Administrative departments — See Charter,
Art. 6.
or permit. Any findings made by the licensing authority in connection
with a denial, revocation, or suspension shall not be relevant to or
introduced in any proceeding at law except for an appeal from said
denial, revocation, or suspension. The Town Collector may intervene in
any hearing held hereunder.
Any license or permit which is denied, revoked, or suspended under
this section shall not be issued, reissued, renewed or reinstated until
the licensing authority receives a certificate from the Town Collector
stating that the applicant for or holder of said license or permit is in
good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments,
or other municipal charges payable to the Town as of the date of
issuance of said certificate.
E.
The licensing authority shall give any applicant for or holder of a
license or permit who has an overdue obligation the opportunity to
enter into a payment agreement as provided by Massachusetts General
Laws for satisfaction of said overdue obligation. Prior to entering into
a prepayment agreement, the applicant shall also be given the
opportunity to meet with the Town Collector to attempt to reach a
resolution acceptable to both parties. Upon execution of any such
agreement, the licensing authority shall issue a certificate, to be
displayed with said license, indicating that said license or permit is
conditioned upon satisfactory compliance with the payment agreement.
Failure to comply with the payment agreement shall be grounds for the
suspension or revocation of the license or permit following notice and
hearing, as required by the applicable provisions of law.
F.
The following licenses and permits shall not be subject to the provisions
of this section: (all references are to the Massachusetts General Laws)
Chapter 48, Section 13 (open air burning); Chapter 85, Section 11A
(bicycle permits); Chapter 101, Section 33 (sales for charitable
purposes); Chapter 149, Section 69 (children's work permits); Chapter
140, Section 21E (clubs dispensing food or beverages); Chapter 140,
Section 137 (dog licenses); Chapter 131, Section 12 (fishing/hunting/
trapping licenses); Chapter 207, Section 28 (marriage licenses);
Chapter 140, Section 181 (public exhibition/theatrical permits).
G.
§ 1-7 AGAWAM CODE § 1-7
1:4
ARTICLE I
Elections; Precincts
[Adopted 12-21-1972 as §§ 2-2 and 2-3 of the Code of the Town of
Agawam]
§ 3-1. Annual Town elections.
The annual Town elections shall be held as provided in the Town Charter.3
§ 3-2. Precinct boundaries.4 [Amended 6-18-2001 by TOR-2001-28]
The boundaries of the precincts of the Town are as follows:
Precinct One. All that portion of the Town included within the following
lines: Beginning at the center of the intersection of Main Street and
Suffield Street with Springfield Street, thence; running in a generally
southwesterly direction along the center of Springfield Street to the
point of its intersection with Annable Street, thence; running in a
generally westerly direction along the center of Annable Street to the
point of its intersection with Colemore Street, thence; running in a
generally westerly direction along the center of Horsham Place to
the point of its intersection with White Brook, thence; running in a
generally northerly direction along White Brook to its junction with the
Westfield River, thence; running in a generally easterly direction along
the Westfield River to its junction with the Agawam Bridge, thence;
running in a generally southerly direction to the point of beginning.
A.
Precinct Two. All that portion of the Town included within the following
lines: Beginning at the center of the intersection of Springfield Street
and Poplar Street, thence; running in a generally southwesterly
direction along the center of Poplar Street to the point of its
intersection with Springfield Street and Mill Street, thence; running in
a generally westerly direction along the center of Springfield Street
to the point of its intersection with Southwick Street, North Westfield
Street, and South Westfield Street, thence; running in a generally
northerly direction along the center of North Westfield Street to the
point of its intersection with North Street and North Street Extension,
thence; running in a generally westerly direction along the center of
North Street Extension and continuing to a point on the boundary line
between the Town of Agawam and the Town of Southwick and the
City of Westfield, thence; running in a generally northerly direction
along the boundary line between the Town of Agawam and the City of
Westfield to the point of its junction with the Westfield river, thence;
running in a generally easterly direction along the center of the
Westfield River to the point of its junction with White Brook, thence;
running in a generally southerly direction along the center of said
White Brook to the point of its junction with Oak Street, thence; running
B.
3. Editor's Note: See Art. 7, Nominations and Elections, of the Charter.
4. Editor's Note: For Charter provisions as to Town precincts, see Section 7-4.
§ 3-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:5
in a generally easterly direction along the center of Oak Street to the
point of beginning.
Precinct Three. All that portion of the Town included within the
following lines: Beginning at the intersection of Springfield Street,
Main Street, and Suffield Street, thence; running in a generally
southwesterly direction along the center of Springfield Street to the
point of its intersection with Annable Street, thence; running in a
generally westerly direction along the center of said Annable Street
to the point of its intersection with Colemore Street, thence; running
in a generally westerly direction along the center of Horsham Place
to the point of its intersection with White Brook, thence; running in a
generally southerly direction along the center of said White Brook to
the point of its junction with Oak Street, thence; running in a generally
easterly direction along the center of Oak Street, to the point of its
intersection with Poplar Street, thence; running in a generally southerly
direction along the center of Poplar Street to the point of its
intersection with Garden Street, thence; running in a generally easterly
direction along the center of Garden Street to the point of its
intersection with Three Mile Brook, thence; running in a generally
northerly and northeasterly direction along the center of Three Mile
Brook to a point, thence; running in a generally northerly direction to
a point on Mill Street, thence; running in a generally easterly direction
along the center of Mill Street to the point of its intersection with
Suffield Street, thence; running in a generally northerly direction along
the center of Suffield Street to the point of beginning.
C.
Precinct Four. All that portion of the Town included within the following
lines: Beginning at the intersection of Springfield Street, Main Street,
and Suffield Street thence; running in a generally southerly direction
along the center of Suffield Street to the point of its intersection with
Mill street and Perry Lane, thence; running in a generally easterly
direction along the center of Perry Lane to the point of its intersection
with Elm Street, thence; running in a generally northeasterly direction
along the center of Elm Street to the point of its intersection with
Main Street, thence; running in a generally northerly direction along
the center of Main Street to the point of its junction with the Henry
E. Bodurtha Highway (Rt. 57), thence; running in a generally easterly
direction along the center of said highway to a point, thence; running
in a generally northerly direction along the center of James Avenue to
the point of its intersection with Meadow Street, thence; running in
a generally easterly direction along the center of Meadow Street to
its point of intersection with Hunt Street, thence; running northerly
along the center of Hunt Street and continuing to the junction with
the Westfield River, thence; running in a generally easterly direction
along the said Westfield River to the point of intersection with the
Connecticut River, thence; running in a generally northerly direction
along the center of the Connecticut River to the point of junction with
the boundary line between the Town of Agawam and the Town of West
Springfield, thence; running in a generally westerly direction along said
D.
§ 3-2 AGAWAM CODE § 3-2
1:6
boundary line to a point on the center of the Agawam Bridge, thence; in
a generally southerly direction to the point of beginning.
Precinct Five. All that portion of the Town included within the following
lines: Beginning at the intersection of Main Street, Emerson Road, and
Leonard Street, thence; running in a generally northerly direction along
the center of Main Street to the point of its junction with the Henry
E. Bodurtha Highway (Rt. 57), thence; running in a generally easterly
direction along the center of said highway to a point, thence; running
in a generally northerly direction along the center of James Avenue to
the point of its intersection of Meadow Street, thence; running in a
generally easterly direction along the center of Meadow Street to the
point of its intersection with Hunt Street, thence; running northerly
along the center of Hunt Street to the point of its junction with the
Westfield River, thence; running in a generally easterly direction along
the Westfield River to the point of its junction with the Connecticut
River, thence; running in a generally southerly direction along the
Connecticut River to the junction with an unnamed brook, thence;
running in a generally northwesterly direction along the center of the
unnamed brook to a point on Leonard Street, thence; running in a
generally westerly direction along the center of Leonard Street to the
point of beginning.
E.
Precinct Six. All that portion of the Town included within the following
lines: Beginning at the intersection of Springfield Street and Southwick
Street with North Westfield Street and South Westfield Street, thence;
running along the center of Springfield Street in a generally easterly
direction to the point of its intersection with Mill and Poplar Streets,
thence; running in a generally southerly direction along the center
of Poplar Street to the point of its intersection with Garden Street,
thence; running in a generally easterly direction along the center of
Garden Street to the point of its junction with Three Mile Brook, thence;
running along the center of Three Mile Brook to a point, thence;
running in a generally northerly direction to a junction with Mill Street,
thence; running in a generally easterly direction along the center of
Mill Street to the point of its intersection with Suffield Street and Perry
Lane, thence; running in a generally easterly and southerly direction
along the center of Perry Lane to the point of its intersection with
Silver Street, thence; running in a generally southwesterly direction
along the center of Silver Street to the point of its intersection with
Castle Hills Road, thence; running in a generally southerly direction
along the center of Castle Hills Road to the point of its intersection with
Centerwood Drive, thence; running in a generally easterly direction
along the center of Centerwood Drive to the point of its intersection
with Fernwood Drive, thence; running in a generally southerly direction
along the center of Fernwood Drive to the point of it intersection
with Conifer Drive, thence; running in a generally easterly direction
along the center of Conifer Drive to the point of its intersection with
Butternut Drive, thence; running in a generally southerly direction
along the center of Butternut Drive to the point of its intersection
F.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:7
with Adams Street, thence; running in a generally westerly direction
along the center of Adams Street to the point of its intersection with
Suffield Street, thence; running in a generally southerly direction along
the center of Suffield Street to the boundary line of Hampden and
Hartford Counties, thence; running in a generally westerly direction
along the Hampden and Hartford county boundary to a point on Still
Brook, thence; running in a generally northwesterly direction along
the said Still Brook to a point on Pine Street, thence; running in a
generally northeasterly direction along the center of Pine Street to
a point, thence; running in a generally westerly and northwesterly
direction to the junction with the Still Brook, thence; running in a
generally northerly direction along the center of the said Still Brook
to the junction with Nicole Terrace, thence; running in a generally
westerly direction along the center of Nicole Terrace to the point of
its intersection with Charter Oak Drive, thence; running in a generally
northerly direction along the center of Charter Oak Drive to the point
of its intersection with Southwick Street, thence; running in a generally
easterly direction along the center of Southwick Street to the point
of its intersection with Sunset Terrace, thence; running in a generally
southerly direction along the center of Sunset Terrace to the point of
its intersection with Overlook Drive, thence; running in a generally
easterly direction along the center of Overlook Drive to the point of
its intersection with Hamilton Circle, thence; running in a generally
northerly direction along the center of Hamilton Circle to the point
of its intersection with Hamar Drive, thence; running in a generally
easterly direction along the center of Hamar Drive to the point of its
intersection with South Westfield Street, thence; running in a generally
northerly direction along the center of South Westfield Street to the
point of beginning.
Precinct Seven. All that portion of the Town included within the
following lines: Beginning at the intersection of Southwick Street and
Charter Oak Drive, thence; running in a generally easterly direction
along the center of Southwick Street to the point of its intersection
with Sunset Terrace, thence; running in a generally southerly direction
along the center of Sunset Terrace to the point of its intersection
with Overlook Drive, thence; running in a generally easterly direction
along the center of Overlook Drive to the point of its intersection with
Hamilton Circle, thence; running in a generally northerly direction
along the center of Hamilton Circle to the point of its intersection with
Hamar Drive, thence; running in a generally easterly direction along
the center of Hamar Drive to the point of its intersection with South
Westfield Street, thence; running in a generally northwesterly direction
along the center of South Westfield Street to the point of intersection
with Southwick Street and North Westfield Street, thence; running in a
generally northerly direction along the center of North Westfield Street
to the point of its intersection with North Street and North Street
Extension, thence; running in a generally westerly direction along the
center of North Street Extension and continuing to a point on the
boundary line between the Town of Agawam, the Town of Southwick,
G.
§ 3-2 AGAWAM CODE § 3-2
1:8
and the City of Westfield thence; running in a generally southerly
direction along the boundary line between the Town of Agawam and the
Town of Southwick to the point of its intersection with the Hampden
and Hartford county boundary and the Town of Southwick, thence;
running in a generally easterly direction along the boundary line of
Hampden and Hartford Counties to the junction of Still Brook, thence;
running in a generally northwesterly direction along the center of the
Still brook to a point on Pine Street, thence; running in a generally
northeasterly direction along the center of Pine Street to a point,
thence; running in a generally westerly and northwesterly direction to
the junction with Still Brook, thence; running in a generally northerly
direction along the center of the said Still Brook to the junction with
Nicole Terrace, thence; running in a generally westerly direction along
the center of Nicole Terrace to the point of its intersection with Charter
Oak Drive, thence; running in a generally northerly direction along the
center of Charter Oak Drive to the point of beginning.
Precinct Eight. All that portion of the Town included within the
following line: Beginning at the center of the intersection of Elm Street,
Elbert Road, and Main Street, thence; running in a generally southerly
direction along the center of Main Street to the point of its intersection
with Leonard Street, thence; running in a generally easterly direction
along the center of Leonard Street to the junction with an unnamed
brook, thence; running in a generally southeasterly direction along
the center of the unnamed brook to the junction with the Connecticut
River, thence; running in a generally southerly direction along the
Connecticut River to its junction with the boundary line of Hampden
and Hartford Counties, thence; running in a generally westerly
direction along said boundary line to the point of its junction with
Suffield Street, thence; running in a generally northerly direction along
the center of Suffield Street to the point of its intersection with Adams
Street, thence; running in a generally northeasterly direction along the
center of Adams Street to the point of its intersection with Butternut
Drive, thence; running in a generally northwesterly direction along
the center of Butternut Drive to the point of its intersection with
Conifer Drive, thence; running in a generally westerly direction along
the center of Conifer Drive to the point of its intersection with
Fernwood Drive, thence; running in a generally northwesterly direction
along the center of Fernwood Drive to the point of its intersection with
Centerwood Drive, thence; running in a generally westerly direction
along the center of Centerwood Drive to the intersection with Castle
Hills Road, thence; running in a generally northerly direction along
the center of Castle Hills Road to the point of its intersection with
Silver Street, thence; running in a generally easterly direction along the
center of Silver Street to the point of its intersection with Perry Lane,
thence; running in a generally northerly direction along the center of
Perry Lane to the point of its intersection with Elm Street, thence;
running in a generally easterly direction along the center of Elm Street
to the point of beginning.
H.
§ 3-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-2
1:9

ARTICLE II
Official Population Census
[Adopted 12-21-1972 as § 2-4 of the Code of the Town of Agawam]
§ 3-3. Publication of figure by Town Clerk.
Upon receipt by the Town Clerk of any officially certified population figure
for the Town as determined by the census of the United States or the
commonwealth, such Town Clerk shall publish the certified population
figure in any newspaper having a circulation within the Town, and no action
shall be taken by any board, officer, committee or otherwise the authority of
which action is the official population census, until the expiration of seven
days after such publication.
§ 3-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-3
1:11

ARTICLE III
Appointed Bodies
[Adopted 12-21-1972 as §§ 2-9, 2-10, 2-11 and 2-16 of the Code of
the Town of Agawam]
§ 3-4. Council on Aging.
§ 3-5. Development and Industrial Commission.
Pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8B, there is hereby
established a Council on Aging consisting of 13 members appointed
by the Mayor, all of whom shall be residents of the Town of Agawam.
They shall be appointed annually in the month of April: four members
to be appointed for three years, four members to be appointed for two
years and five members to be appointed for one year. Thereafter, all
appointments shall be for a term of three years. The Council on Aging
shall annually elect its Chairman and such other officers as it deems
appropriate. [Amended 1-3-1995 by TOR-94-11]
A.
The duties of the Council shall be to:
(1) Identify the total needs of the community's elderly population.
Educate the community and enlist support and participation of all
citizens concerning those needs.
(2)
(3) Design, promote or implement services to fill those needs.
(4) Coordinate present existing services in the community.
Promote and support any other programs which are designed to
assist elderly programs in the community.
(5)
B.
The Council on Aging shall cooperate with the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Commission on Aging and shall be cognizant of all state
and federal legislation concerning funding, information, exchange and
program planning which exists for better community programming for
the elderly.
C.
The Council on Aging shall give an annual report to the Mayor with
a copy of that report directed to the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Commission on Aging.
D.
There is hereby established a Development and Industrial Commission
to be appointed by the Mayor consisting of seven members, two
members to be appointed for a term of five years; two members to be
appointed for a term of four years; one member to be appointed for
a term of three years; one member to be appointed for a term of two
years; one member to be appointed for a term of one year; and their
successors shall be appointed for terms of five years each.
A.
§ 3-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-5
1:13
§ 3-6. Industrial Development Financing Authority.
There shall be an Industrial Development Financing Authority for the Town
of Agawam in accordance with Chapter 772 of the Acts of 1967, amending
MGL c. 40D.
§ 3-7. Consumer Advisory Commission.
§ 3-8. Land Needs Liaison Committee. [Added 12-19-1988 by
TOR-88-23]
The Development and Industrial Commission shall have the authority
and duties set forth in MGL c. 40, § 8A.
B.
There is hereby established a Consumer Advisory Commission. The
Commission shall consist of five members, one member to be the
inspector of weights and measures, and four members to be appointed
by the Mayor.
A.
The Commission shall conduct investigations and perform research into
matters affecting consumer interest and education, advise and report
to the general public as well as to the local government authorities and
law enforcement agencies.
B.
The Commission shall make an annual report to the appointing
authority and the Massachusetts Consumers' Council consistent with
MGL c. 40, § 8F.
C.
There is hereby established a Land Needs Liaison committee. The
Committee shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the
Mayor and confirmed by a majority of the Town Council, three members
to be initially appointed for a term of one year, two members to be
initially appointed for a term of two years and two members to be
initially appointed for a term of three years. After the initial
appointments, the term of all members shall be for two years. The
Committee shall annually elect its Chairperson and such other officers
as it deems appropriate. Present service or membership on any other
Town board, commission, council or committee shall not disqualify
a prospective member from service on the Land Needs Liaison
Committee.
A.
Each member shall be responsible for keeping the Committee abreast
of the land needs of the following Town departments, boards and
commissions:
(1) Housing Authority.
(2) Council on Aging.
(3) Parks and Recreation Department.
B.
§ 3-5 AGAWAM CODE § 3-8
1:14
§ 3-8.1. Municipal Golf Commission. [Added 2-7-1994 by TOR-93-6]
Conservation Commission, Planning Board and Agawam Economic
Development and Industrial Commission.
(4)
(5) School Committee.
(6) Town of Agawam departmental facilities.
(7) Miscellaneous land needs.
The Committee shall research and investigate the possible acquisition
of suitable parcels located within the Town to meet the existing needs
of the Town. This Committee shall identify the best uses for parcels
available for purchases, and they shall keep an updated report of
the land needs of the Town and shall make said reports and
recommendations to the Mayor.
C.
Establishment. There is hereby established in the Town of Agawam a
Municipal Golf Commission to advise and assist in the maintenance,
promotion, development and administration of the Agawam Municipal
Golf Course. [Amended 12-20-1999 by TOR-99-7]
A.
Composition and term.
The Municipal Golf Commission shall consist of five Agawam voters
who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Town
Council. The members of the Municipal Golf Commission shall
receive no compensation for their service on the Commission. Any
member of the Commission may, after a public hearing if
requested, be removed for cause by the Mayor.
(1)
At the time of the creation of said commission, there shall be
appointed two members for one year, two members for two years
and one member for three years. Thereafter all appointments shall
be for a term of three years.
(2)
B.
Duties and powers. The powers and duties of the Municipal Golf
Commission shall be as follows:
Assist and advise in the preparation and development of the annual
operating budget for the golf course.
(1)
Assist and advise in the preparation and development of the capital
improvement plan for the golf course.
(2)
Prepare and periodically update a schedule of fees and charges for
all goods and services offered at the golf course.
(3)
Assist and advise in the contracting for or letting of services,
equipment and supplies for the golf course.
(4)
C.
§ 3-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.1
1:15
§ 3-8.2. Sister City Commission. [Added 3-20-2000 by TOR-2000-3]
The Agawam Town Council does hereby establish a commission, to be
known as the Agawam Sister City Commission (hereinafter called the
"Commission"), for the purpose of fostering the Town of Agawam's
relationship with the City of Reggio Calabria, which will oversee, maintain,
and strengthen economic, educational, cultural, and social ties between the
citizens of our two cities.
Prepare and cause to be published such rules and regulations as
it deems necessary for the proper operation of the golf course,
subject to the approval of the Mayor.
(5)
Prepare an annual report of its activities for the Mayor with copy
to the Town Council.
(6)
Solicit and receive gifts of funds, services, supplies, equipment,
lands, buildings and other properties in the name of the Town of
Agawam. All gifts of real property are subject to the approval of the
Mayor and the Town Council.
(7)
Liquor license. The Town of Agawam shall hold in its name the allalcoholic
liquor license for the Agawam Municipal Golf Course.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 72-2 of the Code of the Town of
Agawam, the sale, possession and consumption of alcoholic beverages
at the Agawam Country Club shall be permitted. [Amended
12-20-1999 by TOR-99-7]
D.
Enterprise fund. Pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53F1/2, there is hereby
established established a separate account classified as an enterprise
fund for the operation of the golf course. The passage of this section by
the Town Council shall act as its acceptance of the provisions of MGL c.
44, § 53F1/2.
E.
The Commission shall consist of 30 members appointed by the Mayor
pursuant to the provisions of the Town Charter. Commission members
shall serve unlimited terms of three years per term. Members of the
original 1997 "ad hoc" commission5 who desire to continue serving
shall automatically be reappointed to the permanent Commission upon
enactment of this section.
A.
The Chairman of the Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor. The
Vice Chairperson and the Secretary shall be elected by a majority vote
of the Commission members.
B.
C. All Commission members shall be residents of the Town of Agawam.
D. Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
5. Editor's Note: The introductory provisions of this ordinance described a previous ad hoc
Sister City Commission organized for the purpose of researching and establishing a
"sister city" relationship with a city in the Republic of Italy.
§ 3-8.1 AGAWAM CODE § 3-8.2
1:16
§ 3-8.3. Community Preservation Act Committee. [Added 1-6-2003
by TOR-2002-9]
Commission reports shall be filed in the office of the Mayor. Official
documents and records, both from the Town of Agawam and from the
City of Reggio Calabria, shall be filed in the office of the Town Clerk.
E.
Establishment and membership.
There is hereby established a Community Preservation Act
Committee consisting of nine voting members pursuant to
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44B. The composition of the
Committee, the appointment authority, and the term of office for
the Committee members shall be as follows:
One member of the Agawam Conservation Commission as
designated by the Commission for a term of three years.
(a)
One member of the Agawam Historical Commission as
designated by the Commission for a term of three years.
(b)
One member of the Agawam Planning Board as designated by
the Board for a term of three years.
(c)
One member of the Agawam Parks and Recreation Department
as designated by the Mayor for an initial term of one year and
thereafter for a term of three years.
(d)
One member of the Agawam Housing Authority as designated
by the Agawam Housing Authority for an initial term of two
years and thereafter for a term of three years.
(e)
One member of the Agawam Open Space Committee as
designated by the Open Space Committee for an initial term of
one year and thereafter for a term of three years.
(f)
Three members to be appointed by the Agawam Town Council,
one member to be appointed for a term of one year and
thereafter for a term of three years, and two members to be
appointed for a term of two years and thereafter for a term of
three years.
(g)
(1)
Should any of the commissions, boards, councils or committees
who have appointment authority under this section be no longer
in existence for whatever reason, the appointment authority for
that commission, board, council, or committee shall become the
responsibility of the Agawam Town Council.
(2)
A.
Duties.
The Community Preservation Act Committee (hereinafter "CPAC")
shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the Town
regarding community preservation. The CPAC shall consult with
(1)
B.
§ 3-8.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.3
1:17
§ 3-8.4. Agawam Agricultural Commission. [Added 5-4-2009 by
TOR-2009-2]
existing municipal boards, including the Conservation Commission,
the Historical Commission, the Planning Board, the Parks and
Recreation Department and the Housing Authority, or persons
acting in those capacities or performing like duties, in conducting
such studies. As part of its study, the CPAC shall hold one or
more public informational hearings on the needs, possibilities and
resources of the Town regarding community preservation
possibilities and resources, notice of which shall be posted publicly
and published for each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Town.
The CPAC shall make recommendations to the Town Council for
the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space, for the
acquisition and preservation of historic resources, for the
acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use,
for the creation, preservation and support of community housing
and for rehabilitation or restoration of such open space, historic
resources, land for recreational use, and housing that is acquired
or created as provided in this section. With respect to community
housing, the CPAC shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse
of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously
developed sites.
(2)
The CPAC may include in its recommendation to the Town Council
a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific
purposes that are consistent with community preservation but for
which sufficient revenues are not then available in the Community
Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set
aside for later spending funds for general purposes that are
consistent with community preservation.
(3)
Requirement for a quorum and cost estimates. The CPAC shall not meet
or conduct business without the presence of a quorum. A majority of
the members of the CPAC shall constitute a quorum. The CPAC shall
approve its actions by majority vote. Recommendations to the Town
Council shall include their anticipated costs.
C.
Amendments. This section may be amended from time to time by a
majority vote of the Town Council, provided that the amendments would
not cause a conflict with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 44B.
D.
When effective; initial appointments. This section shall take effect
immediately upon approval and passage by the Town Council. Each
appointing authority shall have 10 days after approval by the Town
Council to make their initial appointments. Should any appointing
authority fail to make their appointment within that allotted time, the
Town Council shall make the appointment.
E.
§ 3-8.3 AGAWAM CODE § 3-8.4
1:18
§ 3-8.5. Agawam Energy Commission. [Added 9-8-2009 by
TOR-2009-4]
The City Council votes as follows: to establish an Agricultural
Commission to represent the Agawam agricultural community,
including all types of farming, forestry, greenhouse, and wood products,
businesses and accessory uses and activities customarily associated
with those endeavors.
A.
The purpose of the Agricultural Commission will be to support
commercial agriculture and other farming and forestry activities in the
Town of Agawam. The Commission's duties shall include, but not be
limited to, the following: serving as facilitators for encouraging the
pursuits of agriculture and forestry in Agawam; promoting agricultural
and forestry-based economic opportunities and business diversification
in the Town; acting as mediators between parties involved in issues
between operators of working lands and other residents; educating
the public and owners and users of working lands; working for the
preservation of agricultural and forest resource lands; advising the
Mayor, City Council, Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals,
Conservation Commission, Board of Health, Historical Commission,
Board of Assessors, and any other appropriate Town boards and
appointed committees on issues involving agriculture and forestry; and
pursuing initiatives appropriate to creating a sustainable agricultural
community.
B.
The Commission shall consist of five members appointed by the Mayor,
of which at least four of the membership shall be substantially engaged
in the pursuit of agriculture or forestry. All members of the Commission
must either be residents of the Town or owners and farmers of
agricultural property within the Town.
C.
The terms will be as follows: two members for a term of three years;
two members for a term of two years and three thereafter; and one
member for a term of one year and three years thereafter.
D.
There may be up to three alternates appointed to the Commission
by the Mayor. Alternates may fill any vacancies at meetings of the
Commission.
E.
The Mayor shall fill a vacancy based on the unexpired term of the
vacancy in order to maintain the cycles of appointments, based upon
the recommendations of the Commission.
F.
Establishment and purpose. The Agawam Energy Commission is
created to develop strategies to reduce energy costs of Town-owned
facilities through energy conservation, efficiency, and to engage in longterm
energy planning.
A.
Membership. The Commission shall consist of 11 members.
Commission members may include the Superintendent of Public Works
B.
§ 3-8.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.5
1:19
or his or her designee, the Director of Planning and Community
Development or his or her designee, the Inspector of Buildings or
his or her designee, the Building Maintenance Director or his or her
designee. Three members of the Town Council shall be designated
by the Council President. Additionally, four citizen members shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Town Council. Citizen
members shall be selected to represent a diverse range of community
interests and professional or technical expertise with energy issues.
It is recommended that Commission members attend at least one
educational seminar per year and report to the Commission with the
results. The initial terms of the citizen members shall be for one, two or
three years, with successors to be appointed for terms of three years. A
vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled for
the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
Duties and responsibilities. The Agawam Energy Commission shall have
the following duties and responsibilities:
Propose and develop strategies to reduce energy costs of Townowned
facilities and vehicles and street and traffic lighting through
energy conservation, efficiency and renewable energy measures.
Strategies may include electric conservation, vehicle fuel
conservation, natural gas and oil conservation, and may identify
innovative cost-saving measures.
(1)
Advise, assist, and cooperate with state, regional, and federal
agencies in developing appropriate programs and policies relating
to energy planning and regulation in the commonwealth, including
assistance and advice in preparation of loan or grant applications
with respect to energy programs for local agencies.
(2)
Develop local energy data and information management
capabilities to aid energy planning and decisionmaking.
(3)
Recommend Town-wide programs, including participation in
federal or statewide energy initiatives, such as the Green
Communities Program, to promote and facilitate smart energy
strategies for Agawam's citizens on both public and private real
property.
(4)
Work with appropriate Town departments to track energy usage
and costs associated with key assets and operations of the Town.
(5)
Identify climate adaptation, mitigation issues and strategies to
safeguard the long-term economic and cultural vitality of Agawam.
(6)
Follow emerging federal and state mandates, as well as initiatives
and funding opportunities for energy conservation, renewable
energy or climate adaptation and mitigation strategies.
Recommend strategies to comply with applicable mandatory or
voluntary standards.
(7)
C.
§ 3-8.5 AGAWAM CODE § 3-8.5
1:20
§ 3-8.6. Agawam Housing Committee. [Added 5-5-2014 by
TOR-2014-2]
Provide guidance, in the form of education or information, to the
Mayor, Town Council, School Department, and key Town
departments and personnel to support their decisionmaking on
recommended strategies and clean energy opportunities.
(8)
Serve as a communications and information resource on clean
energy issues and Town initiatives for the public through:
(a) Meetings and sponsored events;
(b) Maintenance of an active website;
(c) Regular communications to interested parties; and
(d) Public/private partnerships.
(9)
Keep accurate records of its meetings and actions and shall file an
annual report with the Mayor and Town Council.
(10)
Establishment and purpose. The Agawam Housing Committee is
established to consider housing needs in Agawam, with particular
attention to housing opportunities that are affordable to households
of all income levels and abilities. It will make recommendations to
the Mayor and City Council on steps the Town can take to support
the creation of new housing options to address those needs and to
maintain existing affordable housing stock. The Committee will support
implementation of its recommendations as appropriate and measure
progress toward their fulfillment. The Committee's work will seek
regional solutions and support regional goals for housing market
stability, housing affordability and fair access to housing.
A.
Membership. The Committee shall consist of seven members, four of
which are appointed by the Mayor. The composition of the Committee,
the appointment authority, and the term of office for the Committee
members shall be as follows: [Amended 5-16-2016 by TOR-2016-2]
One member of the Agawam City Council as designated by the
Council President for a term of two years;
(1)
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Planning
Board for a term of three years;
(2)
One member from the Agawam Housing Authority as designated by
the Housing Authority for a term of three years;
(3)
One member from the legal or financial industry as appointed by
the Mayor for an initial term of one year and thereafter for a term
of three years, subject to confirmation by the City Council;
(4)
B.
§ 3-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-8.6
1:21
One member from the development or real estate industry as
appointed by the Mayor for an initial term of one year and
thereafter for a term of three years, subject to confirmation by the
City Council;
(5)
Two at-large members from the community as appointed by the
Mayor for an initial term of two years and thereafter for a term of
three years, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
(6)
A vacancy occurring other than by expiration of a term shall be filled
for the unexpired term in the same manner as an original appointment.
C.
Duties and responsibilities. The Agawam Housing Committee shall have
the following duties and responsibilities:
(1) Completion of periodic local housing needs studies;
(2) Development and implementation of housing action plans;
Review of and making recommendations on housing proposals that
include the creation of housing opportunities that are affordable to
households of all income levels and abilities that are seeking local
support or permitting;
(3)
Active participating in review of M.G.L. Chapter 40B
comprehensive permit proposals;
(4)
Review and making recommendations on local zoning and land use
regulations to further promote housing that is affordable and/or
accessible;
(5)
Serve as a community resource on affordable and/or accessible
housing issues;
(6)
Increase public awareness through forums, workshops and other
community events;
(7)
Identify available local, state and federal resources to support their
recommendations; and
(8)
Identify suitable parcels for affordable and/or accessible housing
development.
(9)
D.
§ 3-8.6 AGAWAM CODE § 3-8.6
1:22
ARTICLE IV
Town Officers
[Adopted 12-21-1972 as §§ 2-30 and 2-31 of the Code of the Town of
Agawam]
§ 3-9. Regular Town Council meetings. [Added 6-7-1982 by
TOR-82-2; amended 4-16-1991 by TOR-91-2; 3-21-1994 by
TOR-94-4; 9-8-2009 by TOR-2009-5]
Regular meetings of the Town Council shall be held on the first and third
Mondays of each month at 7:00 p.m., except that there shall be only one
meeting a month during the months of July and August, in which event such
meetings shall be on the first Monday.
§ 3-10. Conflicts of interest.
§ 3-11. Elective officers.
The following shall be elective officers of the Town:
No member of the Town Council, Mayor and no officer or employee of
the Town shall directly or indirectly make a contract with the Town or
receive any commission, discount, bonus, gift, contribution or reward
from or share in the profits of any person making or performing such
contract unless such member, officer or employee, immediately upon
learning of the existence of such contract or that such contract is
proposed, shall notify, in writing, the Town Council of the nature of his
interest in such contract and shall abstain from doing any official act on
behalf of the Town in reference thereto. In case of such interest on the
part of the Town, the contract may be signed by any other officer whose
duty it is to sign such contract on behalf of the Town, duly authorized
thereto by the Town Council.
A.
A violation of any provision of this section shall render the contract
in respect to which such violation occurs voidable at the option of
the Town. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be
punished by a fine of not more than $300.
B.
Eleven members of the Town Council for terms of two years in
accordance with Article 2 of the Charter of the Town.
A.
One Mayor for a term of two years in accordance with Article 3 of the
Charter of the Town.
B.
Seven members of the School Committee for terms of two years in
accordance with Article 4 of the Charter of the Town.
C.
§ 3-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-11
1:23

ARTICLE V
Legal Counsel
[Adopted 12-21-1972 as §§ 2-13 and 2-33 of the Code of the Town of
Agawam]
§ 3-12. Power of Mayor to employ.
The Mayor is hereby empowered to employ legal counsel to bring suits or to
defend suits against the Town or its officers as agents or trustees.
§ 3-13. Power of School Committee to employ.
The School Committee is hereby authorized to employ legal counsel for
general purposes as provided for in MGL c. 71, § 37F.
§ 3-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-13
1:25

ARTICLE VI
Board of Appeals
[Adopted 12-21-1972 as Art. V of Ch. 2 of the Code of the Town of
Agawam]
§ 3-14. Establishment; membership; vacancies.
There shall be in the Town a Board of Appeals, hereinafter called the Board,
consisting of three members and two alternate members appointed by the
Town Council. The first appointment of members shall be for terms of
one, two and three years. Thereafter, the Town Council shall appoint each
year one member to serve for three years. Appointments of the alternate
members shall be made for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be filled
in the same manner for unexpired terms.
§ 3-15. Conflicts of interest; removal.
A member shall not act in any case in which he may be an interested party.
In case of a vacancy, inability to act or interest in a case on the part of a
member, his place shall be taken by the alternate member, such alternate
member being designated on an alternating basis, and while so acting, the
alternate member shall have the authority and responsibility of the member
whom he replaces. Any member or the alternate member may be removed
for cause by the Town Council upon written charges and after an executive
hearing and in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 14.
§ 3-16. Compensation.
Members of the Board may receive such remuneration as shall be
determined by the Town Council.
§ 3-17. Chairman; rules; meetings; records.
The Board shall annually elect a Chairman and Clerk from its own
membership. It shall adopt rules consistent with law for the conduct of its
business. Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman or as otherwise
provided by the Board, and all hearings shall be open to the public. Records
shall be kept by the Clerk and copies of all decisions setting forth the
reasons therefor shall be filed with the Town Clerk in accordance with the
provisions of the General Laws pertaining to appeals (MGL c. 40, § 14 to
20).
§ 3-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 3-17
1:27
Chapter 5
AIR POLLUTION CONTROL DISTRICT
§ 5-1. Election to join regional district. [HISTORY: Adopted by the
Town Council of the Town of Agawam 12-21-1972 as § 8-2 of the
Code of the Town of Agawam. Amendments noted where applicable.]
§ 5-2. Election to join regional district.
The town hereby elects to join the air pollution control district to be known
as the Lower Pioneer Valley Air Pollution Control District, pursuant to the
provisions of MGL C. 111, § 142B and 142C. Such district may include but is
not limited to the contiguous cities and towns of Agawam, West Springfield,
Holyoke, South Hadley, Easthampton, Northampton, Chicopee, Springfield
and Westfield.
Chapter 7
BUILDING DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Maintenance Department — See Ch.
10.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Fees — See Ch. 103.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 7-1. Establishment. [Amended 3-5-1990 by TOR-90-116]
There is hereby established a Building Department, consisting of an
Inspector of Buildings to be appointed by the Mayor and such other
members and personnel as the Mayor shall, from time to time, determine.
§ 7-2. Inspector of Buildings. [Amended 3-5-1990 by TOR-90-11]
The Inspector of Buildings shall be the chief officer of the Building
Department and shall also be the Zoning Officer of the town.
§ 7-3. Enforcement of town ordinances. [Added 6-18-1979]
Unless it is specifically stated in town ordinances or the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts who the enforcing agent will be as to any
particular law or ordinance, it is deemed that the Inspector of Buildings will
be the designated enforcing agent.
6. Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted to change the title of "Building Inspector" to
"Inspector of Buildings" so as to be in compliance with state statute. References to
"Building Inspector" have been changed to "Inspector of Buildings" throughout the Code
of the Town of Agawam.
§ 3-17 AGAWAM CODE § 7-3
5:28
Chapter 10
BUILDING MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Department — See Ch. 7.
Parks and Recreation Department — See Ch.
45.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
§ 10-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Building Maintenance Department, consisting
of a Director of Municipal Buildings/Recreation, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor, and such other officers and members as the Mayor shall
determine.
Chapter 12
CABLE TELEVISION ADVISORY COMMISSION
§ 12-1. Membership; vacancies.
§ 12-2. Powers and duties.
The Cable Advisory Commission shall consist of seven members. One
member shall be an employee of the Information Technology/Data
Processing Department, who shall serve as the Town of Agawam's
Cable Liaison Officer, and six members shall be appointed by the Mayor.
Member appointments shall be for a term of three years, excluding
the members of the first Commission where five appointments shall be
comprised of the Cable Television Advisory Commission members who
shall continue to serve for the duration of their individual term and
two appointments shall be made by the Mayor for terms of three years
respectively.
A.
Vacancies on the Commission will be filled for the unexpired term of the
Commissioner whose position was vacated.
B.
The Commission shall evaluate the compliance by the cable company
with the provisions of the town's Franchise License Agreement,
Massachusetts General Laws and Congressional Cable
Communications Policy Acts. They may conduct investigations into
matters pertaining to the company's performance and shall make an
annual report to the appointing authority no less than one year prior
to the expiration of the contract between the cable company and the
Town.
A.
§ 7-3 BUILDING MAINTENANCE DEPARTMENT § 12-2
10:29
Chapter 14
CIVIL DEFENSE
§ 14-1. Establishment of Department of Civil Defense; function.
There is hereby established a Department of Civil Defense, hereinafter
called the Department. It shall be the function of the Department to have
charge of civil defense as defined in Chapter 639, § 1, Acts of 1950, to
perform civil defense functions as authorized or directed by such chapter
or by any and all executive orders or general regulations promulgated
thereunder and to exercise any authority delegated to it by the Governor
under such chapter.
§ 14-2. Powers and duties of Director.
The Department of Civil Defense shall be under the direction of a Director
of Civil Defense, hereinafter called the Director, who shall be appointed
as prescribed by law. The Director shall have direct responsibility for the
organization, administration and operation of the Department, subject to
the direction and control of the appointing authority, and shall receive such
salary as may be fixed from time to time by the appointing authority. The
Director may, within the limits of the amount appropriated therefor, appoint
such experts, clerks and other assistants as the work of the Department
may require, may remove them, and may make such expenditures as may be
necessary to execute effectively the purpose of Chapter 639, Acts of 1950.
The Director shall also have authority to appoint district coordinators and
may accept and may receive on behalf of the town services, equipment,
supplies, materials or funds by way of gift, grant or loan for purposes of civil
defense offered by the federal government or any agency or officer thereof
or any person, firm or corporation subject to the terms of the offer and the
rules and regulations, if any, of the agency making the offer. The Director
shall cause appropriate records to be kept of all matters relating to such
gifts, grants and loans.
§ 14-3. Civil Defense Advisory Council.
There is hereby established a Civil Defense Advisory Council, hereinafter
called the Council. Such Council shall serve without pay and shall consist
of the Director of Civil Defense and such other department heads and
persons as the authority appointing the Director may deem necessary.
Such members of the council as the appointing authority shall designate
shall serve subject to the direction and control of the appointing authority
and shall advise such appointing authority and the Director on matters
pertaining to civil defense.
The Commission shall oversee policies regarding the Town's video
production studio and equipment, broadcast equipment in all locations,
PEG access equipment, programming that airs on local access stations
and Town-operated online websites.
B.
§ 12-2 AGAWAM CODE § 14-4
14:30
§ 14-4. Period of effectiveness.
This chapter shall remain in force during the effective period of Chapter
639, Acts of 1950, and any act in amendment or continuation thereof or
substitution therefor.
Chapter 23
FINANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Financial procedures — See Charter, Art. 5. Funds — See Ch. 32.
§ 23-1. Contracts of indebtedness.
Each officer or board contracting indebtedness in favor of the town shall
keep a permanent record of its action in so doing and as often as once a
month shall issue its warrant to the Tax Collector accompanied by properly
drawn bills directing the Tax Collector to collect such indebtedness by
appropriate legal means.
§ 23-2. Deposit of fees; compensation of officers.
All town officers shall pay all fees received by them by virtue of the office
into the town treasury, and the aggregate annual compensation of all town
officers shall be limited to the amount of the annual appropriations therefor.
Chapter 27
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 69. Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
§ 27-1. Establishment; Fire Chief; membership.
There is hereby established a Fire Department, consisting of a Fire Chief,
who shall be appointed by the Mayor, and such other members and
personnel as the Mayor shall determine.
§ 27-2. Duties.
The Fire Department shall be charged with safety of the town with regard
to fires and associated hazards.7
§ 14-4 FINANCES § 27-3
23:31
§ 27-3. Residency requirements.
Any member of the Fire Department who has at least five years of service
in the Department may reside outside of the town, provided that he/she
resides within the commonwealth and within 10 miles of the limits of the
town.
Chapter 32
FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
School Committee — See Charter, Art. 4. Finances — See Ch. 23.
§ 32-1. Stabilization Fund.
There is hereby established by the town a stabilization fund under the
provisions of MGL C. 40, § 5B.
§ 32-2. Whiting Street Fund and Thomas Pyne Fund. [Amended
11-16-1992 by TOR-92-16]
Whiting Street Fund. There is hereby established the Whiting Street
Fund, which is provided for by the will of Whiting Street which is dated
June 23, 1875, and which provides in pertinent part:
"To the inhabitants of the following named towns and city, to each
town in its corporate capacity as a town, and to the city in its
corporate capacity as a city, in trust, the income thereof to be
annually appropriated for the relief and comfort of the worthy poor
of said towns and city, who shall not be in the Almshouse, nor be
town or city paupers.
(1)
(2) To the town of Agawam, the sum of $4,000."
A.
Thomas Pyne Fund. There is hereby established the Thomas Pyne
Fund, which is provided for by the will of Desire A. Pyne which is
dated October 13, 1894, and which provides in pertinent part: "I give
and bequeath to the inhabitants of the Town of Agawam $2,000 as a
perpetual fund to be known as the 'Thomas Pyne Fund' in memory of
my late husband the income of which shall be applied for the relief of
the worthy poor of said town."
B.
C. Board of Commissioners.
7. Editor's Note: Former § 7-2, Exemptions from jury duty of firemen, was repealed as per
MGL C.234A, § 3.
§ 27-3 AGAWAM CODE § 32-2
32:32
§ 32-3. Phelon Fund.
There is hereby established the Phelon Fund, provided for by the will of
Mary A. Phelon as follows: "I give and bequeath the rest and residue of my
estate after the payment of the foregoing legacies to the Treasurer of the
Town of Agawam, whoever he may be at the time of my decease, in trust
as a school fund, to be invested and managed by said Treasurer and his
successors in office as Trustees. The income to be used annually under the
supervision of the Agawam Town School Committee solely for the benefit of
the schools in Feeding Hills Parish."
§ 32-4. (Reserved)8
§ 32-5. Faolin M. Pierce Fund.
There is hereby established the Faolin M. Pierce Fund, provided for by the
will of Faolin M. Pierce as follows: "The Faolin M. Pierce Fund, a fund, the
income only of which is to be used to assist graduates of the Agawam High
School who formerly attended the elementary school on Springfield Street
to obtain further education, in such manner as the School Committee, or
in case there is no School Committee, the Board of Selectmen, shall deem
most advisable and beneficial for the purpose."
Chapter 33
A Board of Commissioners is hereby established to administer
said funds and shall consist of three Agawam voters who shall be
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the Town Council. At the
time of the creation of said Board, there shall be appointed one
member for one year, one member for two years and one member
for three years. Thereafter, the Mayor shall appoint one member
annually for three years and said members shall be confirmed by
the Town Council.
(1)
The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds and securities
of said trust funds, shall invest and reinvest them and expend
therefrom moneys as directed by the Board of Commissioners.
(2)
The Board of Commissioners shall, so far as consistent with the
terms of the wills, manage and control the same, and distribute the
income in accordance with the terms of the respective wills.
(3)
The Board of Commissioners shall keep a record of its activities,
and at the close of each calendar year shall make a report to
the Mayor and the Town Council, showing the total amount of
the funds, and their investments, receipts and disbursements on
account of the same, setting forth in detail the sources of the
receipts and the purposes of the expenditures.
(4)
8. Editor's Note: Former § 32-4, Thomas Pyne Fund, as amended, was repealed 11-16-1992 by
TOR-92-16. See now § 32-2.
§ 32-2 FUNDS § 32-5
32:33
DEPARTMENTAL REVOLVING FUNDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Funds — See Ch. 32. Overflow Trash Bag Revolving Fund — See Ch.
A186.
§ 33-1. Purpose.
This chapter establishes and authorizes revolving funds for the use by
Town departments, boards, committees, agencies and officers in connection
with the operation of programs or activities that generate fees, charges or
other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs
or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed by
M.G.L. c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
§ 33-2. Expenditure limitations.
A department or agency head, board, committee or officer may incur
liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund established and
authorized by this chapter without appropriation, subject to the following
limitations:
§ 33-3. Interest.
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this
chapter shall be credited to the general fund.
§ 33-4. Procedures and reports.
Except as provided in M.G.L. c. 44, § 53E 1/2 and this chapter, the laws,
Charter provisions, ordinances, rules, regulations, policies or procedures
that govern the receipt and custody of Town monies and the expenditure
and payment of Town funds shall apply to the use of a revolving fund
established and authorized by this chapter. The City Auditor shall prepare a
quarterly report on the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances
and expenditures charged to each fund and the balance available for
expenditure in the quarterly report the City Auditor provides to the
Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paid
from the fund shall also be paid from the fund.
A.
No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of the
fund.
B.
The total spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount
authorized by the City Council on or before July 1 of that fiscal year,
or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approved
during that fiscal year by the City Council.
C.
§ 32-5 AGAWAM CODE § 33-4
32:34
department, board, committee, agency or officer on appropriations made
for its use. Copies of such reports shall be provided to the City Council.
§ 33-5. Authorized revolving funds.
The table establishes:9
Chapter 35
HEALTH, BOARD OF
§ 35-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the town a Board of Health in accordance
with MGL C. 111, § 26, consisting of three members, who shall be appointed
by the Mayor. There shall be a Health Agent, appointed by the Mayor, who
is designated as the chief administrative officer of the department.
§ 35-2. Noncriminal disposition of violations. [Added 10-6-1999 by
TOR-99-5]
Whoever violates any rule or regulation of the Board of Health may be
penalized by a noncriminal disposition as provided in Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 40, § 21D, as amended from time to time.
Chapter 45
PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Each revolving fund authorized for use by a department, board,
committee, agency or officer;
A.
The department or agency head, board, committee or officer authorized
to spend from each fund;
B.
The fees, charges and other monies charged and received by the
department, board, committee, agency or officer in connection with the
program or activity for which each fund may be used;
C.
The expenses of the program or activity for which each fund may be
used;
D.
E. Any restrictions or conditions on expenditures from each fund;
F. Any reporting or other requirements that apply to each fund;
G. The fiscal years each fund shall operate under this chapter; and
H. The enabling authority.
9. Editor's Note: See the table of revolving funds included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 33-4 HEALTH, BOARD OF § 45-1
35:35
§ 45-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established in the town a Parks and Recreation Department
to be under the supervision of a Director. The Director shall be appointed
by the Mayor.
§ 45-2. Hours of operation for parks. [Added 2-17-2004 by
TOR-2004-2]
Parks, school grounds, playgrounds and Town facilities under the control
and jurisdiction of the Town of Agawam will be open to the public daily
between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
Chapter 49
PERSONNEL
§ 49-1. Budgetary limitations.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall operate or be construed to authorize
or permit any department head, officer, official or employee of the town to
incur any obligation or to make any expenditure in excess of any duly made
appropriation or for which no appropriation has been made, nor shall this
chapter operate or be construed to impose any liability upon the town for
any obligation or debt incurred in excess of any duly made appropriation or
in the absence of such appropriation.
§ 49-2. Personnel Department; Personnel Officer.
There is hereby established in the town a Personnel Department which shall
be headed by a Personnel Officer appointed by the Mayor. The duties and
responsibilities of the Personnel Officer shall be set forth in the current job
description for the position.
§ 49-3. Indemnification of employees.
The Town of Agawam shall indemnify public employees to the extent and
subject to the limitations imposed by MGL, c. 258, § 9, as amended from
time to time.
§ 49-4. Seeking of elective office.
No employee of the Town of Agawam or the Agawam Public Schools shall
serve in any publicly elected municipal office in the Town of Agawam.
§ 49-5. Request for classification adjustment.
Any employee shall have the right to request a change in the classification
of his/her position. The employee shall make his/her request initially
through his/her department head, who shall submit a recommendation to
the Personnel Officer which is consistent with the classification plan. The
§ 45-1 AGAWAM CODE § 49-5
45:36
matter shall then be submitted to the Mayor for such action as the Mayor
may deem appropriate.
§ 49-6. Advancement within a compensation schedule.
For the purpose of determining when step rate increases shall be payable,
an employee's service shall be considered to begin on his/her anniversary
date, which shall be the first day of January, April, July or October,
whichever is the earliest following the date his/her employment in the
position began. Upon satisfactory completion of each year of service
following his/her anniversary date, the employee's compensation may be
increased to the next higher step in the applicable class grade until the
maximum rate for his/her position has been reached, upon the
recommendation of the department head and the approval of the Mayor.
§ 49-7. Classification of nonbargaining unit employees.
The following positions are not within any of the certified collective
bargaining units in the Town of Agawam.
Full-time administrative positions (salary calculated per year):
Positions enumerated:
Auditor*
Executive Assistant to the Mayor*
Mayor*
Personnel Officer
(*Indicates department head classification.)
(1)
Full-time administrative positions shall have the same hours of
work and shall receive the some vacation leave, holidays, sick
leave, bereavement leave, incentive leave and longevity that are
specified in the current collective bargaining agreement by and
between the Town of Agawam and the Agawam Administrative
Union. The Accountant/Auditor shall receive an annual salary in
the amount of $70,000 and shall receive a percentage increase in
base pay in accordance with the collective bargaining agreement
that the Town currently has and that will be negotiated with the
Agawam Administrative Union; and the Executive Assistant to the
Mayor and the Personnel Officer shall be compensated at the Tier
3 salary schedule as specified in the current collective bargaining
agreement by and between the Town of Agawam and the Agawam
Administrative Union. The Mayor shall receive an annual salary
of $85,000 (effective first Monday, in January, 2008). [Amended
6-21-1999 by TOR-99-3; 1-18-2005 by TOR-2004-18;
11-20-2006 by TOR-2006-14; 3-19-2007 by TOR-2007-2]
(2)
A.
B. Legislative positions (salary calculated per year):
§ 49-5 PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT § 49-7
45:37
Meeting coverage in the absence of the Administrative Assistant
to the Council. In the discretion of the Council President, meeting
coverage for absences of the Administrative Assistant to the
Council may be filled by a member of the Council or by an existing
clerical employee of the Town. If the absence is covered by an
existing clerical employee of the Town, that employee shall be
compensated in accordance with the current collective bargaining
agreement by and between the Town of Agawam and the Clerical
Union. [Amended 9-7-2004 by TOR-2004-9; 6-18-2007 by
TOR-2007-3; 5-20-2013 by TOR-2013-210]
(1)
Councilor: $10,000 per year (effective with commencement of term
beginning January 2008). [Amended 6-21-1999 by TOR-99-3;
3-19-2007 by TOR-2007-2]
(2)
Council President: $12,000 per year (effective with commencement
of term beginning January 2008). [Amended 6-21-1999 by
TOR-99-3; 3-19-2007 by TOR-2007-2]
(3)
School Committee: $5,000 per year (effective with commencement
of term beginning January 2008). [Added 3-19-2007 by
TOR-2007-2]
(4)
Part-time positions (salary calculated per year):
Appraiser: $10,000 to $12,500 per year. [Amended 1-18-2000
by TOR-99-9; 9-20-2000 by TOR-2000-9; 9-17-2001 by
TOR-2001-3]
(1)
Associate Solicitor: $33,000 per year. [Amended 6-18-2018 by
TOR-2018-8]
(2)
Board of Appeals Chairperson: $1,000 per year. [Amended
9-20-2000 by TOR-2000-9]
(3)
Board of Appeals Clerk: $800 per year. [Amended 9-20-2000 by
TOR-2000-9]
(4)
(5) Board of Appeals member: $200 per year.
(6) Registrar of Voters: $750 per year.
Solicitor: $58,500 per year. [Amended 6-18-2018 by
TOR-2018-8]
(7)
Board of Appeals Vice Chairperson: $600 per year. [Added
9-20-2000 by TOR-2000-9]
(8)
Board of Appeals Alternate: $300 per year. [Added 9-20-2000 by
TOR-2000-9]
(9)
(10) (Reserved)11
C.
10.Editor's Note: This ordinance stated that it would take effect 7-1-2013.
§ 49-7 AGAWAM CODE § 49-7
45:38
One part-time Community Preservation Act Clerk: The CPA Clerk
shall be compensated as an Administrative Assistant at the C2
salary schedule as specified in the current collective bargaining
agreement by and between the Town of Agawam and the Agawam
Clerical Employees Association Union. [Added 6-3-2013 by
TOR-2013-4]
(11)
Emergency Management Director: $10,000 to $12,500 per year.
[Added 3-19-2018 by TOR-2018-1]
(12)
Emergency Management Deputy Director/NIMS Coordinator:
$10,000 to $12,500 per year. [Added 3-19-2018 by TOR-2018-1]
(13)
Part-time positions (pay calculated per hour):
Positions enumerated. [Amended 10-1-2007 by TOR-2007-7;
5-20-2013 by TOR-2013-2; 10-5-2015 by TOR-2015-8;
3-21-2016 by TOR-2016-1; 8-7-2017 by TOR-2017-8;
5-7-2018 by TOR-2018-3; 1-22-2019 by TOR-2018-17]
Administrative Assistant to the Council
Assistant Swim Coach
Assistant Teacher (nursery school)
Ballot Counter
Basketball Official
Building Maintenance, seasonal custodian
Call Firefighter
Call Fire Lieutenant
Call Senior Fire Lieutenant
Camera and Audio Operator
Camp Coordinator
Camp Counselor
Camp Director
Camp Nurse
Camp Specialist
Census Worker
Clubhouse Attendant
Constable
Council on Aging Van Driver
Custodian, Council on Aging
(1)
D.
11.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection C(10), regarding City Council/School Committee camera
and audio personnel, added 10-5-2006 by TOR 2006-8, as amended, was repealed
1-22-2019 by TOR-2018-17.
§ 49-7 PARKS AND RECREATION DEPARTMENT § 49-7
45:39
§ 49-8. Retired employee health insurance. [Added 4-5-2004 by
TOR-2004-1]
Eligible retirees and/or their surviving spouses who are not covered by
health/dental insurance at the time of their retirement from employment
with the Town of Agawam, shall be eligible to enroll or reinstate health/
Deputy Precinct Clerk
Deputy Precinct Warden
Head Teacher/Director (nursery school)
Laborer, Seasonal
Lifeguard
Maintenance Crew Leader, Seasonal
Meals on Wheels Driver
Nurse, Substitute
Pool Director
Precinct Clerk
Precinct Warden
Public Access Studio Manager
Recreation Program Supervisor
Swim Coach
Teacher (nursery school)
Voting Machine Set-Up Person
*The Administrative Assistant to the Council shall receive an
annual salary of $42,833 and shall receive the same cost of living
increases afforded members of the Agawam Administrative Union
as contained in the collective bargaining agreement by and
between the Town of Agawam and the Agawam Administrative
Union. The Administrative Assistant to the Council shall receive
the same vacation leave, holidays, sick leave, bereavement leave,
incentive leave and longevity as are specified in the current
collective bargaining agreement by and between the Town of
Agawam and the Agawam Administrative Union.
A listing of the current hourly pay scales for the Subsection D(1)
part-time nonbargaining unit positions can be found on file in the
Town Clerk's office.
(2)
The Agawam Town Council herein sets the current hourly pay
scales for the part-time nonbargaining unit positions which are
contained on Exhibit A. A copy of Exhibit A can be found on file in
the Town Clerk's office. 12 [Amended 1-18-2000 by TOR-99-9]
(3)
12.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is also included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 49-7 AGAWAM CODE § 49-8
45:40
dental insurance coverage with the Town of Agawam group plans during
any health/dental insurance open enrollment period or in the case of a
qualifying life event, provided the retiree, and/or their surviving spouse,
provides the Town of Agawam medical evidence of insurability.
Chapter 52
POLICE
§ 52-1. Establishment of Police Department.
There is hereby established a Police Department, consisting of a Police
Chief, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, and such other officers and
members as the Mayor shall determine.
§ 52-2. Enforcement of ordinances and state laws.
The Police Department shall be charged with the enforcement of the
ordinances of the town and the laws of the commonwealth.
§ 52-3. Aid to other municipalities.
The Police Department is hereby authorized to go to aid another city or town
at the request of such city or town in the suppression of riots or other forms
of violence therein.
§ 52-4. Seeking of elective office by members prohibited.
No member of the regular police force shall while in active employment as
a member of such police force seek election to any elective office.
§ 52-5. Career incentive pay program.
There is hereby established a career incentive pay program for regular
full-time members of the Police Department as provided for in MGL C. 41,
§ 108L.
§ 52-6. Salary increase of certain members.
A member of the Police Department assigned to photographic or fingerprint
identification work shall, after completion of one year's service in such
assignment, receive a salary increase of $600 a year, as provided for in MGL
C. 41, § 108I.
§ 52-7. Compensation of auxiliary police for court time.
The auxiliary police officers at the Town of Agawam shall receive
compensation for time expended in court on behalf of the town, at the same
rate received by members of the Agawam Police Department, based on
Step 1 of the applicable grade and salary range assignment, as enumerated
in the collective bargaining contract, which is in effect at the time said
§ 49-8 POLICE § 52-7
52:41
auxiliary police officers are required to be present in court, except that
such compensation shall be on the basis of straight time hours and not on
the basis of time and a half. Compensation shall be made respectively with
respect to time so expended on and subsequent to January 1, 1979.
Chapter 57
TRANSMISSION LINES
§ 57-1. Establishment of committee; powers.
For the purpose of hearing and acting upon petitions for the construction,
repair and maintenance of transmission lines in accordance with MGL C.
166, § 22, there is hereby established a three-member committee composed
of members of the Town Council. The members of said committee shall be
appointed annually by the Council President and shall have all the powers
granted by the General Laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to the
Town Council under said Chapter 166.
§ 57-2. Report of committee actions.
The committee shall report all of its actions to the Town Council.
Chapter 61
VETERANS COUNCIL
§ 61-1. Membership; appointment. [Amended 9-21-1998 by
TOR-98-6; 6-1-2009 by TOR-2009-3]
The Agawam Veterans Council shall consist of nine members. There shall be
eight residents of Agawam who are honorably discharged veterans of the
armed services who shall be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by the
Town Council. The ninth member of the Agawam Veterans Council shall be
the duly appointed Director/Agent of the Western Hampden District of the
Department of Veterans’ Services.
§ 61-2. Purpose; powers and duties.
The purpose of the Agawam Veterans Council will be to work together in
the best interests of and for the welfare of the veterans of the Town of
Agawam; to organize and implement the Memorial Day activities in the
Town of Agawam; to organize and implement the Veterans Day activities in
the Town of Agawam; and to assist in other patriotic events and activities in
Agawam during each year.
§ 52-7 AGAWAM CODE § 61-2
57:42
Chapter 69
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Violations and penalties — See Ch. 1. Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
§ 61-2 TRANSMISSION LINES § 61-2
57:43

ARTICLE I
Fire Alarm Equipment
[Adopted 2-14-1977]
§ 69-1. Permit required; application.
No person, firm, corporation, company or any other entity shall install any
fire alarm system or equipment in any building or other structure within the
town without making application to the Building Department in accordance
with the provisions of the State Building Code and obtaining a permit
therefor. Such application shall be made in the name of the owner, occupant
or by the person or company who proposes to make the installation of such
fire alarm equipment.
§ 69-2. Approval of installation.
Upon affirmation that the installation will be made in accordance with
the National Fire Protection Association No. 74, Standard for Household
Fire Warning Equipment and National Fire Protection Association No. 101,
Life Safety Code, the head of the Fire Department shall approve such
installation.
§ 69-3. Certificate of completion.
The person or persons making the installation of a fire alarm system shall
immediately, upon completion of the work, file a certificate of completion as
specified in the State Building Code.
§ 69-3.1. Unintentional false alarms; penalties. [Added 4-6-2015 by
TOR-2015-3]
The following fines and charges shall be imposed upon the property
owner for activation of any fire alarm system by error, mistake or
malfunction, as the case may be, which results in a response by the Fire
Department:
Up to four such false alarms may occur in any twelve-month period
without the imposition of a penalty.
(1)
The fifth such false alarm shall result in a fine of $200, and every
subsequent false alarm in excess of the above shall result in a
fine of $100 per false alarm. In addition, such person shall be
responsible for, and shall bear the expense of, responding to any
such false alarm. Said expense shall be determined by the Chief
of the Fire Department and the Auditor of the Town and billed to
the responsible party or parties; provided, however, that no such
charges, exclusive of any penalty imposed, shall exceed $500.
(2)
A.
After the third false alarm, a written warning shall be sent to the
property owner by the Fire Department.
B.
§ 69-1 TRANSMISSION LINES § 69-3.1
57:45
After the fourth such false alarm, a written order shall be issued to the
property owner requiring that the alarm system be inspected and the
Fire Department notified of corrective action taken.
C.
All fines and expenses shall be paid to the Town of Agawam within
30 days of the date of the bill. Fines and bills unpaid for more than
90 days shall be subject to municipal charges liens as set forth and in
accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 58.
D.
§ 69-3.1 AGAWAM CODE § 69-3.1
57:46
ARTICLE II
Burglar Alarms
[Adopted 10-21-1991 by TOR-91-12]
§ 69-4. Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this Article is to provide for the public safety and welfare
by setting forth regulations governing burglary and robbery alarm systems,
businesses and agents within the town, requiring permits therefor, and
providing for punishment of violations of provisions of this Article, and to
prevent the erroneous and mistaken use of said alarms. Alarms which are
not installed and maintained properly has resulted in increased responses
by the Agawam Police Department and is creating a hazard to the members
of that Department and to the general public.
§ 69-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — To engage in the supplying, installing, maintaining or
servicing of burglary or robbery alarm systems.
ALARM SYSTEM — The assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
or a device, which is designed or used for the detection of an unauthorized
entry into a building, structure or facility or other activity which emits a
sound or transmits a signal or message to the Agawam Police Department
to which police officers are expected to respond, and where applicable
includes fire alarm systems.
ALARM USER — That person whose name appears on the registration form
as the user or, if there is no such registration, the owner of the premises to
which the Agawam Police Department is expected to respond.
AUDIBLE ALARM — A device, designed for the detection of unauthorized
entry on premises, which generates an audible sound on the premises when
it is actuated.
DEPARTMENT — The Agawam Police Department.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm signal necessitating response by the Agawam
Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist. Such term
shall include alarms as follows:
Error or mistake. Any action by any person, firm or corporation or
other entity owning or operating any dwelling, building or place, or any
action by any agent or employee of said person, firm or corporation or
other entity which results in the activation of an alarm system when no
emergency exists.
A.
Malfunction. Any unintentional activation of any alarm system caused
by a flaw in the design, installation or maintenance of the system. This
shall not include any activation caused by violent condition of nature or
B.
§ 69-4 TRANSMISSION LINES § 69-5
57:47
§ 69-6. Permit required.
No person shall install or operate an alarm system within the Town of
Agawam until an application has been filed with the Police Department and
a permit authorizing the installation and operation of said alarm system
has been issued. The application shall include the name, telephone number
and address of the alarm user and at least two other persons who can
be reached at any time, day or night, and who shall have access to the
alarm system in order to reset the system or disconnect the same when
necessary. Permits shall expire on January 1 of every odd-numbered year
unless renewed. It shall be the responsibility of each permit holder to notify
the Department in writing within 10 days of any change in registration
information.
§ 69-7. Control and curtailment of signals emitted by alarms.
Within six months from the effective date of this Article, all alarm systems
which use an audible horn, siren or bell shall be equipped with a device
which will shut off such horn, siren or bell within 10 minutes after activation
of the alarm system.
§ 69-8. Approval of plans; location of components; lock boxes.
§ 69-9. Response to alarm.
other extraordinary circumstances, not reasonably subject to control of
the alarm user.
Intentional misuse. Any intentional activation of an alarm system when
no burglary, holdup or other emergency is in progress.
C.
No alarm system shall be installed until the plans and specifications
relating to said alarm system have been approved by the Chief of
the Department or his designee. The Chief of the Department or his
designee shall have the right, at all reasonable times, to inspect any
alarm system within his jurisdiction.
A.
The location of the alarm components shall, when deemed necessary by
the Chief of the Department or his designee, be provided on a floor plan
to be kept at the site of the alarm system or in a location adjacent to the
alarm system panel.
B.
Prior to issuance of a permit pursuant to these provisions, the permit
applicant shall, when deemed necessary by the Chief of the Department
or his designee install a lock box in an approved location at the site of
the alarm system. Said lock box shall, when deemed necessary by the
Chief of the Department or his designee, contain keys to the structure
served by the alarm system.
C.
When an alarm is activated, the Police Department shall respond to
the alarm and notify the person or persons listed with the Police
A.
§ 69-5 AGAWAM CODE § 69-9
57:48
§ 69-10. Unintentional false alarms; penalties.
Department as having responsibility for securing said alarm system.
Said person shall immediately go to the place where the alarm is
sounding to meet the police officers, secure the building and reset the
alarm.
Should any person responsible for securing and resetting any alarm
system, when notified of its activation, refuse to respond pursuant
to this section, the officers on the scene shall check the property
thoroughly and secure the location as much as possible. The Police
Chief or the Chief's designee, at his or her sole discretion, may require
no further response to that building, dwelling or place until such time
as said alarm system has been properly reset.
B.
If any dwelling, building or place is required by law to maintain a
burglar alarm system, as herein defined, and if said alarm system fails
to function and cannot be returned to service within a reasonable time
and if, in the opinion of the Chief of the Department, or his designee,
the absence of properly functioning alarm system may pose a threat
to life and property, the Chief of the Department or his designee may
require the special duty assignment of one or more police officers to
patrol the premises until the alarm system has been returned to service.
The cost of any special duty assignment shall be the responsibility of
the alarm system permit holder.
C.
The following fines and charges shall be imposed upon the alarm
system permit holder for activation of any alarm system by error,
mistake or malfunction, as the case may be, which results in a response
by the Police Department:
Up to four such false alarms may occur in any calendar year
without the imposition of a penalty.
(1)
The fifth such false alarm shall result in a fine of $25, and every
subsequent false alarm in excess of the above shall result in a
fine of $25 per false alarm. In addition, such person shall be
responsible for and shall bear the expense of responding to any
such false alarm. Said expense shall be determined by the Chief
of the Department and the Auditor of the town and billed to the
responsible party or parties; provided, however, that no such
charges, exclusive of any penalty imposed, shall exceed $300.
(2)
A.
After the third false alarm, a written warning shall be sent to the alarm
system permit holder.
B.
After the fourth such false alarm, a written order shall be issued to
the alarm system permit holder requiring that the alarm system be
inspected and the Department notified of corrective action taken.
C.
All fines and expenses shall be paid to the Town of Agawam within
30 days of the date of the bill. Fines and bills unpaid for more than
D.
§ 69-9 TRANSMISSION LINES § 69-10
57:49
§ 69-11. Intentional false alarms; penalties.
§ 69-12. Other offenses.
90 days shall be subject to municipal charges liens as set forth and in
accordance with MGL C. 40, § 58.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally activate any alarm system
when no emergency exists.
A.
No person shall knowingly or intentionally test, repair, adjust, alter
or perform maintenance on an alarm system or cause the same to
be tested, repaired, adjusted, altered or maintained, if such action
could result in a false alarm, without first notifying the Department of
such test, repair, adjustment, alteration or maintenance and receiving
approval for the same. The Department shall be notified immediately
upon completion of such test, repair, adjustment, alteration or
maintenance. The Chief of the Department may restrict or refuse to
permit testing, repair, adjustment, alteration or maintenance of an
alarm system if testing, repair, adjustment, alteration or maintenance
could result in a false alarm when during a time when the manpower
resources of the Department are limited.
B.
Any person who violates Subsection A or B of this section shall be fined
$100 and, where applicable, may additionally be subject to prosecution
under the General Laws of the commonwealth for falsely reporting an
incident. In addition, such person shall be responsible for and shall
bear the expense of responding to any such false alarm. Said expense
shall be determined by the Chief of the Department or his designee and
the Auditor of the town and billed to the responsible party or parties;
provided, however, that no such charge, exclusive of any penalty
imposed, shall exceed $300 per response.
C.
All fines and expenses shall be paid to the Town of Agawam within 30
days of the date of the bill. Fines and bills unpaid for more than 90
days shall be subject to a municipal charges liens as set forth an in
accordance with MGL C. 40, § 58.
D.
Failure to obtain a permit for any alarm system shall result in a fine of
$100, and all other offenses shall be cumulative.
A.
Failure to submit to the Police Department proper names and addresses
as required in § 69-6 shall result in a fine of $25, and all other offenses
shall be cumulative.
B.
All fines and expenses shall be paid to the Town of Agawam within 30
days of the date of the bill. Fines and bills unpaid for more than 90
days shall be subject to a municipal charges liens as set forth and in
accordance with MGL C. 40, § 58.
C.
§ 69-10 AGAWAM CODE § 69-13
57:50
§ 69-13. Use of exterior audible alarm.
No alarm system which produces an exterior audible signal, bell, siren or
horn shall be installed unless its operation is automatically restricted to a
maximum of 10 minutes' automatic reset for a residential facility and 10
minutes' automatic reset for a business facility. Any exterior audible alarm
system in use as of the effective date of this Article must comply with this
section within six months of such date.
§ 69-14. Hearings.
Any person receiving an order or notice of violation pursuant to this Article
may contest said order or notice at a hearing before the Police
Commissioner. All demands for a hearing must be made in writing and
delivered in person or by mail no later than 10 days following receipt of the
order or notice of violation. Any person requesting a hearing shall be given
written notice of the date, time and place of the hearing. Such hearing shall
be held no less than 15 days nor more than 30 days from the date of the
mailing of the notice, provided that the Police Commissioner shall grant,
upon good cause shown, any reasonable request by any interested party for
a postponement or continuance. The presence of the issuing officer shall
be required at the hearing if such person so requests. A person wishing
to contest an order or notice of violation shall appear at the hearing and
shall have the right to represent evidence and cross-examine witnesses.
The Police Commission shall conduct the hearing in a manner that he or
she deems fair and appropriate. The rules regarding the admissibility of
evidence shall not be strictly applied, but all testimony shall be given under
oath or affirmation. The Police Commission shall announce its decision
within five days of the completion of the hearing.
§ 69-15. Exemptions.
The provisions of this Article are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to
automobiles or affixed to municipal, state and federal buildings.
§ 69-16. Disclaimer of town's responsibility.
Notwithstanding the provisions of this Article, the town, its departments,
officers, agents and employees shall be under no obligation whatsoever
concerning the adequacy, operation or maintenance of any alarm device.
No liability whatsoever is assumed for the failure of such alarm devices or
monitoring facilities or for the failure to respond to alarms.
§ 69-13 TRANSMISSION LINES § 69-16
57:51
Chapter 72
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 103.
§ 72-1. Liquor License Commission.
§ 72-2. Open containers prohibited. [Added 5-1-1978; amended
5-17-1989; 6-21-1982 by TOR-82-10]
It shall be unlawful for any person to possess, consume from and/or
transport an open container of alcoholic beverages on any public street,
public sidewalk or public way or on any grounds owned by the town,
state and county or any other municipalities within the limits of the town,
except that this section shall not apply to events or festivals duly licensed
by the Liquor License Commission or officials of the Town of Agawam
having care and custody of the premises so licensed, to the extent of such
license approval. A person who is found to possess, consume from and/
or transport an open container of alcoholic beverage on any public street,
public sidewalk or public way, or on any grounds owned by the town, within
the limits of the town may be arrested by a police officer and kept in custody
in a convenient place, not more than 24 hours, Sunday excepted, until a
complaint can be made against him for the offense, and he be taken upon
a warrant issued upon such complaint. A fine may be imposed for not more
than $200 for this offense.
Chapter 75
AMUSEMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Violations and penalties — See Ch. 1.
There shall be a Liquor License Commission which is hereby authorized
to issue all new or renewal licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages
within the town, both as to on-premises and package services.
A.
The Liquor License Commission shall be composed of three members.
The members shall be appointed by the Mayor in accordance with the
provisions of MGL C. 138, § 4. (See MGL C. 138 generally as to state
regulation of sale of alcoholic beverages.)
B.
§ 69-16 AGAWAM CODE § 75-1
72:52
§ 75-1. License required for automatic amusement devices;
maximum number of devices; inspections; seizure of unlicensed
machines.
Chapter 78
BLIGHTED PROPERTIES
§ 78-1. Purpose.
In accordance with MGL c. 140, § 177A, as amended from time to time,
any individual or business desiring to keep and operate an automatic
amusement device for hire, gain or reward shall secure an annual
license from the Town Council.13 The Town Council shall not grant
a license for any automatic amusement device which presents a risk
of misuse as a gaming device. Automatic amusement devices which
present a risk of misuse as gaming devices are those devices which
simulate actual gaming devices and games which involve matching of
random number combinations.
A.
The maximum number of automatic amusement devices allowed on
any single business premises shall be four, except in the case of duly
licensed arcades and amusement parks. Any individual or business
desiring more than four automatic amusement devices on a single
business premises shall require a special permit from the Board of
Appeals.
B.
All licenses for automatic amusement devices granted by the Town
Council shall be subject to inspection by the Agawam Police
Department to ensure conformance with submitted application
information and local ordinance requirements.
C.
Any unlicensed automatic amusement device shall be subject to
immediate seizure by the Agawam Police Department.
D.
It is hereby found and declared that there exists within the Town of
Agawam numerous real properties which are in a blighted, vacant
and/or foreclosing condition. Many of these properties are essentially
abandoned. Some are in violation of multiple aspects of state and local
building and sanitary codes. The owners of record are often times large
financial institutions located out of state, making enforcement of the
codes very difficult. These code violations may include, but are not
limited to, unoccupied buildings susceptible to vandalism and/or open
structures rendering them unsafe and dangerous, yards full of litter
and trash, unsecured houses, unshoveled snow rendering sidewalks
impassable, and overgrown grass and foliage.
A.
The existence of such blight contributes to the decline of city
neighborhoods. It is further found that the existence of such blighted
B.
13.Editor's Note: The Town Council adopted an application package 1-21-1997 by TR-97-1.
§ 75-1 AMUSEMENTS § 78-1
75:53
§ 78-2. Definitions.
When used in this chapter, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the
following terms shall have the following meanings:
BLIGHTED PREMISES — Any building, structure, parcel of land, or any part
of a building or structure that is a separate unit, whether commercial or
residential, whether occupied or unoccupied, whether in foreclosure or not,
in which at least one of the following conditions exists:
properties, if abandoned, encourages temporary occupancy, by
transients, drug users and persons engaged in criminal activity,
adversely affecting the economic well-being of the Town of Agawam
and the health, safety and welfare of Agawam's residents, and creates
significant costs to Agawam by virtue of the need for constant
monitoring and frequent boarding and securing.
It is further found that many of the blighted properties can be
rehabilitated, reconstructed, demolished and/or reused so as to provide
decent, safe, sanitary housing or commercial facilities, and that such
rehabilitation, reconstruction, demolition and/or reuse would eliminate,
remedy and prevent the adverse conditions described above.
C.
It is the intent of this chapter to protect and preserve public safety,
security and quiet enjoyment of occupants, abutters and neighborhoods
by:
Requiring all residential, commercial and industrial property
owners, including lenders, trustees and service companies, to
properly maintain blighted and/or foreclosing properties; and
(1)
Regulating the maintenance of blighted and/or foreclosing
residential, commercial and industrial properties to prevent
blighted and unsecured properties.
(2)
D.
The premises is not being adequately maintained and secured as
documented by the Enforcement Officer (as the term is defined herein)
based upon, without limitation, the following factors: missing or
boarded windows or doors; collapsing or missing walls, roof or floor;
siding that is seriously damaged or missing; fire damage; a foundation
that is structurally faulty; accumulation of interior furniture outside;
garbage, trash, junk; inoperable cars, boats, motorcycles or other
inoperable machinery; or other refuse (unless otherwise licensed to do
so).
A.
It has been cited for violations as documented by the Code Enforcement
Officer, the Inspector of Buildings, the Health Inspector, the Chief of
Police, the Fire Chief and/or their designated agents, and said violations
have not been corrected.
B.
It is attracting illegal activity as documented by the Police Department
and/or an appropriate agent or department of the Town of Agawam.
C.
§ 78-1 AGAWAM CODE § 78-2
75:54
BUILDING — An independent structure having a roof supported by columns
or walls, resting on its own foundations and designed for shelter, housing or
enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
CITY — The Town of Agawam.
COMMISSIONER — The Building Commissioner.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer, Inspector of
Buildings, Director of the Board of Health, Health Inspector, Police Chief,
Fire Chief and/or their designated agents.
FORECLOSING — The process by which a property placed as a security for
a real estate loan is prepared for sale to satisfy the debt if the borrower
defaults.
INITIATION OF THE FORECLOSURE PROCESS — Taking any of the
following actions:
LOCAL AGENT — An agent located within 20 driving miles' distance of the
property in question.
MORTGAGEE — The creditor, including but not limited to service
companies, lenders in a mortgage agreement and any agent, servant, or
employee of the mortgagee, or any successor in interest and/or assignee
of the mortgagee's rights, interests, or obligations under the mortgage
agreement.
OWNER — Any individual, business entity, voluntary association or
nonprofit organization, which alone or jointly or severally with others:
D. It is a fire hazard as documented by the Fire Department.
Because of fire, wind or other natural disaster, or because of physical
deterioration, it is no longer habitable as a dwelling or useful for the
purpose for which the completed structure was originally intended;
E.
F. It is a vacant building as defined hereunder; or
It is determined by the Code Enforcement Officer, the Inspector of
Buildings and/or the Health Inspector that the building, structure or
parcel of land is in a condition which poses a serious threat to safety,
health, morals, and general welfare of the Town of Agawam.
G.
Taking possession of a residential property pursuant to M.G.L. c. 244,
§ 1;
A.
Publishing the first notice of a residential property pursuant to M.G.L.
c. 244, § 14; or
B.
Commencing a foreclosure action on a residential property in either the
Land Court or Hampden Superior Court.
C.
A. Has legal title to any building, structure, and property.
Has care, charge, or control of any such building, structure or property
in any capacity, including but not limited to agent, executor, executrix,
B.
§ 78-2 AMUSEMENTS § 78-2
75:55
PROPERTY — Any real residential, commercial, or industrial property or
portion thereof, located in the Town of Agawam, including buildings or
structures situated on the property. For purposes of this chapter, "property"
does not include property owned or subject to the control of the Town of
Agawam or any of its governmental bodies.
RECEIVER — A court-appointed individual who serves as a general
contractor and whose duties and powers shall be specified by the court in
accordance with the provisions of M.G.L. c. 111, § 127I.
SECURING — Measures that are taken to prevent unauthorized persons
access to the property, including but not limited to erecting fencing around
the property, boarding up doors and windows and the like.
VACANT BUILDING — Any commercial or industrial building in which
no person or entity actually conducts a lawfully licensed business in said
building; or any residential building in which no person lawfully resides in
any part of the building; or a mixed-use building in which neither licensed
business nor a lawful resident exists. Further, any building in which many of
the total exterior windows and doors are broken, boarded or open without
a functioning lock shall be deemed "vacant."
§ 78-3. Creation or maintenance of blighted premises prohibited.
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
holder of legal title.
C. Is a lessee under a written agreement; or
D. Is a mortgagee in possession of any such property; or
Is an agent, trustee, or other person appointed by the courts and vested
with possession or control of such building, structure or property.
E.
Is a trustee who holds, owns or controls mortgage loans for mortgagebacked
securities transactions and has initiated the foreclosure
process.
F.
No owner of real property located within the Town of Agawam shall
allow, create or maintain or cause to be created or maintained any
blighted premises.
A.
Administration.
Investigation. The enforcement officer may undertake an
investigation of any alleged violation of this section upon his or
her own initiative or shall, upon receipt of a complaint from any
individual, civic organization or other governmental agency,
undertake an investigation of the alleged violation.
(1)
Orders to take corrective action. Upon a finding of a violation of the
provisions of this section, the enforcement officer shall serve notice
of the violation and an order to correct such violation upon the
owner of the property by certified mail or by in-hand service by a
(2)
B.
§ 78-2 AGAWAM CODE § 78-3
75:56
person authorized to do such. The order shall require the owner to
take one or more of the following actions to bring the property into
compliance with the requirements of this section within 30 days of
receipt of such order:
To file a completed application and any required plans for a
permit for repair or rehabilitation of the building or structure
and a schedule indicating a completion date for such work
or its various phases. All work performed pursuant to this
subsection shall be completed within 90 days of the date the
order is received unless the enforcing officer permits a greater
amount of time. However, the enforcement officer shall not
allow more than 180 days from the date the order was
received.
(a)
To file a completed application and any required plans for
a permit for demolition of the building or structure and a
schedule indicating a completion date for such work in its
various phases. All work performed pursuant to this subsection
shall be completed within 90 days of the date the order is
received unless the enforcing officer permits a greater amount
of time. However, the enforcement officer shall not allow more
than 180 days from the date the order was received.
(b)
To take any action that the enforcement officer deems
necessary to correct the violations of this section in order to
assist the Town of Agawam in protecting the public health,
safety and welfare.
(c)
Recovery of costs. Whenever a property owner fails, neglects
or refuses to make repairs or take other corrective actions
specified in the order, the city official may undertake such
repairs or actions, when in his or her judgment a failure to
make the necessary repairs or corrective actions will endanger
the public health, safety and welfare. The city may seek a
court-appointed receiver to manage the property and bring
said property into compliance with all applicable statutes,
regulations and codes.
(d)
Notice of the intention of the city to make such repairs or other
corrective actions shall be served on the owner by certified mail or
by service in hand by a person duly authorized to do such. When
the repairs are made or other corrective actions are taken by the
Town of Agawam, the cost of such repairs shall constitute a debt
in favor of the city against the owner of the repaired building or
structure. In the event that the owner fails, neglects or refuses to
pay the city the amount of the debt within 30 days of the receipt of
the notice of the debt, the city may place a lien on the property for
such debt and/or may initiate a civil action against the owner in a
court of competent jurisdiction to recover the debt.
(3)
§ 78-3 AMUSEMENTS § 78-4
75:57
§ 78-4. Registration of vacant buildings required.
Registration.
Within 30 days of a building becoming vacant, each owner of
such vacant building shall register said building with the Town of
Agawam's Code Enforcement Officer. All registrations must state
the owner's name, mailing address, telephone number and e-mail
address if the individual has an e-mail address. The mailing address
shall not be a post office box.
(1)
If none of the owner(s) are at an address within the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, the registration shall also include the name,
address, phone number and e-mail address of a person who resides
in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, who shall be designated
as the responsible local agent for purposes of securing and
maintaining the property, for the purposes of notification in the
event of an emergency affecting the public health, safety and
welfare, and for service of any and all notices issued pursuant to
this chapter.
(2)
The failure to timely register a vacant building shall be a violation
of this chapter.
(3)
A.
Registration fees.
There shall be no fees associated with registering blighted/vacant
buildings and buildings undergoing the foreclosure process as long
as the buildings are registered within 30 days from the start of
their vacancy and/or the foreclosure process.
(1)
Failure to timely register any vacant or blighted building or
building going through the foreclosure process shall be a violation
of this chapter, and a fee shall be imposed as a municipal charges
lien on the property in accordance with M.G.L. c. 40, § 58 as voted
by the Agawam City Council.
(2)
B.
Maintenance requirements.
Properties subject to this section shall comply with 780 CMR 116.2,
Standards for making buildings safe or secure, and shall be
maintained in accordance with all applicable sanitary codes,
building codes and local regulations;
(1)
The local owner or local agent must inspect and maintain the
property on a monthly basis for the duration of the vacancy.
(2)
The property must contain a posting with the name and twentyfour-
hour contact phone number of the local owner or local agent
responsible for the maintenance. This sign must be posted at the
front of the property and must be legible and clearly visible from
the public way and/or street.
(3)
C.
§ 78-4 AGAWAM CODE § 78-4
75:58
§ 78-5. Violations and penalties; enforcement; imposition of fines.
Once the property is no longer vacant or is sold, the owner must provide
proof of sale or written notice of occupancy to the Code Enforcement
Officer.
D.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer, the
Building Commissioner/Building Inspector, the Director of the Board of
Health/Health Inspector, the Police Chief, the Fire Chief and/or their
designated agents.
A.
Penalties.
Each separate offense of this section shall be punishable of a fine
of:
(a) First offense: $50.
(b) Second offense: $75.
(c) Third offense and each subsequent offense: $150.
(1)
Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall be considered
a separate offense, and each day that any violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
(2)
B.
Upon failure to comply with any order issued under this chapter, the
city may, in addition to other penalties and actions, bring civil or
legal action against the owner to require compliance with the order,
including but not limited to seeking a court-approved receiver for the
property in violation.
C.
The imposition of any fine shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other laws upon the premises or prevent the initiation
of other enforcement measures or penalties. Failure to pay any fine
arising from the enforcement of this chapter shall constitute a debt in
favor of the city. The city may place a lien on the property for such debt
and/or initiate a civil action against the owner in a court of competent
jurisdiction to recover the debt.
D.
The provisions of this chapter are effective immediately upon passage,
and all provisions shall be enforced immediately, but no monetary fine
shall be imposed pursuant hereto until 90 days after passage.
E.
§ 78-4 AMUSEMENTS § 78-5
75:59
Chapter 82
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Department — See Ch. 7.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 85.
Fees — See Ch. 103.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 78-5 AGAWAM CODE § 78-5
75:60
ARTICLE I
Building Code; Demolition Delay
[Adopted 12-21-1972 as § 4-1 of the Code of the Town of Agawam]
§ 82-1. Adoption of State Building Code.
§ 82-2. Waiver of inspection certificate fees, building, electrical and
plumbing permit fees. [Added 1-7-1981; amended 5-5-1986 by
TOR-86-11; 10-2-2000 by TOR-2000-7]
§ 82-3. Demolition delay of historically significant buildings. [Added
5-17-1999 by TOR-99-1]
The Building Code of the State of Massachusetts as provided for in
MGL C. 143, § 93 et seq. is hereby adopted as the Building Code of
the town and shall apply to the construction, erection and repair of all
buildings and structures within the town. The effective date of this code
is January 1, 1975.
A.
Copies of such code shall be on file in the Building Department. (See
MGL C. 143, § 93-100, as to provisions establishing the State Building
Code; MGL C. 143, § 92, as to codes in effect prior to January 1, 1975.)
B.
Building, electrical and plumbing permit fees and inspection certificate
fees by the Inspection Services Department or Building Department
shall be waived in their entirety for buildings or structures or parts
thereof owned by the town.
A.
Inspection certificate fees by the Inspection Services Department or
Building Department shall be waived in their entirety for buildings or
structures or parts thereof used solely for religious purposes.
B.
Nothing herein shall be construed as a waiver of the requirement to
obtain an inspection certificate or to obtain a building, electrical, or
plumbing permit.
C.
Intent and purpose. The purpose of this section is to preserve and
protect historically significant buildings within the Town of Agawam
and to encourage owners of such buildings to seek out persons who
are willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such buildings
rather than demolish them. To achieve this purpose, the Agawam
Historical Commission is empowered to advise the Inspector of
Buildings with respect to the issuance of permits for demolition of
historically significant buildings. The issuance of demolition permits for
historically significant buildings is regulated as provided in this section.
A.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
subsection:
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming a shelter for
persons, animals, or property.
B.
§ 82-1 AMUSEMENTS § 82-3
75:61
COMMISSION — The Agawam Historical Commission
DEMOLITION — Any act of pulling down, destroying, removing or
razing a building or any portion thereof; or commencing the work of
total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — Any building or portion
thereof which after a public hearing of the Agawam Historical
Commission:
SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — Any building or portion thereof which:
Is deemed to be associated with one or more historic persons or
events, or with the architectural, cultural, economic, political or
social history of the Town of Agawam; or
(1)
Is historically or architecturally important (in terms of period, style,
method of building construction or association with a famous
architect or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of
buildings or structures; or
(2)
(3) Is located within any federal, state or local historic district; or
Is located within 150 feet of a federal, state or local historic district
boundary.
(4)
Is included in the Agawam Inventory of Historic Structures
prepared by the Commission, as amended from time to time,
including those buildings listed for which complete surveys may be
pending; or
(1)
Is listed on, or is within an area listed on, the National Register of
Historic Places, or is the subject of a pending application for listing
on said National Register.
(2)
Procedure.
Upon receipt of an application for a demolition permit for a
significant building, the Inspector of Buildings shall forward a copy
thereof to the office of Planning and Community Development. No
demolition permit shall be issued at that time.
(1)
Within five days, the office of Planning and Community
Development shall make an initial determination of the building.
If the building is listed in the Agawam Inventory of Historic
Structures or listed on the National Register of Historic Places, the
initial determination shall be positive. If the building is not listed
in the Inventory or on the National Register of Historic Places,
the initial determination shall be negative. If the building receives
a positive determination, the Office of Planning and Community
Development shall notify the Commission in writing of the
determination. If the building receives a negative determination,
the office of Planning and Community Development shall notify the
Inspector of Buildings in writing.
(2)
C.
§ 82-3 AGAWAM CODE § 82-3
75:62
If the initial determination is negative, the Inspector of Buildings
may issue the demolition permit. If the initial determination is
positive, within 30 days of receipt of the determination from the
office of Planning and Community Development, the Commission
shall hold a public hearing. The Historical Commission shall give
public notice thereof by publishing notice of the time, place and
purpose of the hearing in a local newspaper at least 14 days before
said hearing and also within seven days of said hearing, mail a copy
of said notice to the applicant, to the owners of all property deemed
by the Commission to be affected thereby as they appear in the
records of the Assessor's office, and to such other persons as the
Commission shall deem entitled to notice.
(3)
If, after such hearing, the Commission determines that the
demolition of the significant building would not be detrimental to
the historical or architectural heritage or resources of the town,
the Commission shall so notify the Inspector of Buildings within 10
days. Upon receipt of such notification, or after the expiration of 15
days from the date of the conduct of the hearing if the Inspector
of Buildings has not received notification from the Commission, the
Inspector of Buildings may, subject to the requirements of the state
building code and any other applicable laws, ordinances, rules and
regulations, issue the demolition permit.
(4)
If the Commission determines that the demolition of the significant
building would be detrimental to the historical or architectural
heritage or resources of the town, such building shall be
considered a historically significant building. The Commission shall
notify the Massachusetts Historic Commission, the office of
Planning and Community Development, and other interested
parties requesting assistance in preservation funding and adaptive
reuses.
(5)
Upon a determination by the Commission that the significant
building which is the subject of the application for a demolition
permit is a historically significant building, the Commission shall
so advise the applicant and the Inspector of Buildings, and no
demolition permit may be issued until at least six months alter the
date of such determination by the Commission.
(6)
The Commission and other appropriate town departments shall
make all efforts to assist the applicant in the preservation,
rehabilitation, and/or restoration of the historically significant
building(s). Such efforts may include seeking buyers for the
property, seeking grants for preservation, rehabilitation and/or
restoration, or obtaining other professional assistance.
(7)
Notwithstanding the preceding subsection, the Inspector of
Buildings may issue a demolition permit for a historically
significant building at any time after receipt of written advice from
the Commission to the effect that either:
(8)
§ 82-3 AMUSEMENTS § 82-3
75:63
The Commission is satisfied that there is no reasonable
likelihood that either the owner or some other person or group
is willing to purchase, preserve, rehabilitate or restore such
building; or
(a)
The Commission is satisfied that, for at least six months since
the determination that the building is a historically significant
building, the owner has made continuing, bona fide and
reasonable efforts to locate a purchaser to preserve,
rehabilitate and restore the building, and that such efforts
have been unsuccessful.
(b)
Enforcement and remedies.
The Inspector of Buildings is authorized to institute any and all
proceedings in law or equity as he or she deems necessary and
appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this
section, or to prevent violation thereof.
(1)
No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises
upon which a significant building has been voluntarily demolished
in violation of this section for a period of two years after the
date of the completion of such demolition, such date of completion
to be determined by the Inspector of Buildings. As used herein
"premises" includes the parcel of land upon which the demolished
significant building was located.
(2)
D.
Severability. If any subsection and/or portion of this section is for any
reason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other
subsection and/or portion shall continue in full force and effect.
E.
§ 82-3 AGAWAM CODE § 82-3
75:64
ARTICLE II
Stretch Energy Code
[On 12-5-2016 by TR-2016-64, the Town adopted 780 CMR 115,
Appendix A (the Stretch Energy Code) of the Massachusetts Board
of Building Regulations and Standards (BBRS), including future
editions, amendments or modifications thereto, effective 1-2-2017.]
AMUSEMENTS § 82-3
75:65
Chapter 85
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building Department — See Ch. 7.
Fire Department — See Ch. 27.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
§ 85-1. Numerical identification required.
Numerical identification of each dwelling, business or industry in the Town
of Agawam is to be provided by the owner and is to be placed in a clearly
visible location on the structure located on the nearest exposure to the
street. In the event that such structure is located 200 feet or more from the
roadway, or in the event that such structure is not visible from the roadway,
a numbered signpost shall be erected in a conspicuous location on or near
the street entryway to the structure.
§ 85-2. Specifications.
Identifying numbers must be a minimum of three inches in height and be of
a contrasting color so as to be visible from the roadway day or night.
§ 85-3. Deadline for compliance; enforcement.
All structures are to be so numbered within 90 days of the effective date
of this chapter. Enforcement of this chapter will be the responsibility of the
Fire Department for existing structures and the Building Department for
newly constructed structures prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy
permit.
§ 85-4. Violations and penalties.
Noncompliance with this chapter within the prescribed time and following
written notice will result in a fine of $15 and an additional $15 for each
thirty-day period thereafter.
Chapter 89
COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS
§ 89-1. Issuance of licenses.
Licenses may be granted by the Town Council to any responsible person to
engage in the business of selling coal or coke or fuel oil as principal or agent
and at wholesale or retail, either by maintaining a place of business or by
peddling the same from house to house within the town.
§ 82-3 AGAWAM CODE § 89-2
85:66
§ 89-2. Fee.
The fee for such license shall be $1.
Chapter 91
CRIMINAL RECORD BACKGROUND CHECKS
§ 91-1. Purpose and authorization.
§ 91-2. Submission of applicants to fingerprinting.
In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the inhabitants of
the Town of Agawam, and as authorized by M.G.L. c. 6, § 172B1/2, this
chapter shall require:
Applicants for certain Town licenses permitting the engagement
in specific occupational activities within the Town as enumerated
in § 91-2 below to submit to fingerprinting by the Agawam Police
Department;
(1)
The Police Department to conduct criminal record background
checks based on such fingerprints; and
(2)
The Town to consider the results of such background checks in
determining whether or not to grant a license.
(3)
A.
The Town authorizes the Massachusetts State Police, the
Massachusetts Department of Criminal Justice Information Systems
(DCJIS) and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI), as may be
applicable, to conduct on behalf of the Town and its Police Department
fingerprint-based state and national criminal record background
checks, including of FBI records, consistent with this chapter. The Town
authorizes the Police Department to receive and utilize FBI records in
connection with such background checks, consistent with this chapter.
B.
The Police Chief shall periodically check with the Executive Office of
Public Safety and Security (EOPSS) to determine if there have been
any updates or changes in the procedure for obtaining criminal history
information, to verify that the Town of Agawam remains in compliance
with those procedural requirements.
C.
Any applicant for a license to engage in any of the following
occupational activities within the Town shall submit a full set of
fingerprints taken by the Agawam Police Department within 10 days of
the date of the application for a license, for the purpose of conducting
a state and national criminal record background check to determine
suitability of the applicant for the license:
(1) Manager of alcoholic beverage license.
(2) Peddling and soliciting.
A.
§ 89-2 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 91-2
89:67
§ 91-3. Processing of background checks; communication of
results.
§ 91-4. Reliance on results.
Licensing authorities of the Town shall utilize the results of fingerprintbased
criminal history record background checks for the sole purpose of
determining the suitability of the subjects of the checks in connection
with the license applications specified in § 91-2. A Town licensing authority
may deny any application for a license on the basis of the results of the
fingerprint-based criminal record background check, if it determines that
the results of the check render the subject unsuitable for the proposed
occupational activity. The licensing authority shall consider all applicable
laws, regulations and Town policies bearing on the applicant's suitability in
making this determination. The licensing authority shall not deny a license
based on information in a criminal record unless the applicant has been
afforded a reasonable time to correct or complete the record or has declined
to do so.
§ 91-5. Compliance with law, regulation and Town policy.
Implementation of this chapter and the conducting of fingerprint-based
criminal record background checks by the Town shall be in accordance
(3) Owner or operator of taxi service.
(4) Dealer of secondhand articles.
(5) Ice cream truck vendor.
At the time of fingerprinting, the Police Department shall notify the
individual fingerprinted that the fingerprints will be used to check the
individual's FBI criminal history records.
B.
The Police Department shall transmit fingerprints it has obtained
pursuant to § 91-2 of this chapter to the Identification Section of the
Massachusetts State Police, the DCJIS and/or the FBI as may be
necessary for the purpose of conducting fingerprint-based state and
national criminal record checks of license applicants specified in § 91-2.
A.
An applicant may request and receive a copy of his or her criminal
history records from the Police Department. Should an applicant wish
to correct or amend the information contained in it, he or she will be
directed to the DCJIS for state records and the FBI for national records.
B.
The Police Department shall communicate the results of the fingerprintbased
criminal record background checks to the applicable licensing
authority within the Town. The Police Department shall indicate
whether the applicant has been convicted of, or is awaiting final
adjudication for, a crime that bears upon the applicant's suitability, or
any felony or misdemeanor involving the use of force or the threatened
use of force, controlled substances or a sex-related offense.
C.
§ 91-2 AGAWAM CODE § 91-5
89:68
with all applicable laws, regulations, and Town policies, which shall include
record retention and confidentiality requirements. The Town shall not
disseminate the results of fingerprint-based criminal record background
checks except as may be provided by law, regulation, and Town policy. The
Town shall not disseminate criminal record information to unauthorized
persons or entities.
§ 91-6. Fees.
The fee charged by the Police Department for the purpose of conducting
fingerprint-based criminal record background checks shall be $75. A
portion of the fee, as specified in M.G.L. c. 6, § 172B1/2, shall be deposited
into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Fund, and the remainder
of the fee may be retained by the Town for costs associated with the
administration of the fingerprinting system.
Chapter 96
DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals crossing sidewalks — See Ch. 155,
Art. I, § 155-14.
§ 96-1. Authority.
The Town may create ordinances relating to animals pursuant to MGL c.
140, § 173.
§ 96-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following interpretations shall be placed on the
words and phrases hereinafter mentioned:
ADEQUATE SHELTER — A structure that is large enough for the animal
to stand naturally, turn around and lay down inside of the structure, which
must have three sides with a roof to prevent the animal from being exposed
to the elements of weather. During cold weather, a moveable flap shall be
placed over the entrance to a dog shelter to preserve the dog's body heat.
AT LARGE — Any dog, farm animal, livestock or fowl which is off the owner's
or keeper's property and not under the control of the owner or keeper.
ATTACK — Aggressive physical contact initiated by an animal.
COMPANION ANIMAL — Any dog or cat, or animal kept for the purposes of
being a "pet." "Companion animal" shall not include a farm animal, livestock
or fowl.
§ 91-5 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 96-2
89:69
DANGEROUS DOG — A dog that either: without justification, attacks a
person or domestic animal causing physical injury or death; or behaves
in a manner that a reasonable person would believe poses an unjustified
imminent threat of physical injury or death to one or more persons,
domestic or owned animals.
FARM ANIMAL — Any poultry, ungulate, species of cattle, sheep, swine,
goats, llamas, equine, or other fur-bearing animals which are raised for
commercial or subsistence purposes.
KEEPER — Any person, business, corporation, entity or society, other than
the owner, harboring or having in such person's possession any dog, cat,
farm animal, livestock or fowl.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — Any premises maintained for any of (or
combination of) the following:
KENNEL, RESIDENTIAL — Any premises where an owner or keeper
maintains as companion animals or pets, or for breeding, four or more but
not more than nine dogs six months of age or older.
LIVESTOCK or FOWL — Any fowl or other animal, including farm animals,
kept or propagated by the owner for food or as a means of livelihood and
deer, elk, cottontail rabbit, northern hare, pheasant, quail, partridge and
other birds or quadrupeds determined by the Department of Fisheries and
Wildlife and Environmental Law Enforcement to be wild and kept by, or
under permit from, said department in proper houses or suitable enclosed
yards. Such term shall not include dogs, cats and other pets.
OWNER — Any person possessing, harboring, keeping, having an interest
in, or having control or custody of an animal. If a person under the age of 18
owns the animal, that person's custodial parent(s) or legal guardian(s) shall
be responsible for complying with all requirements of this chapter.
SEVERE INJURY — Any physical injury that results in broken bones or
disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic
surgery.
§ 96-3. Licensing of dogs.
A. The overnight boarding or training of any number of dogs.
B. Any pet store that sells dogs or cats.
Any person who, at the commencement of a license period (April 1
through March 31), is or who, during any license period, becomes the
owner or keeper of a dog six months old or older, shall cause the dog to
be licensed within 30 days. The Animal Control Officer shall issue dog
licenses and tags on a form prescribed and furnished by the Town.
A.
The license record shall include the name, address and phone number
of the owner or keeper of the dog, and the name, license number, breed,
color, age, sex and the rabies expiration date of each dog and indicate
B.
§ 96-2 AGAWAM CODE § 96-3
89:70
§ 96-4. Licensing fees.
whether the dog has been spayed or neutered. The license tag shall
include the license number, the name of the Town and the year of issue.
The owner or keeper shall cause each dog to wear around its neck or
body a collar or harness to which he shall securely attach the license
tags. In the event that any tag is lost, defaced, or destroyed, a substitute
tag shall be obtained by the owner or keeper from the Animal Control
Officer at the cost of $5. Such monies shall be transmitted to the Town
Treasurer in the same manner as license fees. The Animal Control
Officer shall not issue a license for any dog unless the owner or keeper
provides the Animal Control Officer with a veterinarian's certificate
verifying that the dog is currently vaccinated against rabies.
C.
The Animal Control Officer shall not grant such licenses for any
unvaccinated dog unless the owner thereof provides either a
veterinarian's certificate that such dog has been certified exempt from
rabies vaccination or a notarized letter from a veterinarian that a
certificate was issued.
D.
The following is a list of licensing fees for dogs to be licensed in the
Town:
(1) Male dog: $25.
(2) Female dog: $25.
(3) Spayed female dog: $10.
(4) Neutered male dog: $10.
A.
Exceptions.
If the owner or keeper of any dog has a written statement from
a veterinarian indicating that because of age, infirmity or other
physical condition spaying or neutering is deemed inadvisable and
presents said written statement to the Animal Control Officer, the
licensing fee shall be $10.
(1)
No fee shall be charged for a license for a dog specifically trained
to lead or serve a blind, deaf, or handicapped person upon
presentation to the Animal Control Officer of a certificate of such
training.
(2)
B.
Overdue and out-of-Town licenses. No license may be issued for any dog
unless all prior overdue licenses (i.e., licenses from prior years which
were required but not obtained) have been paid for.
Any owner or keeper of a dog who moves into the Town and has a
valid dog license for his/her dog from another town or town in the
commonwealth shall, within 30 days, obtain a dog license for a fee
of $5 upon producing evidence of the previous license.
(1)
C.
§ 96-3 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 96-4
89:71
§ 96-5. Vaccination against rabies.
§ 96-6. Limit on number of companion animals.
The Animal Control Officer shall collect a late fee of $10 for every
dog license issued after the thirty-day period, as defined in § 96-3.
(2)
Any person, who violates the provisions of § 96-3 or 96-4 shall receive a
written warning, issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer,
for the first offense, and for each subsequent offense shall be liable for
payment of a fine of $50, which shall be paid to the Town Treasurer.
D.
The owner or keeper of a dog, cat or ferret in the Town six months of
age or older shall cause such dog, cat or ferret to be vaccinated against
rabies by a licensed veterinarian using a licensed vaccine according to
the manufacturer's directions and shall cause such dog, cat or ferret
to be vaccinated at intervals recommended by the manufacturer.
Unvaccinated dogs and cats acquired or moved into the commonwealth
shall be vaccinated within 30 days after acquisition or arrival into the
Town or upon reaching the age of six months, whichever last occurs.
Such owner or keeper shall procure a veterinarian's certificate that
such animal has been so vaccinated, setting forth the day of such
vaccination and the duration of immunity, or a notarized letter from a
veterinarian that a certificate was issued.
A.
The veterinarian shall issue a tag with each certificate of vaccination.
The tag shall be secured by the owner or keeper of such dog or cat to a
collar or harness made of suitable material to be worn by the dog or cat;
provided, however, the owner of a cat or ferret may choose not to affix
a tag to his cat or ferret, but shall have the tag and certificate available
for inspection upon demand by animal control officers, police officers
or other such authorized officials of the Town.
B.
Vaccinated animals, dog, cat or ferret, shall be revaccinated
periodically in accordance with the rules and regulations adopted by
and promulgated by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health.
C.
Any person who violates the provisions of § 96-5 shall receive a written
warning, issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer, for
the first offense, and for each subsequent offense shall be liable for
payment of a fine of $50, which shall be paid to the Town Treasurer.
D.
No person shall keep more than three dogs over the age of six months
at any residence without complying with the requirements of the Town
of Agawam Zoning Ordinance,14 and obtaining a kennel license.
A.
Additional restrictions on the number of companion animals may be
imposed by the Animal Control Officer if, after an investigation of a
dwelling or property, it is revealed the living conditions are not healthy
B.
14.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 96-4 AGAWAM CODE § 96-6
89:72
§ 96-7. Kennel licenses.
and these conditions are the result of an overcrowding of animals in
said dwelling or property.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall receive a
written warning, issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer,
for the first offense, and for each additional subsequent offense shall
be liable for payment of a fine of $50 for each day in violation of
this section, which shall be paid to the Town Treasurer. A reasonable
amount of time will be allowed for the proper placement of animals
into alternate care before fines are imposed. The Animal Control Officer
may assist persons in need with placement of animals if necessary.
C.
Any person or business maintained for a residential kennel or
commercial kennel as defined in this chapter shall obtain the
appropriate kennel license from the Building Inspector. The Building
Inspector shall not issue any kennel license for any use not in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance.15 The Building Inspector shall
not issue a residential kennel license unless the owner or keeper
provides the Town Clerk with a veterinarian's certificate verifying that
each dog six months of age or older is currently vaccinated against
rabies.
A.
Issuance of a residential or commercial kennel license, and continued
use of said license, shall be contingent upon inspection and approval by
the Animal Control Officer to ensure that basic standards of cleanliness
and proper care and confinement of said dogs exist on the premises.
B.
Such license shall be in a form prescribed by the Building Inspector.
Such license shall be in lieu of any other license for any dog while kept
at such kennel during any portion of the period for which the kennel
license is issued. The holder of a license for a kennel shall cause each
dog kept therein to wear a collar or harness of leather or other suitable
material to which shall be securely attached a tag upon which shall
appear the number of such kennel license, the year of issue and the
inscription "AGAWAM."
C.
The fee for each license for a kennel shall be $200 for a residential
kennel license and $400 for a commercial kennel license.
D.
The name and address of the owner of each dog kept in any kennel,
if other than the person maintaining the kennel, and a veterinarian's
certificate verifying that each dog six months of age or older is
currently vaccinated against rabies, shall be kept on file thereat and
available for inspection by the Animal Control Officer or any authorized
person.
E.
15.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 96-6 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 96-7
89:73
§ 96-8. Kennel inspection and regulation.
The Building Inspector shall, upon application, issue without charge
a kennel license to any domestic charitable corporation, incorporated
exclusively for the purpose of protecting animals from cruelty, neglect,
or abuse, and the relief of suffering among animals. A veterinary
hospital shall not be considered a kennel unless it contains an area
for the selling, breeding, or boarding of dogs for other than medical
purposes, in which case it shall apply for a kennel license.
F.
The license period for a kennel license shall be from January 1 to
December 31.
G.
Any person who violates the provisions of this section shall receive a
written warning, issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer,
for the first offense, and for each subsequent offense shall be liable for
payment of a fine of $50 for each day in violation of this section, which
shall be paid to the Town Treasurer.
H.
The Animal Control Officer, Board of Health, Zoning Enforcement
Officer and/or any agent authorized by the Town may, at any time
during normal business hours, inspect or cause to be inspected any
kennel or property holding a kennel license, residential or commercial.
A.
If, in his judgment, the Animal Control Officer, Board of Health, Zoning
Enforcement Officer or any agent authorized by the Town, after
inspection, determines the kennel is not being maintained in a sanitary
and humane manner, or if records are not properly kept as required by
law, the Mayor (or his/her designee) may, by order, revoke or suspend,
and in case of suspension, may reinstate such license issued under this
chapter.
B.
Upon written complaint from the Animal Control Officer or a resident
of the Town of Agawam, filed with the Chief of Police, setting forth
that they are aggrieved, annoyed to an unreasonable extent, by one
or more dogs at a kennel because of the excessive barking or vicious
disposition of said dogs or other conditions connected with such kennel
constituting a public nuisance, the Chief of Police (or his designee),
within seven days after the filing of such petition, shall give notice to all
parties in interest of a public hearing, conducted by the Chief of Police
or his/her designee, to be held within 14 days after the date of such
notice.
C.
Within seven days after such public hearing, said Chief of Police (or
his designee) shall make an order either revoking or suspending such
kennel license or otherwise regulating said kennel, or dismissing said
petition.
D.
The holder of such license aggrieved by any decision rendered by
the Chief of Police (or his designee) may appeal such decision in
accordance with MGL c. 140, § 137C.
E.
§ 96-7 AGAWAM CODE § 96-8
89:74
§ 96-9. Barking dogs.
§ 96-10. Payments to veterinarians for emergency treatment of dogs
or cats injured on ways.
A veterinarian registered under MGL c. 112, § 55 or 56A who renders
emergency care or treatment to, or who euthanizes, a dog or cat that is
injured on any way shall receive payment from the owner of such dog or cat,
if known, or, if not known, from the city or town in which the injury occurred
in an amount not to exceed $250 for such care, treatment or euthanization;
provided, however, such emergency care, treatment or euthanization shall
be rendered for the purpose of maintaining life, stabilizing the animal or
alleviating suffering until the owner or keeper of the dog or cat is identified
or for 24 hours, whichever is sooner. A veterinarian who renders such
emergency care or treatment to a dog or cat or euthanizes a dog or cat shall
notify the municipal animal control officer and the animal control officer
shall assume control of the dog or cat or the remains of the dog or cat.
§ 96-11. Dogs at large prohibited; leashing required.
Any person maintaining a kennel after the license has been so revoked,
or while such license is so suspended, may be punished by a fine of $50
for each day in violation of said revocation or suspension, which shall
be paid to the Town Treasurer.
F.
No person owning or keeping or otherwise responsible for a dog shall
allow or permit said dog to annoy another person's reasonable right
to peace or privacy by making loud and continuous noise, where such
noise is plainly audible at a distance of 150 feet from the building,
premises, vehicle or conveyance housing said dog, and such noise is
continuous in excess of 10 minutes. The fact that such noise is plainly
audible at such distance and continuous in excess of 10 minutes shall
be prima facie evidence of a violation, as long as the barking is not the
result of willful instigation from a third party.
A.
Any person who violates this provision shall receive a written warning,
issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer, for the first
offense, and shall be liable for payment of the following fines: $50 for
the second offense, $75 for the third offense, and $100 for the fourth
offense and each subsequent offense. Said fine shall be paid to the Town
Treasurer.
B.
Any person owning, keeping or being responsible for a dog shall not
allow nor permit said dog to run at large on any of the streets or public
places in the Town or upon any private property, unless the owner or
lawful occupant of such property grants permission therefor.
A.
No dog shall be allowed or permitted in any public place or street
within the Town unless it is effectively restrained and controlled by a
chain or other form of leash, not to exceed a length of six feet, that is
B.
§ 96-8 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 96-11
89:75
§ 96-11.1. Other animals at large.
§ 96-12. Enforcement; impounding of dogs at large.
It shall be the duty of the Animal Control Officer or police officer to
apprehend any dog found running at large and to impound such dog in the
animal shelter or other boarding facility.
sufficient to hold the dog, or unless it is within and confined to a motor
vehicle.
In any prosecution hereunder, the presence of such dog at large upon
premises other than the premises of the owner or keeper of such dog
shall be prima facie evidence that such knowledge and permission was
not granted.
C.
The owner or keeper of a dog who has violated any of the provisions
of this section shall be punished by a written warning, issued by the
Animal Control Officer or police officer, for the first offense, a fine of
$75 for the second offense, a fine of $100 for the third offense and
$200 for the fourth and each subsequent offense, to be paid to the Town
Treasurer.
D.
Any person owning, keeping or being responsible for any farm animal,
livestock or fowl shall not permit said animal to go at large or depasture
on any of the streets or public places in Town or upon any private
property, unless the owner or lawful occupant of such property grants
permission therefor.
A.
The owner or keeper of a farm animal, livestock or fowl who has
violated any of the provisions of this section shall be punished by a
written warning, issued by the Animal Control Officer or police officer,
for the first offense, a fine of $75 for the second offense, a fine of
$100 for the third offense and $200 for the fourth and each subsequent
offense, to be paid to the Town Treasurer.
B.
The Animal Control Officer or impounding officer shall keep a register
and make a complete record of each impounding.
A.
The record shall contain the following information: breed, color, and sex
of each dog; whether or not the dog is licensed, the license number, if
any; the name and address of the owner, if known; the date and place
of apprehension; and the location where the dog is being kept.
B.
The owner of an impounded dog, when known, shall be notified verbally
or in writing of such impoundment or, if the owner is unknown, written
notice shall be posted with the animal control office and public access
television channel.
C.
Notice shall contain a description of the dog, date and place of
apprehension and where the dog is being kept.
D.
§ 96-11 AGAWAM CODE § 96-12
89:76
§ 96-13. Fee for reclaiming impounded dog; failure to claim.
§ 96-14. Removal of dog or cat waste from property.
§ 96-15. Inhumane treatment.
The owner or keeper or responsible person may reclaim the dog so
impounded upon payment of the license fee, if unpaid, and proof of
rabies vaccination in the form of a rabies vaccination certificate from a
certified veterinarian, and the payment of impoundment and boarding
fees and the costs relevant to such impoundment.
E.
An owner or keeper of a dog reclaiming an impounded dog shall pay
to the Animal Control Officer for deposit with the Town Treasurer an
administrative fee of $125. In the event that the owner or keeper of
the dog being reclaimed provides proof of rabies vaccination sufficient
for the Animal Control Officer to determine that the rabies vaccination
for the animal being reclaimed is current, the Animal Control Officer
shall reduce the reclamation fee to $50. The reclamation fee is an
administrative fee in addition to any fine due of the owner or keeper of
the animal for violation of the animal control ordinances of the Town.
A.
Any dog whose owner or keeper fails to claim said dog within seven
days from the day of impounding shall be subject to the provisions set
forth in MGL c. 140, § 151A.
B.
No person owning or having the care, custody, or control of any dog or
cat shall permit said dog or cat to soil or defile or commit any nuisance
upon any sidewalk, street, thoroughfare, wetland, in or upon public
property or in or upon the property of persons other than the owner or
persons having the care, custody, or control of such dog or cat, unless
said person picks up any such waste and disposes of it in a sanitary
manner.
A.
Any person found in violation of § 96-14 by the Animal Control Officer
or police officer shall be liable for payment of a fine of $25 for each
offense, which shall be paid to the Town Treasurer.
B.
Any person owning, keeping, in control of or otherwise responsible
for a companion animal, farm animal, livestock or fowl, who, in the
opinion of the Animal Control Officer or police officer, is treating the
aforementioned animals in an inhumane manner [such treatment may
include, but not be limited to: prolonged chaining or tethering of
animals (see below); extended outdoor confinement, lack of access to
food, water or shelter; exposure to hazardous conditions, habitually at
large], shall be subject to a written warning and/or a fine, issued by the
Animal Control Officer or police officer, of $150 for the first offense and
$300 for each subsequent offense, paid to the Town Treasurer.
A.
If any of the aforementioned persons violate this section more than
three times, the Animal Control Officer or police officer may, after a
B.
§ 96-12 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 96-15
89:77
§ 96-15.1. Tethering and outdoor confinement of dogs.
A person owning or keeping a dog may confine such dog outside, subject to
the restrictions in MGL c. 140, § 174E and in compliance with the following:
§ 96-16. Dangerous and potentially dangerous animals.
hearing conducted by the Chief of Police or his/her designee, with not
less than 10 days' notice to the owner or keeper, confiscate the subject
animals or order the person to permanently surrender the animal or
animals for placement. If placement is not obtainable, the animal or
animals may be ordered euthanized.
Where, in the opinion of the Animal Control Officer or police officer,
said aforementioned treatment of said animals places the animals at
imminent risk, the Animal Control Officer or police officer may
immediately remove and impound the animal for its own protection.
C.
No person owning or keeping a dog shall chain or tether a dog to a
stationary object, including, but not limited to, a structure, dog house,
pole or tree, for longer than five consecutive hours during a twentyfour-
hour period.
A.
No dog shall be penned, kenneled, or kept in any other outdoor
enclosure for more than 12 consecutive hours in a twenty-four-hour
period.
B.
No dog shall be kept outside in any manner between 11:00 p.m. and
6:00 a.m. This section shall not prevent an owner/keeper from walking
a dog on leash at any time.
C.
No dog shall be kept outside in cases of extreme weather, when a
heat/cold advisory is in effect or during any time in which an extreme
weather advisory has been issued by the Town or state, including but
not limited to floods, hurricanes, tornadoes and tropical storms, unless
the tethering is for not more than 15 minutes.
D.
Procedure for determining a potentially dangerous or dangerous dog or
cat. Based upon receipt of a written complaint by a citizen requesting
a determination that a dog is potentially dangerous or dangerous, or
on the initiative of an Animal Control Officer or police officer based
on information received, the Chief of Police, or the Chief of Police's
designee may make an investigation and determination that a dog
is potentially dangerous or dangerous. The investigation and
determination shall be in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
and shall be consistent with the procedures delineated in MGL c. 140,
§ 157.
A.
B. Determination of potential danger or danger.
§ 96-15 AGAWAM CODE § 96-16
89:78
When a dog is determined to be potentially dangerous or
dangerous, the Chief of Police, or the Chief of Police's designee,
may order any or all of the following:
(a) Spaying or neutering;
Microchip identification, tattooing or other means of
permanent identification;
(b)
(c) Behavior training and behavioral assessment;
Any other order concerning the keeping, restraint, removal
from the Town, humane euthanasia, or disposal of such dog
as may be deemed necessary, in accordance with MGL c. 140,
§ 157.
(d)
(1)
Such orders may include:
Requirements at home for dogs that have been determined to
be potentially dangerous or dangerous. While on the owner's
or keeper's property, a dog that has been determined to be
potentially dangerous or dangerous may be ordered securely
confined indoors or in a security-enclosed and locked pen or
structure of a type meeting standards established by the
Animal Control Officer, suitable to prevent the entry of young
children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Such
pen or structure must have a minimum dimension of 12 feet by
12 feet by six feet high, with a solid floor to prevent the dog
from digging out and a top to prevent the dog from climbing
out. If the pen has no solid floor secured to the sides, the
sides must be embedded into the ground no less than two
feet to prevent the dog from digging out. The enclosure must
provide the dog with adequate shelter from the elements of
nature. The owner shall conspicuously display a sign with a
symbol warning children who cannot read of the presence of a
dangerous dog.
(a)
Requirements outside of the home for dogs that have been
determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous.
While off the owner's or keeper's premises, a dog that has
been determined to be potentially dangerous or dangerous
must be restrained by a lead approved by the Animal
Control Officer not exceeding six feet in length and must
be under the direct physical control of a responsible, ablebodied
adult. No dog designated as a potentially
dangerous or dangerous dog shall be permitted at public
festivals, carnivals, parades or similar events. The dog may
be required while in public to wear a muzzle designed
to prevent the dog from biting. The muzzle must prevent
injury to the dog and must not interfere with the dog's
vision or respiration.
[1]
(b)
(2)
§ 96-16 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 96-16
89:79
The owner or keeper of a dog that has been determined to
be potentially dangerous or dangerous must immediately
notify the Animal Control Officer if the dog:
[a] Is loose or unconfined;
[b] Bites a person or attacks another animal;
[c] Is sold, given away or dies;
Has been moved to another address, and the location
of the new address.
[d]
[2]
Exemptions.
No dog shall be deemed dangerous based solely upon
growling or barking or upon the breed of dog. If such dog
was reacting to another animal or to a person and such
dog's reaction was not grossly disproportionate to any
of the following circumstances: such dog was protecting
or defending itself, its offspring, another domestic animal
or a person from attack or assault; the person who was
attacked or threatened by the dog was committing a crime
upon the person or property of the owner or keeper of
such dog; the person attacked or threatened by the dog
was engaged in teasing, tormenting, battering, assaulting,
injuring or otherwise provoking such dog; at the time
of such attack or threat the person or animal that was
attacked or threatened by such dog had breached an
enclosure or structure in which the dog was kept apart
from the public and such person or animal was not
authorized by the owner of the premises to be within
such enclosure, including, but not limited to, a gated,
fenced-in area if the gate was closed, whether locked or
unlocked; provided, however, that if a person is under the
age of seven, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that
such person was not committing a crime, provoking the
dog or trespassing.
[1]
The provisions of this section shall not apply to dogs
owned by law enforcement agencies or law enforcement
officers in the performance of police work.
[2]
(c)
Penalties. Any person owning or harboring such dog that has been
deemed potentially dangerous or dangerous who fails to comply with an
order of the Chief of Police, or his/her agents, in accordance with this
section, shall be punishable by a fine of $150 for the first offense and
$300 for a subsequent offense, paid to the Town Treasurer.
If said animal is found on property not owned or controlled by its
owner or keeper, or is found to be not restrained in a secure area,
or is found to be in violation of any order issued by the Chief of
(1)
C.
§ 96-16 AGAWAM CODE § 96-16
89:80
§ 96-17. Motor vehicles striking, injuring or killing dogs or cats.
The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures or kills a dog or cat
on the byways of the Town shall forthwith report such an accident to the
owner or keeper of said dog or cat or to a police officer or Animal Control
Officer. A violation of this section shall be punished by a fine of $75, to be
paid to the Town Treasurer.
§ 96-18. Enforcement.
These provisions may be enforced through and pursuant to the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in these ordinances.
§ 96-19. Severability.
These rules and regulations are adopted with the intent that each of them
shall have force and effect separately and independently of each other,
except insofar as by express reference or necessary implication any rule or
part of any rule is made dependent upon another rule or part thereof.
Chapter 103
FEES
Police, said dog may be subject to further restriction, including
an order of removal from the Town or humane euthanasia, in
accordance with the laws of the commonwealth.
Each day there exists a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense.
(2)
A dog that has been determined to be potentially dangerous or
dangerous shall not be considered legally licensed, pursuant to MGL c.
140, §§ 137 and 147, unless the owner or keeper is in full compliance
with this chapter.
D.
All dangerous dogs confined outdoors in a secure pen shall adhere
to the provisions named under § 96-15.1, Tethering and outdoor
confinement of dogs.
E.
§ 96-16 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 96-19
89:81

ARTICLE I
Services and Licenses
§ 103-1. Board of Appeals.
Board of Appeals fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Filing fee:
Variance and specifications permit $250
Special use permit exception $250
§ 103-1.1. City Council. [Added 4-2-2018 by TOR-2018-2]
Agawam City Council fees shall be:
Type Fee
Filing fee:
Special permit $250
§ 103-2. Assessor.
Assessor fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Map (8" x 14") $3
Record cards $1
Current assessment letter $3
Real estate excise inquiry $5
Bank excise tax inquiry $3
Registry legal reference inquiry $3
Abutter's List $10
§ 103-3. Building Department.
Building Department fees shall be as follows. Whenever there is any
uncertainty as to the classification, fee or fine of a building permit, the
Building Official shall determine the classification, fee or fine within
which it falls.
A.
Electrical permits should be applied for prior to the start of work being
done, but not later than five days after work commences. If this state
requirement is not followed, a fee of $50, in addition to the regular fees
listed below, will be charged.
B.
§ 103-1 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-3
89:83
All building, plumbing and gas permits must be applied for prior to the
start of any work being done or a fee of $50, in addition to the regular
fees listed below, will be charged.
Type Fee
Building - Residential
Single-family (include garage,
exclude basement if nonhabitable
rooms)
$0.45 per sq. ft.
Two-family (include garage, exclude
basement if nonhabitable rooms)
$0.45 per sq. ft.
Multifamily, condo, motel or hotel
(include basement)
$0.45 per sq. ft.; $500 min.
Additions or alterations $0.30 per sq. ft.; $100 min.
Accessory buildings $0.30 per sq. ft.; $50 min.
Fence $45
Roofing (shingling and stripping
only/no structural changes)
$45
Roofing (with structural repairs) $100
Siding $45
Replacement windows/doors (singleand
two-family only)
$45
Replacement windows/doors (all
others)
$7.50 per window/door; $45
min.
Insulation $45
Solid fuel appliance $45
Chimney $45
Construction trailer or temporary
housing (fire-damaged residence)
$75
Demolition (include basement) $75 per floor
Demolition (accessory structures,
pools)
$30
Swimming pools and spas - above
ground (separate installations)
$75
Swimming pools - in ground $100
Decks $0.30 per sq. ft.; $50 min.
Sheet metal $50
Solar collectors (electrical permit
also required)
$75
Solar - independent accessory
structures
$20 per structure
C.
§ 103-3 AGAWAM CODE § 103-3
89:84
Type Fee
Building - Business, Institutional
and Industrial
Building (include basement) $0.45 per sq. ft.; $400 min.
Additions or alterations $0.40 per sq. ft.; $200 min.
Accessory buildings $0.40 per sq. ft.; $100 min.
Signs (attached or freestanding) $60
Tents (for retail purposes) $50
Demolition (including basement) $150 per floor
Fence $50
Re-occupancy only (no changes, no
work being done)
$45
Roofing (no structural changes -
covering only)
$0.05 per sq. ft.; $100 min.
Roofing (with structural changes) $0.10 per sq. ft.; $200 min.
Replacement windows $7.50 per window; $45 min.
Commercial kitchen exhaust hood $75
Sheet metal $100
Cell tower $2 per ft.
Cell tower - cabinet $250
Cell tower - antenna (new or
replacement)
$100 each
Solar - less than 5,000 square feet of
panel
$200
Solar - between 5,000 square feet
and 10,000 square feet
$300
Solar - over 10,000 square feet of
panel
$500
Solar - independent accessory
structures
$25 per structure
Periodic inspections (capacity under
500/over 500)
$50/$100
Fire Prevention - Residential and
Commercial
Fire suppression systems (less than
5,000 square feet)
$75
Fire suppression systems (more than
5,000 square feet)
$0.05 per sq. ft.
Fire warning systems (less than
5,000 square feet)
$75
§ 103-3 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-3
89:85
Type Fee
Fire warning systems (more than
5,000 square feet)
$0.02 per sq. ft.
Commercial kitchen hood fire
suppression
$75
Electrical - Residential
Single-family $150
Two-family $200
Multifamily, condo, motel or hotel
(per unit)
$80
Additions or alterations $80
Service change or alteration (per
family unit)
$45
Solar collectors $100
Generator $50
Construction trailer or temporary
housing
$45
Security systems, data, low voltage
(under 3,000 square feet/over 3,000
square feet)
$45/$65
Security systems, data, low voltage
(wireless systems)
$40
Electrical - Business,
Institutional and Industrial
New or additions and alterations $0.10 sq. ft.; $100 min.
Accessory building $0.10 sq. ft.; $60 min.
Signs (attached or freestanding,
each)
$60
Service change (per unit) $0.40 per amp; $60 min.
Temporary structures $60
Replacement - HVAC units $40 each
Solar collectors $75
Low voltage, security and data
systems (under 3,000 square feet/
over 3,000 square feet)
$60/$100
Blanket maintenance fee (subject to
the conditions below)
$500
§ 103-3 AGAWAM CODE § 103-3
89:86
Type Fee
Any business operation which
maintains an electrical maintenance
force shall pay a blanket fee of $500
annually for work done on premises
subject to the following:
1. The permit application and fees
are due the first day of January
each year.
2. Any work done by outside
contractors is subject to
appropriate action of this
schedule.
3. A log of work completed shall
be kept by the supervisor of
electrical maintenance, and
arrangements shall be made for
the wiring inspection semiannually.
Plumbing - Residential
Single-family $100 + $5 per fixture
Multifamily, condo, motel or hotel
(per unit)
$75 (Unit) + $5 per fixture
Additions or alterations $50 + $5 per fixture
Water heater (tank or tankless,
separate installation or
replacement)
$45 (may also require a gas
permit)
Plumbing - Business,
Institutional and Industrial
New construction $150 + $10 per fixture
Additions or alterations $75 + $10 per fixture
Gas - Residential
Supply test $45
Gas piping only $45
Gas water heater (replacement gas
piping only)
$30
Gas piping plus heater or appliance $45 + $20 per appliance
**Maximum charge no matter how
many appliances
$85
Gas - Business, Institutional and
Industrial
Supply test $60
§ 103-3 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-3
89:87
§ 103-4. Town Clerk.
Town Clerk fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Amusement license:
Per year per machine per location $50
Over 20 machines, per machine per year per location $100
Weekly amusement, per year $50
Class I dealers' license, per year $200
Class II dealers' license, per year $200
Class III dealers' license, per year $200
Class IV license, per year $200
Class V license, per year $200
Junk dealers' license, per year $200
Taxi license, per year $200
Billiards/bowling license, per year $200
Zoning bylaws book $50
Town Code book $66
Update service of Town Code
$25
Street listing book $20
Farmer survey $2
Type Fee
Gas piping only $60
Gas piping plus heater or appliance $60 + $25 per appliance
Reinspection required for failed
inspection:
$50 per inspection
NOTE: A fine of 2X the permit fee will be required for proceeding
with any work before any permit is granted or if any work is
intentionally omitted on the application for permit. Separate permits
are required as necessary for building, plumbing and gas. The above
applies to electrical permit fees, if the permit is not taken out first or
within five days of starting electrical work.
Any work not specifically covered by this fee schedule: those permit
fees for building, electrical, plumbing and gas shall be established by
the Inspector of Buildings.
Filing fees shall be waived for agencies of the Town of Agawam. Filing
fees shall also be waived for any handicap ramp built to a residential
unit, which is used strictly for residential purposes.
§ 103-3 AGAWAM CODE § 103-4
89:88
Type Fee
Rules and Regulations of Planning Board (subdivision
control)
$25
Agawam Farmlands (A Plan for Preservation) $2
Auctioneer's 1-day permit $20
Auctioneer's (auction house) annual permit $150
Raffle permits $20
Gasoline storage (own use):
Not more than:
1,000 gallons $50
Renewal $50
3,000 gallons $50
Renewal $50
5,000 gallons $50
Renewal $50
10,000 gallons $100
Renewal $50
More than:
10,000 gallons $200
Renewal $100
Gasoline storage (resale):
Not more than:
1,000 gallons $50
Renewal $50
5,000 gallons $100
Renewal $50
10,000 gallons $100
Renewal $50
Limit
30,000 gallons $200
Renewal $100
Amendment to birth records to legitimate $25
Correcting errors in records:
Birth $20
Marriage $20
Death $20
Furnishing certified copy of:
§ 103-4 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-4
89:89
Type Fee
Birth $10
Marriage $10
Death $10
Furnishing abstract copy of record of:
Birth $10
Marriage $10
Death $10
Marriage intention notice certificate $20
Business certificate other than real name $20
Change in business certificate other than real name:
Change of residence $10
Discontinuance, retirement or withdrawal $10
Change of location of business $10
Certified copy of business certificate other than real
name
$10
Voter's identification card $5
Uniform Commercial Code:
Financing statements $10
Termination statements $5
Amendment, continuance, statements, assignments $10
Copy of any of above $3
Certificate of Registration:
Optometry recording $25
Certified copy of optometry registration recording $25
Physician or osteopath recording $25
Podiatry recording $25
Examining records or papers relating to:
Birth $10
Death $10
Marriage $10
Delayed record of birth $15
Copy fee, per page Per MGL c. 66,
§ 10
Postage and handling Annual cost
Pole location fees:
Per petition $50
§ 103-4 AGAWAM CODE § 103-4
89:90
Type Fee
Each additional street listed on petition $10
§ 103-5. Conservation Commission.
Conservation Commission fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Notice of intent:
Category 1 per activity $55
Category 2 per activity $250
Category 3 per activity $525
Category 4 per activity $725
Category 5 per activity, $2 per linear
foot, not less
than $50 nor
more than
$1,000
Determination of applicability $50
§ 103-6. Data processing.
Data processing fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Voters labels (approximately 13,000 labels) $448.50
Voter computer tape $431
Mailing label, per label $0.05
Mailing list, per name on list $0.05
Street list (17 and over) computer tape $650
Compact disk voters list $25
§ 103-7. Fire Department.
Fire Department fees shall be as follows:
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
NFPA 1 Chapter 10 - General Requirements
Open burning -
disposal of yard
waste
310 CMR 7.07;
NFPA 1 Section
10.11.4
$10 annually
§ 103-4 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-7
89:91
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
Ceremonial bonfires MGL c. 111, § 142H
and I; NFPA 1
Sections 10.11.4.1
and 10.11.4.2
$10
Use of candles, open
flames, and portable
cooking in assembly
areas, dining areas
of restaurants, and
drinking
establishments
NFPA 1 Section
10.11.1
$10 annually
Burning of
Christmas trees
MGL c. 111,
§ 142G; NFPA 1
Sections 1.12.8,
10.11.4 and 10.14
$20 plus fire
standby detail
as required
Use of torch or
other flame or heatproducing
device
NFPA 1 Section
10.11.9.1
$30 per week
Use of canine
guards
NFPA 1 Section
10.22.1
$30 annually
Fumigation and
insecticidal fogging
NFPA 1 Section
10.11.1
$30 per day
NFPA 1 Chapter 11 - Oil Burners and Fuel Oil
Installation or
alteration of any fuel
oil burning
equipment
NFPA 1 Section
11.5.1.8; MGL c.
148, §§ 10A, 23 and
24
$30
Installation or
removal of fuel
storage tank,
aboveground
NFPA 1 Sections
11.5.1.10.5(6) and
11.5.10.5.1
$30 per tank
Installation or
removal of fuel
storage tank,
underground, 0 -
1,500 gallons
NFPA 1 Sections
11.5.1.10.5(6) and
11.5.10.5.1
$30 per tank $25
Installation or
removal of fuel
storage tank,
underground,
>1,500 gallons
NFPA 1 Sections
11.5.1.10.5(6) and
11.5.10.5.1
$50 per tank $75
§ 103-7 AGAWAM CODE § 103-7
89:92
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
NFPA 1 Chapter 13 - Fire Protection Systems and Related
Equipment
Residential sale or
transfer of property,
inspection of smoke/
CO devices, 1 to 6
dwelling units
NFPA 1 Chapter 13;
MGL c. 148, §§ 26F
and 26F1/2
$50 per
dwelling unit,
$150
maximum
Fee for
reinspection
due to
noncompliance:
permit fee x
0.5
Residential sale or
transfer of property,
inspection of smoke/
CO devices, >6
dwelling units
NFPA 1 Chapter 13;
MGL c. 148, §§ 26F
and 26F1/2
$50 per
dwelling unit,
$500
maximum
Fee for
reinspection
due to
noncompliance:
permit fee x
0.5
Installations of CO
protection technical
options
NFPA 1 Sections
13.7.1.4.9 and
13.13.2.13
$30 $25
Fire protection
systems and related
equipment
NFPA 1 Chapters
42 and 69
$30 $25
Replacement or
disconnection of any
fire protection
system
NFPA 1 Chapters
13 and 50
$30 $25
NFPA 1 Chapter 16 - Safeguarding Construction, Alteration and
Demolition Operations
Torch-applied
roofing coverings
NFPA 1 Sections
10.11.9.1 and
16.6.1
$25 per day
Placement of tar
kettle on roof
NFPA 1 Sections
10.11.9.1 and
16.7.1.2
$25 per day
Use of salamanders NFPA 1 Section
16.1.1.1
$10 per day
NFPA 1 Chapter 19 - Combustible Waste, Refuse and Rubbish
Containers
Rubbish containers
(Dumpster) >6 cubic
yards
NFPA 1 Section
19.1.1
$30 per
container
NFPA 1 Chapter 20 - Occupancy Fire Safety
§ 103-7 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-7
89:93
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
Unvented propane
or natural-gas-fired
space heaters
NFPA 1 Sections
20.2.4.5, 20.3.2.1,
20.8.2.6.1,
20.9.2.2.1,
20.10.2.1 and
20.11.2.1
$30 per device
NFPA 1 Chapter 23 - Cleanrooms
Use, storage, or
handling of
hazardous materials
NFPA 1 Section
23.3 and Chapters
60 through 75
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 24 - Dry Cleaning
Use, storage, or
handling of
hazardous materials
NFPA 1 Section
24.2 and Chapters
60 through 75
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 31 - Forest Products
Storage of mulch >
300 cubic yards
NFPA 1 Section
31.2
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 32 - Motion Picture and Television Production
Studio Soundstages and Approved Production Facilities
For activities listed:
1. Use of
pyrotechnic special
effects [Section
65.3]
NFPA 1 Sections
32.4.2 and 32.5.2
$20 per day
plus fire
standby detail
as required
2. Use of open flame
[Section 65.4]
$20 per day
plus fire
standby detail
as required
3. Welding and
cutting [Chapter 41]
$30 per week
4. Storage and use
of flammable or
combustible liquids
or gasses [Chapters
63 and 66]
$50 annually
5. Use of aircraft $20 per day
plus fire
standby detail
as required
§ 103-7 AGAWAM CODE § 103-7
89:94
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
6. Presence of motor
vehicles within a
building
$50 annually
7. Productions with
live audience
$50 annually $50 annually
8. Storage of
liquefied petroleum
gases [Section 69.1]
$50 annually
9. Use of fog and
haze
$50 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 41 - Welding, Cutting and Other Hot Work
Cutting and welding
operations
NFPA 1 Sections
41.1.5, 41.3.2.2,
and 41.3.4
$30 per week
NFPA 1 Chapter 42 - Refueling (Gaseous Fuel Containers and
Systems)
Installation or
connection of
NFPA 1 Section
42.2.2.1
$50 $25
NFPA 1 Chapter 42 - Refueling (Cargo Tanks, Portable Tanks or
Transfer Tanks)
Permitting and
inspection of tanks
NFPA 1 Sections
42.2.2.1 and
1.12.8.25.3.4.1
$50 every 2
years
$25 every 2
years
Exemption
certificate
NFPA 1 Sections
42.2.2.1 and
1.12.8.25.3.5.2
$30 annually
Unattended cargo,
portable or transfer
tank
NFPA 1 Sections
42.2.2.1 and
1.12.8.25.2.1
$10 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 43 - Spraying, Dipping, and Coating Using
Flammable or Combustible Materials
Storage, use or
handling of
hazardous materials
NFPA 1 Chapters
60 through 75
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 45 - Combustible Fibers
For storing,
handling of
combustible fibers >
100 cubic feet
NFPA 1 Section
45.1.3
$30 annually
§ 103-7 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-7
89:95
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
NFPA 1 Chapter 50 - Commercial Cooking Equipment
Installation or
modification of fire
extinguishing
equipment
NFPA 1 Section
50.4.2
$50 $30
NFPA 1 Chapter 51 - Industrial Ovens and Furnaces
Installation and
operation of an oven
or furnace
NFPA 1 Section
51.1.2.1
$30 annually $30 for
inspection of
installation or
modification
NFPA 1 Chapter 60 - Hazardous Materials
Process or
processing of any
hazardous material
in Category 2, 3, 4
and/or 5
NFPA 1 Section
60.8
$50 annually $50 annually
Crop ripening or
color processing
NFPA 1 Section
60.8.4. Where that
process involves
storage, handling
and use of a
flammable
compressed gas
(see Section
63.1.2). Where that
process involves
storage handling
and use of
combustible or
flammable liquid
(see Section 66.1.5)
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 61 - Aerosol Products
Storage > 500
pounds
NFPA 1 Section
61.1.2
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 63 - Compressed Gases and Cryogenic Fluids
Storage of
compressed gases
inside or outside of
building
NFPA 1 Section
63.1.2
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 65 - Explosives, Fireworks, Model Rocketry and
Flame Effects
§ 103-7 AGAWAM CODE § 103-7
89:96
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
Conduct blasting
operations
NFPA 1 Sections
65.9.2.1 and
65.9.2.2; MGL c.
148, §§ 12 and 13
$50 plus fire
standby detail
as required
Storage and
manufacturing of
fireworks and
explosives
NFPA 1 Section
65.9.2.1; MGL c.
148 §§ 12 and 13
$50 annually $50 annually
Vehicle carrying
explosive materials
left unattended and
parked in an
authorized area
NFPA 1 Section
65.9.2.1; MGL c.
148, §§ 12 and 13
$50 $50
Storage in any
magazine, building
or structure
NFPA 1 Section
65.9.2.1
$50 annually $50 annually
Supervision of the
use of explosives,
fireworks and
cannon mortar
NFPA 1 Section
65.2.3
$50 plus fire
standby detail
as required
Storage of solidpropellant
model
rocket motors,
reloading kits, or
motor components >
50 pounds' net
weight at a
residence
NFPA 1 Section
65.6.1
$30
Storage of highpower
model rocket
motors, motor
reloading kits, and
pyrotechnic modules
NFPA 1 Section
65.8.2
$30 annually $30 annually
for commercial
properties
Use of flame effects NFPA 1 Sections
65.4.2 and 65.4.1.1
$30 annually $30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 - Flammable and Combustible Liquids
§ 103-7 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-7
89:97
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
To keep, store,
manufacture, or
handle flammables
or combustible
liquids < 500
gallons
NFPA 1 Section
66.1.5
$30 annually
To keep, store,
manufacture, or
handle flammables
or combustible
liquids 501 - 2,500
gallons
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $75 annually
To keep, store,
manufacture, or
handle flammables
or combustible
liquids > 2,500
gallons
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $150 annually
Installation,
maintenance and
storage of waste oil
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $30
Storage of alcoholbased
hand rubs and
preparations > 10
gallons
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $30 annually
Removal of
underground piping
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $20 $30
Removal of
underground tanks
< 1,500 gallons and
piping
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $30 per tank $30
Removal of
underground tanks
1,501 - 2,500 gallons
and piping
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $30 per tank $75
Removal of
underground tanks
2,501 - 5,000 gallons
and piping
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $50 per tank $75
§ 103-7 AGAWAM CODE § 103-7
89:98
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
Removal of
underground tanks
> 5,000 gallons and
piping
NFPA 1 Chapter 66 $50 per tank $125
NFPA 1 Chapter 67 - Flammable Solids
Storage of
flammable solids >
100 pounds
NFPA 1 Section
67.1.2
$30 annually
NFPA 1 Chapter 69 - Liquid Petroleum Gases and Liquefied Natural
Gas
Installation or
modification
NFPA 1 Sections
69.1.2 and 69.1.3.1
$25 $25
Keeping, removal,
storage or use of LP
gas > 42 pounds'
aggregate capacity
NFPA 1 Sections
69.1.2 and 69.1.3.1
$25 $30 annual
inspection for
retail and
commercial
transfer
operations only
NFPA 1 Chapter 1 - 1.12.8.5.1 - Quantities, Permits and/or License
Thresholds
Keeping of small
arms ammunition
(private use), rim
fire or center fire, >
10,000 rounds
NFPA 1 Section
1.12.8.50.2 and
Table 1.12.8.50
$30
Keeping of small
arms shotgun
ammunition (private
use) > 5,000 rounds
NFPA 1 Section
1.12.8.50.2 and
Table 1.12.8.50
$30
Keeping of small
arms ammunition
primers (private or
commercial use) >
1,000 caps
NFPA 1 Section
1.12.8.50.2 and
Table 1.12.8.50
$30
§ 103-7 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-7
89:99
Permits Required
Work/Activity
CMR/MGL/NFPA
Section Permit Fee
Inspection
Fee
Keeping of
smokeless
propellants (private
and commercial) >
16 pounds [Note:
prohibited for
persons under 18
years of age. No
more than 2 pounds
shall be stored in a
multiple-family
dwelling or a
building of public
access.]
NFPA 1 Section
1.12.8.50.2 and
Table 1.12.8.50
$30
Keeping of black
powder (private and
commercial) > 2
pounds [Note:
prohibited for
persons under 18
years of age.]
NFPA 1 Section
1.12.8.50.2 and
Table 1.12.8.50
$30
Explosive material
classified as Division
1.1 - 1.6
NFPA 1 Section
1.12.8.50.2 and
Table 1.12.8.50
$50
Keeping of LP gas >
2,000 gallons in
aggregate
NFPA 1 Section
1.12.8.50.2 and
Table 1.12.8.50
$50
Other Miscellaneous Permits
Other miscellaneous
permits not
otherwise noted
As applicable $30
Plan Review, Inspection Services and Fees Not Otherwise Noted
Activity Fee
Quarterly inspections as required by code (i.e.,
nursing facilities, hotels, motels, theaters,
elderly housing, group homes, inns)
$50 per quarterly
inspection
Annual inspections as required by code (i.e.,
liquor licenses, certificates of inspection)
$50 per annual inspection
Commercial fire alarm system plan review -
NFPA 1 Section 1.14
$0.05/square foot, $100
minimum
§ 103-7 AGAWAM CODE § 103-7
89:100
Plan Review, Inspection Services and Fees Not Otherwise Noted
Activity Fee
Residential fire alarm system plan review -
NFPA 1 Section 1.14
$30
Sprinkler/suppression system plan review -
NFPA 1 Section 1.14
$0.05/square foot, $100
minimum
Emergency Response Activities
Activity Fee
Hazardous materials incident - MGL c. 21E
First hour $400
Each additional hour or part thereof:
Per aerial device $250
Per engine company $200
Per ambulance $200
Per chemical truck $200
Per brush truck $150
Per tanker $150
Per command vehicle $100
Per rescue truck $100
HAZMAT Unit per hour or part thereof $600
Replace in kind all materials used for mitigation
and control of incident
§ 103-7.1. Fire Department fee abatement.
If an individual is unable to pay fees listed in Chapter 103, § 103-7, the Fire
Chief or his or her designee shall have the authority to assess the nature of
financial hardship and abate all or a portion of the fees.
§ 103-8. Health Department. [Amended 6-4-2018 by TOR-2018-7]
Health Department fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Percolation test, repair $75
Percolation test, new construction $125
Cabins; motels; trailers $75
Septic installers $75
Haulers of septic effluent, garbage, rubbish $75
Piggeries $75
§ 103-7 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-8
89:101
Type Fee
Semipublic pools $75
Food service, 80 seats or less $75
Food service, 81 seats or more $125
Massage Taken over by
state
Funeral director $50
Burial permits $20
Temporary food service, 1-day license $25
Retail food service, less than 2,500 square feet $75
Retail food service, more than 2,500 square feet $125
Mobile vendor $50
Recreational camps $50
Tanning facilities $50
Riverside Park (1 license per entire park) $300
Disposal works construction $100
Tobacco sales $200
§ 103-9. Library.
Library fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Copier fee, per copy $0.10
Lost card fee, per lost card $1
Lost or damaged materials, list price Replacement
cost
Overdue fines, all items (exceptions noted below)
Videos/DVDs (per item) $1
Museum passes $5
All other materials (per day) $0.10
Maximum fines:
Videos/DVDs (per item) $5
Museum passes $50
All other items (per item) $3
Non-Massachusetts resident
Borrower's card for 2 years $30
Computer floppy disks (per disk) $1
Computer printouts
§ 103-8 AGAWAM CODE § 103-9
89:102
Type Fee
Black and white
First 10 pages per day No charge
More than 10 pages (per page) $0.10
Color printout (per page) $0.15
§ 103-10. Liquor Licensing Commission.
Liquor Licensing Commission fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
All alcoholic licenses, one day $100
Wine/malt licenses, one day $100
All alcoholic innholder $1,500
All alcoholic common victualer $1,500
All alcoholic common victualer as a commercial club $1,500
All alcoholic club $700
All alcoholic package goods store $1,200
All alcoholic druggist $500
Wine/malt common victualer $700
Wine/malt package goods store $700
Special beer licenses $150
Application fee $150
License replacement $150
§ 103-11. Parks and recreation.
Parks and recreation fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Perry Lane Day Camp, per two-week session (Summer
2015, 2016 and 2017)
$195
Perry Lane Preschool Camp, per two-week session
(Summer 2015, 2016 and 2017)
$130
Perry Lane Teen Camp, per two-week session (Summer
2015, 2016 and 2017)
$195
Perry Lane Park daily pool charge, per person $1
Recreational swim, daily pool charge, per person $1
Picnic charges, groups using Perry Lane pavilion, per
user group
$75
§ 103-9 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-12
89:103
§ 103-12. Perry Lane Nursery School.
Perry Lane Nursery School fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Perry Lane Nursery (effective with 2015-2016 school
year)
Two-day program, per month $130
Three-day program, per month $165
Four-day program, per month $115
§ 103-13. Planning Board.
Planning Board fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Preliminary subdivision, plan submission (plus $5. per
acre)
$25
Definitive subdivision plan submission (plus $60. per
acre)
$150
Approval-not-required plans $35
§ 103-14. Police Department.
Police Department fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Pistol permit $100
F.I.D. card $100
F.I.D. mace permit $25
Dealer/gunsmith, for three years $100
Sale of ammunition, for three years $100
Accident report, per report $5
Incident report, per page $1
Turkey shoot, per date $2
Log entries, per page $1
911 tape, per call $10
§ 103-15. Department of Public Works.
Department of Public Works fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Road opening/driveway permit $5
Pavement cuts, utilities $20
§ 103-12 AGAWAM CODE § 103-15
89:104
Small-scale town maps $0.75
Large-scale town maps $1.50
Zoning Map $1.50
Blueprint reproduction, per sheet or
any part thereof
$5
Clearance of building sewer storage:
Regular working hours (7:30 a.m.
to 6:30 p.m.)
$150
After working hours/weekends/
holidays
$405
Sewer entrance fee, per business/
dwelling unit
$807
Water meters:
5/8" meter $410
3/4" meter $425
1" meter $480
1 1/2" turbo meter $1,255
2" turbo meter $1,460
1 1/2 compound turbo meter $1,665
2" compound turbo meter $1,900
Water connection:
3/4" Type K copper tubing
(minimum)
$2,385
1" Type K copper tubing
(minimum)
$2,455
1 1/2 Type K copper tubing
(minimum)
$3,150
2" Type K copper tubing
(minimum)
$3,290
Over 2" (minimum) $7,645
Discontinuation of water service
(minimum)
$895
Meter valve replacement - 3/4" or 1"
service
$125
Tee and valve for irrigation system —
3/4" or 1" service
$185
Water main drilling and tapping — 3/4"
or 1" service
$330
Final water/sewer reading and
calculation (per property)
$25
§ 103-15 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-15
89:105
Turn off or on water at curb (overtime
requests will be billed at actual OT
rates)
$45
Removal or reinstallation of water
meters
$87.50
Cross-connection fees:
Application review/permitting of
backflow prevention devices
$67.50
Testing of backflow prevention
device
$40
§ 103-16. Weights and measures.
Weights and measures fees shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Balances and scales:
Over 10,000 pounds $200
5,000 to 10,000 pounds $50
1,000 to 5,000 pounds $45
100 to 1,000 pounds $40
More than 10 pounds but less than 100 pounds $25
10 pounds or less $25
Seasonal scales (farm stands) $20
Weights, each:
Avoirdupois $3
Metric $3
Apothecary $3
Troy $3
Capacity measures, vehicle tanks:
Each indicator $5
Each 100 gallons or fraction thereof $2
Capacity Measures, liquid:
1 gallon or less $1
More than 1 gallon $2
Liquid measuring meters:
Inlet 1/2 inch or less, oil, grease $5
Inlet more than 1/2 inch to 1 inch gasoline $30
Inlet more than 1 inch:
Vehicle tank pump $50
§ 103-15 AGAWAM CODE § 103-16
89:106
Type Fee
Unsealed out-of-town meters $50
Vehicle tank gravity $25
Bulk storage $50
Company supplies prover $35
Pumps, each stop on pump $2
Other devices:
Taxi meters $30
Odometer, hub odometer $10
Leather measuring (semiannual) $5
Fabric measuring $5
Wire, rope, cordage $5
Linear measures:
Yardsticks $1
Tapes $1
Miscellaneous:
Dry measures $1
§ 103-16.1. Agawam Municipal Golf Course.
Fees for the Agawam Municipal Golf Course shall be as follows:
Type Fee
Weekdays:
18 Holes $26
9 Holes $20
18 Holes (Sr) $22
9 Holes (Sr) $18
18 w/Cart $36
*After 12:00 $32
Weekend:
18 Holes $29
9 Holes $22
18 Holes (Sr) $26
9 Holes (Sr) $20
18 W/Cart $40
*After $12:00 $36
"Back Nine Special" (Before 8:00
a.m.)
$24
§ 103-16 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-16.1
89:107
Type Fee
Cart fees:
9 Holes $7.50 per person
18 Holes $15 per person
Rider Fee $12
Rain Check Policy
• If 3 holes or less are completed, a full rain check will be issued.
• If 4 holes or through 11 holes are completed, a nine-hole rain check
will be issued.
• If you reach the 12th tee, your round is deemed complete and no rain
check will be issued.
• All players must have their own set of clubs.
• We are a spikeless facility and no metal spikes are allowed.
• All players must have proper attire; no tattered pants.
• Collared shirt and apparel must be worn at all times.
• There are absolutely no coolers allowed on the course unless there is
a medical condition, which cooler must be authorized by the golf shop
staff prior to play.
§ 103-16.1 AGAWAM CODE § 103-16.1
89:108
ARTICLE II
Ambulance Fees
§ 103-17. Establishment of fee.
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 5(21A), the Town hereby establishes a fee
for transporting persons by the Agawam Town ambulances. Said fee shall
be in accordance with those fees set by insurance standards or Medicare.
The fees shall be used to defray the cost of maintenance and operation of
such ambulances, including maturing debt and interest; and to pay for fire
fighter/EMT salaries and benefits in accordance with MGL c. 44, § 53E 1/2.
§ 103-18. Inability to pay.
If a Town resident is uninsured or unable to pay said fee, an abatement
of said fee shall be determined by the Fire Chief and/or a designee to be
appointed by the Mayor.
§ 103-17 COAL, COKE AND FUEL-OIL DEALERS § 103-18
89:109
Chapter 106
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire Department — See Ch. 27.
Fire alarm equipment — See Ch. 69, Art. I.
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Local Option Statutes — See Ch. A185.
§ 103-18 AGAWAM CODE § 103-18
106:110
ARTICLE I
Smoke and Heat Detectors
[On
June
18,
1979,
the
Town
accepted
the
applicability
of
MGL
c.
148,
§ 26C,
which
requires
the
installation
of
automatic
smoke
and
heat
detectors.]
FIRE PREVENTION § 103-18
106:111

ARTICLE II
Automatic Sprinklers
[On
April
17,
1990,
the
Town
accepted
the
applicability
of
MGL
c.
148,
§ 26G
and
26I,
which
require
the
installation
of
automatic
sprinklers
in
certain
new
buildings.]
FIRE PREVENTION § 103-18
106:113

ARTICLE III
Noncriminal Disposition of Violations
[Adopted 6-6-2005 by TOR-2005-5]
§ 106-1. Alternative proceedings for Fire Code violations and
remedy of fire hazard conditions.
Any violation of this chapter, Chapter 106, and any violation of the Code of
Massachusetts Regulations 527 CMR 1.06, and/or any violation or failure
to comply with MGL c. 148, § 5, may, in the discretion of the Fire Chief or
his designee, be enforced by the noncriminal complaint method for which
provision is made, and/or as set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, as amended
from time to time, that is, noncriminal disposition. Fines issued pursuant to
§ 106-1 shall be as follows: $50 for each consecutive 48 hours during which
such failure or refusal to comply continues.
§ 106-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 106-1
106:115
Chapter 109
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Junk and secondhand dealers — See Ch. 114. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
§ 106-1 AGAWAM CODE § 106-1
109:116
ARTICLE I
Recycling
[Adopted 1-11-1988 by TOR-87-12]
§ 109-1. Program established.
There is hereby established a program for the mandatory separation of
certain recyclable material from garbage or rubbish by the residents of
the Town of Agawam and the collection of the recyclables at the residents'
curbside. The collection of separated recyclables shall be made periodically
under the supervision of the Superintendent of Public Works.
§ 109-2. Categorization of recyclables.
Recyclables are the discarded materials described below which may be
reclaimed and are considered salable by the Town of Agawam. For the
purpose of this article, they are defined in the following categories:
§ 109-3. Separation and placement for removal; penalty.
Aluminum: Cans made from aluminum, aluminum foil, aluminum
wrappers and containers or trays used in the packaging, preparation,
or cooking of prepared dinners, pies, cakes or other foods.
A.
Glass: All unbroken jars and bottles or similar products made from
silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the product being transparent or
translucent and being used for packaging or bottling of various matter,
and all other material commonly known as glass, excluding:
(1) Blue and flat glass and glass commonly known as "window glass."
(2) Dishes and crockery.
B.
Ferrous metal cans: All containers composed in whole of iron or steel
and so-called "tin" cans used for the packaging or storing of various
food and nonfood items, except containers which contained paint or
petroleum-based solvents and any pressurized aerosol cans.
C.
Clean and unsoiled newspaper, including newsprint, all newspaper
advertisements, supplements, comics and enclosures. Newspapers
shall be considered clean and uncontaminated if they have not been
exposed to substances or conditions rendering them unusable for
recycling. Persons may wrap solid waste in used newspapers and
discard the same with regular solid waste even if such wrapping does
not render the newspapers unusable for recycling.
D.
Corrugated paper: Corrugated boxes, cardboard, cardboard cartons,
pasteboard and similar corrugated and kraft paper materials.
E.
Household batteries known or suspected to contain mercury or other
recyclable materials as may be later determined by the Superintendent
of Public Works. [Added 10-15-1990 by TOR-90-43]
F.
§ 109-1 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 109-3
109:117
§ 109-4. Ownership of recyclables; penalty.
The resident shall use the recycling receptacle provided to each
household for the purpose of collecting the recyclables and placing
them for disposal.
Recycling receptacles shall be placed on and removed from the
curbside or tree belt in a manner similar to and at the same time as
the regular garbage or rubbish.
(1)
All the metal and glass recyclables, as defined in § 109-2A, § 109-2B
and § 109-2C, shall be placed together in the designated recycling
receptacle separate from rubbish or garbage. These recyclables
need not be washed, flattened or processed in any way, and labels,
lids, corks and neck rings need not be removed.
(2)
Recyclable household batteries as defined in § 109-2F shall be
placed together in a container to be made available by the town and
placed atop of or affixed to the designated recycling receptacle.
[Added 10-15-1990 by TOR-90-43]
(3)
Recyclable newspapers and corrugated paper shall be placed on
top of or next to the recycling receptacle in a manner to prevent
the scattering of the paper.
Newspapers shall either be packed in standard grocery or
paper shopping bags, placed in corrugated boxes or securely
tied in flat bundles, none of which shall weigh more than 50
pounds.
(a)
If not used for packing paper recyclables, corrugated boxes
and cardboard cartons shall be collapsed and tied in bundles
weighing not more than 50 pounds and placed on top of or next
to the recycling receptacle.
(b)
(4)
Recyclables shall not be placed in plastic garbage bags for
collection, removal or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in
the same refuse container as or otherwise mixed with other forms
of solid waste for collection, removal or disposal.
(5)
Rubbish, refuse or other nonrecyclables shall not be placed in the
recycling container for collection, removal or disposal.
(6)
A.
A resident who violates the provisions of this section shall first be
notified of the violation by registered mail, and such notice shall advise
of the requirements of the recycling ordinance and the fine for
subsequent violations which shall be $25 for the first offense after
receipt of the above notice and not more than $50 for succeeding
violations.
B.
From the time of placement at the curbside tree belt of any recyclables
for collection by the Town of Agawam or its agencies, pursuant to
A.
§ 109-3 AGAWAM CODE § 109-4
109:118
§ 109-5. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances, resolutions, regulations or other
documents inconsistent with the provisions of this article are hereby
repealed to the extent of such inconsistency.
§ 109-6. Severability.
This Article and the various parts, sentences, sections and clauses thereof
are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, section or clause
is adjudged invalid, it is hereby provided that the remainder of this article
shall not be affected thereby.
§ 109-7. When effective.
This Article shall take effect no later than one week after the Materials
Recovery Facility commences commercial operation. Notice of the
commencement date shall be published once in a daily newspaper having
circulation in the Town of Agawam.
the program established hereby and the rules and regulations issued
hereunder, such materials shall become and be the property of the
Town of Agawam. It shall be a violation of this article for any person
other than authorized employees of the Town of Agawam acting in the
course of their employment or contractors or agents under the terms of
their contract to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any recyclable materials. Any and each such collection or pickup in
violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
The recyclables collected by the Town of Agawam shall be transported
to and disposed of at the designated Materials Recovery Facility.
B.
Any violation of this section or any part thereof shall be punishable by
a fine not to exceed $300, and the violator shall make restitution to the
town for the value of any recyclables illegally removed.
C.
§ 109-4 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 109-7
109:119

ARTICLE II
Dumping
[Adopted 10-2-1989 by TOR-89-26]
§ 109-8. Prohibitions.
No person, business, corporation, enterprise or other legal entity shall
place, throw, deposit, discharge or shall cause to be placed, thrown,
deposited or discharged any trash, bottles, cans, refuse, rubbish, garbage,
debris, scrap, waste or any other waste material of any kind, including
but not limited to household trash, lawn clippings and leaves, demolition
material, motor vehicle parts and tires, hazardous waste or materials, used
appliances, construction materials and debris, on any public highway, public
way, city or town way, private way, street or upon any property, public or
private.
§ 109-9. Service of notice of violation.
The Department of Health shall have the authority and power to issue a
written notice ordering removal of any offensive matter in violation of this
article. Said notice shall order removal within 14 days of receipt and shall
be served:
§ 109-10. Requirement after expiration of notice period.
No person, business, corporation, enterprise or other legal entity shall allow
or permit such trash, bottles, cans, refuse, rubbish, garbage, debris, scrap,
waste or any other waste material of any kind, including but not limited
to household trash, lawn clippings and leaves, demolition material, motor
vehicle parts and tires, hazardous waste or materials, used appliances,
construction materials and debris, to remain upon any public highway,
public way, city or town way, private way, street or upon any property, public
or private, for any period of time after expiration of the fourteen-day notice
period.
§ 109-11. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any provision of this article shall be fined not more than
$500 nor less than $200. Each item of waste placed, thrown, deposited or
discharged shall constitute a separate violation of this article. Each day said
Personally by a duly authorized member of the Police Department and/
or the Department of Health;
A.
B. By leaving a copy at the last and usual place of abode or business;
By sending a copy by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at the last known address; or
C.
If the address is unknown and service in hand is not possible, by posting
a copy in a conspicuous place on or about the property.
D.
§ 109-8 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 109-11
109:121
violation is permitted to continue after expiration of the fourteen-day notice
period shall constitute a separate violation of this article. Whoever violates
any provision of this article shall pay to the Town of Agawam all costs and
expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the town in the
enforcement of and prosecution of this article. The Town of Agawam shall
also be entitled to restitution for any and all costs incurred in the collection,
removal and disposal of said waste.
§ 109-12. Alternative proceedings for violations. [Added 6-6-2005
by TOR-2005-6]
Any violation of this chapter, Chapter 109, and any violation of the Code
of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR) 410.600 and/or 410.602, may, in the
discretion of the Board of Health, Health Agent, or his designee, or any
police officer as directed by the Police Chief or his designee, be enforced
by the noncriminal complaint method for which provision is made, and/
or as set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, as amended from time to time, that
is, noncriminal disposition. Fines issued pursuant to § 109-12 shall be as
follows:
A. First offense: $25.
B. Second offense: $50.
C. Third offense and each subsequent offense: $100.
§ 109-11 AGAWAM CODE § 109-12
109:122
Chapter 111
GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Coal, coke and fuel-oil dealers — See Ch. 89. Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
§ 111-1. Purpose.
For the public purpose to promote and protect the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents of the Town of Agawam, to prevent and control
fires, and to control traffic, it is deemed to be in the best interests of the
Town of Agawam to regulate the number of gasoline service stations and
retail refueling sites within the Town of Agawam.
§ 111-2. Gasoline service station.
A gasoline service station shall include any business selling or offering for
sale any motor fuel, such as gasoline or diesel fuel, to the public, whether
or not the public is permitted or expected to operate the pump to put
the fuel into a motor vehicle's fuel tank or a container, and shall include
gasoline filling stations and gasoline self-service stations. For the purposes
of this chapter, "gasoline service station" shall also include any site used or
operated as a retail refueling site, including the fuels of gasoline, propane,
electricity and hydrogen.
§ 111-3. Licensing; limitation.
No business or person shall operate a gasoline service station without a
license issued under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter
148 § 13, or a permit issued in accordance with the Code of Massachusetts
Regulations 527 CMR 14.03. for the purpose of licensing gasoline service
stations under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 148
§ 13, and permitting gasoline service stations in accordance with the Code
of Massachusetts Regulations 527 CMR 14.03, there shall be no more than
20 licenses and/or permits issued at any one time.
§ 111-4. Exercise of license.
Any license or permit issued under the provisions of this chapter and
Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 148 § 13 or 527 CMR 14.03 shall
become invalid and shall be null and void if the activity authorized by said
license or permit is not commenced within six months from the date of the
issuance of said license or permit.
§ 109-12 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS § 111-5
111:123
§ 111-5. Capacity of license.
All licenses issued under the provisions of this chapter and Massachusetts
General Laws Chapter 148 § 13 or 527 CMR 14.03 shall state the capacity
of fuel for which said license or permit is issued. No less than 80% of the
capacity stated on said license or permit must be in use and operation at all
times during the term of the license.
§ 111-6. Previously issued licenses.
Any license or permit issued under the provisions of Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 148 § 13 or 527 CMR 14.03 prior to the enactment of this
chapter shall and must commence the activity allowed by such license or
permit within six months from the date this chapter is enacted. If the
activity allowed by such license or permit is not commenced within said six
months, any such license or permit shall become invalid and be null and
void.
Chapter 114
JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 103. Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 111-5 AGAWAM CODE § 111-6
111:124
ARTICLE I
Pawnbrokers, Junk Dealers and Secondhand Dealers
[Adopted 9-2-2014 by TOR-2014-316]
§ 114-1. Pawnbroker's license; fee.
Definition. A pawnbroker is an individual or business that offers
secured loans to individuals with items of personal property used as
collateral.
If an item is pawned for a loan, within a certain contractual period
of time, the pawnbroker may redeem it for the amount of the loan
plus some agreed-upon amount of interest. The amount of time,
and rate of interest, is governed by law or by the pawnbroker's
policies. If the loan is not paid (or extended, if applicable) within
the time period, the pawned item will be offered for sale by the
pawnbroker. The pawnbroker does not report the defaulted loan on
the customer's credit report, since the pawn broker has physical
possession of the item and may recoup the loan value through an
outright sale of the item.
(1)
The term "secondhand junk dealer" shall not apply to a
pawnbroker.
(2)
A.
Application referral. Upon receiving an application for a license to
engage in business as a pawnbroker, the application shall be referred
by the Town Council to the Chief of Police for investigation into the
applicant's criminal record, which investigation shall include obtaining
fingerprints, photograph and CORI check from the applicant.
B.
Interview. The Chief of Police may, in his discretion, require a personal
interview of the applicant and may request further relevant
information.
C.
Disqualification. No license shall be issued by the Town Council unless
the Chief of Police has first issued his recommendation for its issuance.
The Town Council may refuse to approve the issuance of such license
on any of the following grounds:
That the applicant, based on his or her criminal record, would be
an improper person in that particular business; or
(1)
That the applicant has had a previous license to engage in such
business revoked or suspended by the Town of Agawam or some
other jurisdiction; or
(2)
That the conduct of the business at the location in question would
not be in the interest of the public health, safety or welfare.
(3)
D.
16.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. I, Junk, Old Metal and Secondhand
Articles, adopted 12-21-1972 as § 9-2 of the Code of the Town of Agawam.
§ 114-1 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS § 114-1
111:125
§ 114-2. Junk and secondhand dealer's license.
No person, firm, or corporation shall engage in the business of operating
a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of secondhand articles without
obtaining a license therefor and complying with the terms of this section.
The Town Council may license suitable persons to be collectors of, dealers
in or keepers of shops for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metal
or secondhand articles, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 140 of the
General Laws.
§ 114-3. Records of purchases.
Notification. The Chief of Police shall notify the Town Council and the
applicant of his recommendation of said license, in writing, within 30
days of the date of application.
E.
F. Fee. The fee for such a license shall be $200.
The Town Council shall be the issuing authority for all pawnbroker
dealer's licenses.
G.
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old
metal or secondhand articles and every pawnbroker within the limits
of this Town shall keep an electronic record in which shall be written,
at the time of every purchase or upon the receipt of any article, a
description thereof, which shall include, but shall not be limited to,
all distinguishing marks, etchings, engravings, model names, model
numbers and serial numbers, and the full name (first and last), date
of birth, license or state/government ID number and residence of the
person from whom, and the day and hour when, such purchase or
receipt was made, and such electronic record shall at all times be open
to the inspection of officers of the Police Department and of any person
authorized to make such inspection.
A.
The license holder shall photograph any and all jewelry items pawned,
sold, pledged, or otherwise deposited with the license holder. The
required photo shall be clear and of such quality that the item(s) shall
be clearly identified. The photographs shall be stored in a digitized
format, and the image must be retrievable and a clear copy provided
to police upon request. The above-described photos shall be maintained
by the license holder for a minimum of three years.
B.
Every license holder shall allow a representative of the New England
State Police Information Network ("NESPIN") to enter his shop and
install, on the shopkeeper's computing device, the software necessary
to allow the shopkeeper to electronically transmit a record of his/her
transactions. Before the first hour of every business day, post meridian,
every shopkeeper shall transmit a record of his/her transactions from
the prior day. The record transmitted must include the information
included in § 114-3A and B of this article.
C.
§ 114-1 AGAWAM CODE § 114-3
111:126
§ 114-4. Signs on shops.
Every keeper of a junk shop or pawnshop shall put in a suitable and
conspicuous place on his shop a sign having his name and occupation
legibly inscribed thereon in large letters.
§ 114-4.1. Examination of junk shops.
All junk shops, and all articles of merchandise therein, may at all times
be examined by officers of the Police Department or by any person by it
authorized to make such examination.
§ 114-4.2. Transactions with minors.
No keeper of a junk shop, secondhand dealer, or pawnshop and no junk
collector shall, directly or indirectly, either purchase or receive, by way of
barter or exchange, any junk, old metal or secondhand articles of a minor,
as defined by the General Laws, knowingly or having reason to believe him
to be such.
§ 114-4.3. Time period for holding articles prior to resale.
The license holder shall accurately describe all items pawned, sold,
or pledged with the license holder. This description shall include, but
shall not be limited to, all distinguishing marks, etchings, engravings,
model names, model numbers and serial numbers. Any jewelry with
an affiliation to any institution or organization shall include the name
of said institution or organization, year, and inscribed initials if any.
Any and all descriptions of items of jewelry shall include the material,
size (if applicable), weight, length, shape, and color. Descriptions of
coins, stamps, collectible cards, autographed items, figurines, or other
collectible of any description shall include any identifying features,
such as the name of the items, date, denomination, color, size, brand
name, vintage or image represented. All items pledged, sold, or pawned
with the license holder must remain intact (i.e., precious stones in
jewelry or data on electronic devices) until such time that they may
legally change ownership.
D.
The license holder shall photograph the customer making the
transaction with the license holder, along with a photograph of the
required customer license or state/government issued ID. The required
photographs shall be clear and of such quality that the customer and
required license or state/government issued ID is clearly identifiable.
This information shall be maintained according to § 114-7C.
E.
Exception for dealers in secondhand books, clothing and furniture.
Persons who do not buy or sell secondhand articles except books,
clothing or furniture shall be exempt from the provisions of § 114-3D.
F.
The Town Council shall be the issuing authority for all secondhand junk
dealer's licenses.
G.
§ 114-3 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS § 114-4.3
111:127
§ 114-4.4. Hours of operation.
Pawn shops and secondhand dealers shall be closed except between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. of each weekday, and no keeper thereof
and no junk collector shall purchase any junk, old metal or secondhand
articles except during such hours. Any shop wishing to open on Saturday
must receive written permission from the Police Chief or his designee. All
pawn shops and secondhand dealers must maintain regular business hours.
§ 114-4.5. Storage of rags and wastepaper by junk dealers.
Rags and wastepaper kept or collected by junk dealers or junk collectors
shall not be kept or stored within the limits of any district, except in
substantial brick or stone buildings.
§ 114-4.6. Used vehicle junk dealers.
A Class 3 license shall be required for used vehicle junk dealers.
§ 114-4.7. Purchase of certain items prohibited; violations and
penalties.
Required holding period. No article purchased or received by the
keeper of a pawn shop or a secondhand dealer shall be sold until at
least 60 days from the date of its purchase or receipt have elapsed.
The article shall be kept in an unaltered condition for the required time
period. For the purposes of this section, "unaltered condition" means
that the item or article shall be kept in the same condition it was in at
the time it was brought into the shop by the seller.
A.
Exception for dealers in secondhand books, clothing and furniture.
Persons who do not buy or sell secondhand articles except books,
clothing or furniture shall be exempt from the provisions of § 114-4.3A.
B.
No keeper of a pawnshop and no keeper of a shop for the purchase,
sale or barter of junk, old metal or secondhand articles shall purchase
or take in pawn any item if it appears that such item has had any serial
numbers or identifying marks removed or apparently removed.
A.
For the purpose of this section, "identifying mark" includes but is not
limited to engravings, initials, or similar inscriptions on rings, watches
or other jewelry or similar inscriptions on other items.
B.
Violation of this section shall be grounds for revocation of a license
granted under § 114-1 or 114-2.
C.
Violations of any section of this article (§§ 114-1 through 114-4.7) may
result in a fine of not less than $300, suspension of license, or
revocation of license.
D.
§ 114-4.3 AGAWAM CODE § 114-4.7
111:128
ARTICLE II
Secondhand Motor Vehicles
[Adopted 1-16-1987 by TOR-86-17]
§ 114-5. Conditions precedent to issuance of Class 1 and Class 2
licenses. [Amended 1-21-1999 by TOR-98-5]
Any applicant filing a new application for a Class 1 or Class 2 license
or filing a renewal application which seeks to amend the maximum
number of motor vehicles under Subsection B hereof or in any other
way changes the plot plan currently on file in the Office of Inspection
Services shall file a site plan of the proposed licensed premises with
the Agawam Planning Board for approval pursuant to § 180-13. The site
plan shall meet all the requirements of § 180-13 and it shall show the
specific areas to be utilized for the car lot, motor vehicle display areas
and all permanent buildings. The site plan shall also include required
buffer areas, signs, lighting, driveways, the total square footage of
the proposed licensed premises, indicate all abutters to the property
and contain such other information and plans as may be necessary
to determine the merits of the application. After receiving site plan
approval from the Agawam Planning Board, the site plan shall be
submitted to the Agawam Town Council as licensing authority for
review under this article. Any applicant filing a renewal application
which does not seek to amend the maximum number of motor vehicles
under Subsection B hereof or in any other way change the plot plan
currently on file in the Office of Inspection Services need not undergo
site plan review. All licenses granted under this section shall expire on
December 31 of each year following the date of issue unless sooner
suspended or revoked by the licensing authority. Applications for
current license holders, seeking to reapply, shall submit for
consideration an application approved by the licensing authority no
later than September 1 of each year. Licenses, granted in accordance
with § 114-5 of the Code of the Town of Agawam and MGL c. 140
§§ 58 and 59, shall not be transferable. [Amended 8-2-2004 by
TOR-2004-3]
A.
The maximum number of motor vehicles available to each licensee
shall be calculated by dividing the net available square footage of the
proposed licensed premises by 200. The number of motor vehicles
available to each licensee as listed on his/her license shall determine
the maximum number of unregistered motor vehicles allowed on the
premises. The net available square footage of the proposed licensed
premises shall be determined by subtracting the following items from
the total square footage of the proposed licensed premises as shown on
the site plan:
The total square footage of any and all buildings located on the
proposed licensed premises;
(1)
(2) The total square footage of required buffer zone areas;
B.
§ 114-5 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS § 114-5
111:129
(3) The total square footage of driveways;
The total square footage of delineated wetland areas and required
stormwater detention areas located on the proposed licensed
premises; and
(4)
(5) The total square footage of required customer parking spaces.
Every licensee shall provide a suitable place to conduct his/her business
which shall include sufficient office space and a facility to provide
repair services for not less than one motor vehicle. Every licensee
shall provide a minimum of one customer parking space of at least
200 square feet in area for every 15 motor vehicles allowed by his/her
license.
C.
No motor vehicle offered for sale shall be parked within required
buffer areas, which shall extend a minimum of five feet around the
street line or sidewalk of the proposed licensed premises. Bumper
guards shall be placed along any street line used as a display area, and
appropriate screening shall be placed along abutting property lines.
The licensing authority may require additional buffer areas, bumper
guards and screening as it deems necessary.
D.
All repairs must be performed indoors, and there shall be no outdoor
storage of automobile parts or other related materials.
E.
After a license is issued under this article, the licensee must obtain
dealer license plates from the Registry of Motor Vehicles and shall not
use repair plates for the vehicles offered for sale. The licensee must
obtain the dealer license plates within 90 days of the issuance of the
license and must retain these plates as a condition of holding his/her
license. All license plate numbers must be recorded in the office of the
Town Clerk upon receipt from the Registry of Motor Vehicles.
F.
No person shall be licensed to buy and sell secondhand motor vehicles
unless he/she have filed with his/her application a statement certifying
that the buying or selling of secondhand motor vehicles is his/her
principal business.
G.
No temporary office or repair space will be allowed, such as small
buildings or trailers on wheels or blocks.
H.
Failure of a licensee to conform to any provision of Chapter 180
(Zoning) shall be deemed cause to suspend, revoke or not renew his/
her license.
I.
All signs shall conform to the Sign Ordinance (Article XIII of Chapter
180).
J.
The hours of operation shall be restricted to between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Monday through Saturday and 12:00 noon to 5:00
p.m. on Sunday.
K.
§ 114-5 AGAWAM CODE § 114-5
111:130
§ 114-6. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 1-21-1999
by TOR-98-5]
The licensing authority is empowered to suspend, revoke or take any other
action provided by this article or the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts against any license issued under § 114-5 after hearing, if it
finds that there has been a violation of law, ordinance or any duly imposed
condition.
§ 114-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-21-1999 by
TOR-98-5]
§ 114-8. Number of licenses restricted. [Amended 4-18-1989 by
TOR-89-3; 5-18-1998 by TOR-98-3; 7-6-2004 by TOR-2004-4]
The total number of Class 2 dealer licenses issued under MGL, c. 140, §§ 58
and 59, at any one time shall be not more than 20, except this section shall
not apply to premises lawfully in existence and lawfully used in accordance
with said MGL, c. 140, §§ 58 and 59, at the time of enactment hereof,
provided that any such premises has continuously and lawfully been used in
accordance with said MGL, c. 140, §§ 58 and 59.
§ 114-9. Fees.
The annual fee for Class 1 and 2 licenses is $100.
The licensing authority may place conditions and/or safety precautions
on any license.
L.
The licensing authority may approve an application for a Class 1 and
Class 2 dealers license with the stipulation that all the above
requirements must be met prior to the issuance of that license.
M.
All applicants must comply with and meet the requirements of MGL c.
140 §§ 58 and 59. [Added 8-2-2004 by TOR-2004-3]
N.
If the licensing authority finds after hearing that there has been a
violation of law, ordinance or any duly imposed license condition, it
may revoke, suspend or fine any licensee. Fines shall be established as
follows:
(1) First offense for each day of violation: $50; and
(2) Second or subsequent offense, for each day of each violation: $100.
A.
Nothing herein shall prevent the licensing authority from imposing any
of the above penalties in any combination.
B.
§ 114-5 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS § 114-10
111:131
§ 114-10. Investigation of violations. [Amended 1-21-1999 by
TOR-98-5]
The investigation of violations under this article shall be delegated to the
Police Chief or his/her designees and the Inspector of Buildings or his/her
designees, who may enter licensed premises at reasonable times to inspect
and investigate in order to ensure compliance with § 114-5 and any duly
imposed license conditions. Each licensed premises shall be inspected a
minimum of two times per year.
§ 114-11. Class 3 licenses.
The provisions of §§ 114-6, 114-7, 114-9 and 114-10, inclusive, shall apply
to all Class 3 licenses.
§ 114-10 AGAWAM CODE § 114-11
111:132
Chapter 116
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
§ 116-1. Trash in public places prohibited.
No person shall throw or cause to be thrown any handbill, circulars,
pamphlets or any other papers or any trash or discard material whatsoever
in any street or other public places within the town.
Chapter 117
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Congregating on streets and sidewalks — See
Ch. 155, Art. I.
§ 117-1. Loitering prohibited.
Three or more persons shall not stand or loiter upon any street or in
the entrance of any public building after having been ordered to move
therefrom by a constable or police officer.
Chapter 121
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 128. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 169.
§ 121-1. Prohibited noises enumerated.
Pursuant to MGL C. 40, § 21, Clause 22, the creation of or failure to
abate or control any unreasonably loud, disturbing and/or unnecessary
noise is prohibited. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the
following acts are hereby declared to be unreasonably loud, disturbing and/
or unnecessary noise in violation of this section:
A. Motor vehicles:
§ 114-11 LITTERING § 121-1
116:133
§ 121-2. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 121-3. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this chapter shall be fined not more than $300 nor less
than $100 for the first offense. Second and subsequent offenses shall result
in a mandatory fine of $300. Whoever violates any provision of this chapter
shall pay restitution to the Town of Agawam in an amount equal to all costs
and expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the town in
the prosecution of this chapter.
Chapter 124
PARADES
The sounding of any horn, whistle or signal device on any
motorized vehicle, including but not limited to an automobile, bus,
truck, motorcycle or motorscooter, while in motion or not in
motion, except as a danger signal if another vehicle is approaching
in an erratic or out of control manner.
(1)
The operation of any motorized vehicle, including but not limited
to an automobile, bus, truck, motorcycle or motorscooter, in such
a manner or in such a condition as to cause unreasonably loud,
disturbing and/or unnecessary noise.
(2)
Radios, stereos, phonographs, musical instruments and/or other audio/
video equipment: the playing of any radio, stereo, phonograph, musical
instrument and/or other audio/video equipment in such a manner or at
such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of other
person(s).
B.
Churches and schools: the creation of any unreasonably loud,
disturbing and/or unnecessary noise on any area adjacent to any
church, school or other educational or religious institution while the
same is in session.
C.
Peddlers and hawkers: the shouting and/or crying of peddlers, hawkers
and/or other street vendors which annoys or disturbs the quiet, comfort
or repose of other person(s).
D.
Use of drums and/or loudspeakers for sale or display: the use of any
drum, loudspeaker, musical instrument or other voice amplification
device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise for
sale or display of merchandise. Amusement parks, civic and religious
organizations shall be exempt from the provisions of this subsection.
E.
§ 121-1 AGAWAM CODE § 124-1
124:134
§ 124-1. Assembly permit required.
Before any persons shall parade or assemble within the town, such persons
shall obtain from the Chief of Police a parade and assembly permit which
shall be issued and signed. Such permit shall be issued only to responsible
persons or organizations.
§ 124-2. Withholding of permit.
The Chief of Police shall withhold the issuance of any such permit if he feels
that the parade or assembly contemplated may lead to a breach of the peace
or endanger the safety of the public.
Chapter 128
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fees — See Ch. 103. Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
§ 128-1. Peddlers license; penalty.
§ 128-2. Registration of solicitors; penalty.
Any person soliciting from door to door shall first register with the Police
Department and show credentials. Violations of this section will be punished
by a fine of $50.
No person not already duly licensed under the laws of the
commonwealth shall go from place to place in the town selling or
bartering, carrying or exposing for sale or barter any fish, fruits or
vegetables in or from any cart, wagon or other vehicle or in any other
manner without a license therefor from the Chief of Police; provided
that this section shall not apply to any person who sells only fruit or
vegetables raised or produced by himself or his family, or fish which is
lawfully obtained by his own labor or the labor of his family.
A.
No person shall, except in accordance with a written permit from the
Chief of Police and except as provided in MGL C. 101, § 17, in any street
or from any point immediately adjacent to a sidewalk, sell or offer for
sale any goods or articles to any person on any sidewalk of the town.
B.
No person shall place or keep any table, stall, booth, cart or other
structure in any public way or other public place in the town or upon
any sidewalk for the sale of food, fruit, merchandise or other thing
without permission first being obtained from the Chief of Police.
C.
Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding $50 for each and every violation thereof.
D.
§ 124-1 PEDDLING AND SOLICITING § 128-2
128:135
Chapter 131
PICNIC GROVES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peddling and soliciting — See Ch. 128.
§ 131-1. Issuance of license.
The Town Council may grant a license to any person to establish, keep open
and maintain a grove to be used for picnics or other lawful gatherings and
amusements for hire, gain or reward, upon such conditions and regulations
as it deems proper subject to the provisions of MGL C. 140, § 202 to 205.
§ 131-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person without such license who establishes, lets, keeps open or
maintains, himself or by another, a grove to be used for picnics or other
amusements for hire, gain or reward shall be punished by a fine of not more
than $100.
§ 131-3. Hawking and peddling; penalty.
Any person not having a residence or regular place of business within 1/2
mile of a grove licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter
who, during the time of holding a picnic or other lawful gathering in such
licensed grove and within 1/2 mile thereof, hawks or peddles goods, wares
or merchandise, establishes or maintains a tent, booth, vehicle or building
for vending provisions or refreshments without the consent of the licensee
of such grove, engages in gaming or horse racing or exhibits or offers to
exhibit any show or play shall for each offense forfeit not more than $50.
Chapter 134
PROPERTY, TOWN AND PRIVATE
§ 134-1. Destruction of town property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to destroy or injure any of the town's property. The Town
Council is hereby authorized to offer a reward for information leading to the
conviction of any person violating this section.
§ 134-2. Trespassing.
Whoever, without right, enters or remains in or upon the dwelling
house, buildings, boats or improved or enclosed land, wharf or pier
of another after having been forbidden so to do by the person who
has lawful control of said premises, either directly or by notice posted
A.
§ 128-2 AGAWAM CODE § 134-2
131:136
Chapter 140
SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Loitering — See Ch. 117.
§ 140-1. Unauthorized persons in schools or school zones; loiterers
and trespassers.
thereon, or in violation of a court order pursuant to MGL C. 208,
§ 34(b), MGL C. 209A, § 4, shall be punished by a fine of not more than
$100 or by imprisonment for not more than 30 days, or both. Proof that
a court has given notice of such a court order to the alleged offender,
shall be prima facie evidence that the notice requirement of this section
has been met. A person who is found committing such trespass may
be arrested by a sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable or police officer and
kept in custody in a convenient place, not more than 24 hours, Sunday
excepted, until a complaint can be made against him for the offense and
he can be taken upon a warrant issued upon such complaint.
This section shall not apply to tenants or occupants of residential
premises who, having rightfully entered said premises at the
commencement of the tenancy or occupancy, remain therein after such
tenancy or occupancy has been or is alleged to have been terminated.
The owner or landlord of said premises may recover possession thereof
only through appropriate civil proceedings.
B.
No person not being a student or employee of a school and not having
a legitimate, specific reason for being there and not having written
or oral permission from the school principal or his/her designee shall
remain in or about any school grounds or any public property or way
immediately adjacent thereto during school hours.
A.
No person not being a student or employee of a school shall congregate
or stand in or in front or in back or to the side of any school playground
or, without written or oral permission from the school principal or
his/her designee, shall use any school playground or facilities thereon
during school hours.
B.
Persons shall not congregate or stand on any public way or public
property or in front or in back or to the side of any kindergarten or
primary, elementary or secondary school with the purpose of annoying
or molesting the students or employees thereof, or hinder, obstruct,
prevent or disrupt the normal functions carried on therein, or prevent
students or employees from entering or leaving the school.
C.
§ 134-2 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 140-1
140:137
§ 140-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person found in violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine not
exceeding $300.
Chapter 149
SMOKING AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS
No person not being a student or employee of a school, while on school
property or on public property adjacent to a school, shall distribute
to students or throw, deposit or discard any handbills, literature,
brochures or other papers or articles of any kind, unless such person
has received written or oral permission from the school principal or his/
her designee.
D.
No person shall post or affix handbills, posters, political signs or articles
of any kind promoting business or organizations to any building, tree,
fence or other structure on school grounds without written or oral
permission from the school principal or his/her designee.
E.
§ 140-1 AGAWAM CODE § 140-2
140:138
ARTICLE I
Smoking in Workplaces and Public Places
§ 149-1. Authority.
This chapter is promulgated pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), which states
in part that "Nothing in this section shall permit smoking in an area in
which smoking is or may hereafter be prohibited by law including, without
limitation: any other law or . . . health . . . regulation. Nothing in this section
shall preempt further limitation of smoking by the commonwealth . . . or
political subdivision of the commonwealth."
§ 149-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words shall have the following
meanings, unless the context requires otherwise.
COMPENSATION — Money, gratuity, privilege, or benefit received from an
employer in return for work performed or services rendered.
E-CIGARETTE — Any electronic device, not approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration, composed of a mouthpiece, heating element,
battery and/or electronic circuits that provides a vapor of liquid nicotine to
the user, or relies on vaporization of any liquid or solid nicotine. This term
shall include such devices, whether they are manufactured as e-cigarettes,
e-cigars, e-pipes, e-hookahs or under any other product name.
EMPLOYEE — An individual or person who performs a service for
compensation for an employer at the employer's workplace, including a
contract employee, temporary employee, and independent contractor who
performs a service in the employer's workplace for more than a de minimis
amount of time.
EMPLOYER — An individual, person, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, organization, school, college, university or other educational
institution or other legal entity, whether public, quasi-public, private, or
nonprofit, which uses the services of one or more employees at one or more
workplaces, at any one time, including the Town of Agawam.
ENCLOSED — A space bounded by walls, with or without windows or
fenestrations, continuous from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one or more
doors, including but not limited to an office, function room or hallway.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building or facility owned, operated, leased
or occupied by the municipality.
OUTDOOR SPACE — An outdoor area, open to the air at all times and
cannot be enclosed by a wall or side covering.
RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment that is not required to
possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell or offer for
sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco products and paraphernalia,
in which the sale of other products is merely incidental, and in which the
entry of persons under the age of 21 is prohibited at all times, and which
§ 149-1 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 149-2
140:139
maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products as required
by the Agawam Board of Health.
SMOKING (OR SMOKE) — The lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco or nontobacco product designed to be combusted and inhaled.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises
and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22, to maintain a valid permit to operate
a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue.
"Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those establishments that
are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah bars."
WORKPLACE — An indoor area, structure or facility or a portion thereof,
at which one or more employees perform a service for compensation for an
employer; other enclosed spaces rented to or otherwise used by the public;
and where the employer has the right or authority to exercise control over
the space.
Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in MGL c. 270, § 22,
and/or 105 CMR 661.00. To the extent any of the definitions herein conflict
with MGL c. 270, § 22, or 105 CMR 661.00, the definition contained in this
regulation shall control.
§ 149-3. Smoking prohibited.
It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free
environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace as
well as those workplaces listed in Subsection C below.
A.
Smoking is hereby prohibited in Agawam in accordance with MGL c.
270, § 22 (commonly known as the "Smoke-Free Workplace Law").
B.
Pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), smoking is also hereby prohibited in:
Smoking bars whose operators have newly applied after the date
these regulations take effect;
(1)
(2) Nursing homes;
(3) Hotels, motels, bed-and-breakfast rooms;
In all outdoor areas where food and/or beverages are served to the
public by employees of restaurants, bars and taverns;
(4)
(5) Public transportation, bus/taxi waiting areas;
On all Town-owned playgrounds, parks, beaches, ballfields or any
other recreational facility, future or existing, with structures,
improved paths, parking areas or other maintained improvements.
Also included are all municipal buildings, future or existing, and
their grounds, including, but not limited to, the Town Hall, Senior
Center, Town Hall Annex, Fire and Police Stations, Library, and
(6)
C.
§ 149-2 AGAWAM CODE § 149-3
140:140
§ 149-4. Enforcement.
§ 149-5. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not effect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
Building Maintenance Facility. A municipal golf course shall be
exempt from this section.
The use of e-cigarettes is prohibited wherever smoking is prohibited
per MGL c. 270, § 22, and § 149-3C of this regulation.
D.
An owner, manager, or other person in control of a building, vehicle or
vessel who violates this section, in a manner other than by smoking in
a place where smoking is prohibited, shall be punished by a fine of:
(1) $100 for the first violation;
$200 for a second violation occurring within two years of the date
of the first offense; and
(2)
$300 for a third or subsequent violation occurring within two years
of the second violation.
(3)
A.
Each calendar day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
B.
This regulation shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its
designees.
C.
Violations of § 149-3B shall be disposed of by a civil penalty using the
noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, without an enabling ordinance or bylaw. The disposition of fines
assessed shall be subject to MGL c. 111, § 188.
D.
Violations of § 149-3A, C and D may be disposed of by a civil penalty
using the noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in
MGL c. 40, § 21D.
E.
If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building, vehicle
or vessel violates this regulation repeatedly, demonstrating egregious
noncompliance as defined by regulation of the Department of Public
Health, the Board of Health may revoke or suspend any Board-of-
Health-issued permit to operate and shall send notice of the revocation
or suspension to the Department of Public Health.
F.
Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation and
enforcement with the Board of Health, the local inspection department
or the equivalent.
G.
§ 149-3 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 149-6
140:141
§ 149-6. Conflict with other laws or regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 149-3 of this regulation, nothing in this
regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health or
other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited by
such fire, health or other regulations.
§ 149-7. (Reserved)
§ 149-6 AGAWAM CODE § 149-7
140:142
ARTICLE II
Sale or Gifts of Tobacco Products
§ 149-8. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
ADULT-ONLY RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment that is not
required to possess a retail food permit whose primary purpose is to sell
or offer for sale, but not for resale, tobacco products and tobacco
paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is merely incidental,
and in which the entry of persons under the minimum legal sales age is
prohibited at all times, and maintains a valid permit for the retail sale of
tobacco products as required to be issued by the Agawam Board of Health.
BLUNT WRAP — Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap
or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed
or intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers
regardless of any content.
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR — A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted or
detectable either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or
component part thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas
relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert,
alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco
product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because
of the provision of ingredient information or the use of additives or
flavorings that do not contribute to the distinguishable taste or aroma of the
product.
CIGAR — Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any
substance containing tobacco with or without a tip or mouthpiece not
otherwise defined as a cigarette under MGL c. 64C, § 1, paragraph 1.
COMPONENT PART — Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not
limited to, the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent.
CONSTITUENT — Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other
than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacturing
or packaging of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke
constituent.
COUPON — Any card, paper, note, form, statement, ticket or other issue
distributed for commercial or promotional purposes to be later surrendered
by the bearer so as to receive an article, service or accommodation without
charge or at a discount price.
§ 149-8 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 149-8
140:143
DISTINGUISHABLE — Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private college, school,
professional school, scientific or technical institution, university or other
institution furnishing a program of higher education.
EMPLOYEE — Any individual who performs services for an employer.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust or
other organized group of individuals that uses the services of one or more
employees.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any tobacco product or component
part thereof that contains a constituent that has or produces a
characterizing flavor. A public statement, claim or indicia made or
disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person
authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public
statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has
or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.
HEALTH CARE INSTITUTION — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides healthcare
services and employs health-care providers licensed, or subject to
licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 112 or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and
services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. Health-care
institutions include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers,
pharmacies, drug stores, doctor offices, optician/optometrist offices and
dentist offices.
LIQUID NICOTINE CONTAINER — A bottle or other vessel which contains
nicotine in liquid or gel form, whether or not combined with another
substance or substances, for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein.
The term does not include a container containing nicotine in a cartridge
that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a tobacco product, as defined
herein, if the cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer and not
intended to be opened by the consumer or retailer.
LISTED OR NONDISCOUNTED PRICE — The higher of the price listed
for a tobacco product on its package or the price listed on any related
shelving, posting, advertising or display at the place where the tobacco
product is sold or offered for sale plus all applicable taxes if such taxes are
not included in the state price, and before the application of any discounts
or coupons.
MINIMUM LEGAL SALES AGE (MLSA) — The age an individual must be
before that individual can be sold a tobacco product in the municipality.
NONRESIDENTIAL ROLL-YOUR-OWN (RYO) MACHINE — A mechanical
device made available for use (including to an individual who produces
cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, or roll-your-own
tobacco solely for the individual's own personal consumption or use) that
is capable of making cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products. RYO
§ 149-8 AGAWAM CODE § 149-8
140:144
machines located in private homes used for solely personal consumption are
not nonresidential RYO machines.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products who applies for and receives a tobacco product sales
permit or any person who is required to apply for a tobacco product sales
permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including, but not limited to, an owner,
operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any establishment,
business or retail store.
SCHOOLS — Public or private elementary or secondary schools.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select a
tobacco product, as defined herein, without assistance from an employee or
store personnel.
SMOKE CONSTITUENT — Any chemical or chemical compound in
mainstream or sidestream tobacco smoke that either transfers from any
component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the
combustion or heating of tobacco, additives or other component of the
tobacco product.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the retail
sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the premises
and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22, to maintain a valid permit to operate
a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department of Revenue.
"Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those establishments that
are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah bars."
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; or electronic cigarettes,
electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookahs, liquid nicotine, "eliquids"
or other similar products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely
on vaporization or aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any
component or part of a tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include
any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration either as a tobacco use cessation product or for other
medical purposes and which is being marketed and sold or prescribed solely
for the approved purpose.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses or makes cigarettes or any other tobacco products, as defined
herein.
§ 149-9. Tobacco sales to persons under minimum legal sales age
prohibited.
§ 149-8 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 149-9
140:145
No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products, as
defined herein, to be sold to a person under the minimum legal sales
age; or not being the individual's parent or legal guardian, give tobacco
products, as defined herein, to a person under the minimum legal sales
age. The minimum legal sales age in Agawam is 21.
A.
Required signage:
In conformance with and in addition to MGL c. 270, § 7, a copy
of MGL c. 270, § 6, shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or
other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to
sell tobacco products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available
from the Agawam Board of Health. The notice shall be at least
48 square inches and shall be posted conspicuously by the permit
holder in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner
so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the
floor. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products at retail shall conspicuously post
any additional signs required by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or
other place used to sell hand-rolled cigars must display a warning
about cigar consumption in a sign at least 50 square inches
pursuant to 940 CMR 22.06(2)(e).
(1)
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall
conspicuously post signage provided by the Agawam Board of
Health that discloses current referral information about smoking
cessation.
(2)
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used
to sell tobacco products that rely on vaporization or aerosolization,
as defined herein as "tobacco products," at retail shall
conspicuously post a sign stating that "The sale of tobacco
products, including c-cigarettes, to someone under the minimum
legal sales age of 21 years is prohibited." The notice shall be
no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted
conspicuously in the retail establishment or other place in such a
manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the floor.
(3)
B.
Identification. Each person selling or distributing tobacco products, as
defined herein, shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of a valid
government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer's
C.
§ 149-9 AGAWAM CODE § 149-9
140:146
§ 149-10. Tobacco product sales permit.
date of birth that the purchaser is 21 years old or older. Verification is
required for any person under the age of 27.
All retail sales of tobacco products, as defined herein, must be faceto-
face between the seller and the buyer and occur at the permitted
location.
D.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products, as
defined herein, within the Town of Agawam without first obtaining a
tobacco product sales permit issued annually by the Agawam Board of
Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent, nonmobile
location in Agawam are eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco
products, as defined herein, at the specified location in Agawam.
A.
As part of the tobacco product sales permit application process, the
applicant will be provided with the Agawam regulation. Each applicant
is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant has read
said regulation and that the applicant is responsible for instructing any
and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco product sales
regarding federal, state and local laws regarding the sale of tobacco
and this regulation.
B.
Each applicant who sells tobacco products is required to provide proof
of a current tobacco retailer license issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue, when required by state law, before a tobacco
product sales permit can be issued.
C.
A separate permit, displayed conspicuously, is required for each retail
establishment selling tobacco products, as defined herein, the fee for
which shall be determined by the Agawam Board of Health annually.
D.
E. A tobacco product sales permit is nontransferable.
Issuance of a tobacco product sales permit shall be conditioned on
an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her
retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation.
F.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines
has expired and/or the permit holder has not satisfied any outstanding
permit suspensions.
G.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has sold a tobacco product to a person under the MLSA (§ 149-9A) three
times within the previous permit year and the time period to appeal
has expired. The violator may request a hearing in accordance with
Subsection D of § 149-22, Violations and penalties.
H.
Maximum number of tobacco product sales permits. At any given time,
there shall be no more than 38 tobacco product sales permits issued in
I.
§ 149-9 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 149-10
140:147
§ 149-11. Cigar sales regulated.
§ 149-12. Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
flavored tobacco product, except in smoking bars and adult-only retail
tobacco stores.
§ 149-13. Prohibition of sale of blunt wraps.
No person or entity shall sell or distribute blunt wraps in Agawam.
§ 149-14. Free distribution and coupon redemption.
Agawam. No permit renewal will be denied based on the requirements
of this subsection except any permit holder who has failed to renew his
or her permit within 30 days of expiration will be treated as a first-time
permit applicant.
A tobacco product sales permit shall not be issued to any new applicant
for a retail location within 500 feet of a public or private elementary or
secondary school as measured by a straight line from the nearest point
of the property line of the school to the nearest point of the property
line of the site of the applicant's business premises.
J.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed a
single cigar.
A.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
original factory-wrapped package of two or more cigars, unless such
package is priced for retail sale at $5 or more.
B.
This section shall not apply to:
The sale or distribution of any single cigar having a retail price of
$2.50 or more.
(1)
A person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing
cigars for commercial purposes to another person or entity
engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for
commercial purposes with the intent to sell or distribute outside
the boundaries of Agawam.
(2)
C.
The Agawam Board of Health may adjust from time to time the amounts
specified in this section to reflect changes in the applicable Consumer
Price Index by amendment of this regulation.
D.
No person shall:
Distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples of tobacco
products, as defined herein;
(1)
A.
§ 149-10 AGAWAM CODE § 149-14
140:148
§ 149-15. Out-of-package sales.
§ 149-16. Self-service displays.
All self-service displays of tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited. All humidors, including, but not limited to, walk-in humidors,
must be locked.
§ 149-17. Vending machines.
All vending machines containing tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited.
§ 149-18. Nonresidential roll-your-own machines.
All nonresidential roll-your-own machines are prohibited.
Accept or redeem, offer to accept or redeem, or cause or hire
any person to accept or redeem or offer to accept or redeem
any coupon that provides any tobacco product, as defined herein,
without charge or for less than the listed or nondiscounted price;
or
(2)
Sell a tobacco product, as defined herein, to consumers through
any multipack discounts (e.g., "buy-two-get-one-free") or otherwise
provide or distribute to consumers any tobacco product, as defined
herein, without charge or for less than the listed or nondiscounted
price in exchange for the purchase of any other tobacco product.
(3)
Subsection A(2) and (3) shall not apply to products, such as cigarettes,
for which there is a state law prohibiting them from being sold as loss
leaders and for which a minimum retail price is required by state law.
B.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, in any
form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited,
including the repackaging or dispensing of any tobacco product as
defined herein for retail sale. No person may sell or cause to be sold
or distribute or cause to be distributed any cigarette package that
contains fewer than 20 cigarettes, including single cigarettes.
A.
A retailer of liquid nicotine containers must comply with the provisions
of 310 CMR 30.000 and must provide the Agawam Board of Health with
a written plan for disposal of said product, including disposal plans for
any breakage, spillage or expiration of the product.
B.
All retailers must comply with 940 CMR 21.05, which reads: "It shall be
an unfair or deceptive act or practice for any person to sell or distribute
nicotine in a liquid or gel substance in Massachusetts after March 15,
2016, unless the liquid or gel product is contained in a child-resistant
package that, at a minimum, meets the standard for special packaging
as set forth in 15 U.S.C. §§ 1471 through 1476 and 16 CFR § 1700 et
seq."
C.
§ 149-14 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 149-19
140:149
§ 149-19. Prohibition of sale of tobacco products by health-care
institutions.
No health-care institution located in Agawam shall sell or cause to be sold
tobacco products, as defined herein. No retail establishment that operates
or has a health-care institution within it, such as a pharmacy, optician/
optometrist or drug store, shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products, as
defined herein.
§ 149-20. Prohibition of sale of tobacco products by educational
institutions.
No educational institution located in Agawam shall sell or cause to be
sold tobacco products, as defined herein. This includes all educational
institutions as well as any retail establishments that operate on the property
of an educational institution.
§ 149-21. Incorporation of Attorney General Regulation 940 CMR
21.00.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, must comply
with those provisions found at 940 CMR 21.00 ("Sale and Distribution of
Cigarettes, Smokeless Tobacco Products and Electronic Smoking Devices in
Massachusetts").
§ 149-22. Violations and penalties.
It shall be the responsibility of the establishment, permit holder and/or
his or her business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this
regulation. The violator shall receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a fine of $300.
In the case of a second violation within 36 months of the date of
the current violation, a fine of $300, and the tobacco product sales
permit shall be suspended for 14 consecutive business days.
(2)
In the case of three or more violations within a thirty-six-month
period, a fine of $300, and the tobacco product sales permit shall
be suspended for 60 consecutive business days.
(3)
In the case of four violations or repeated, egregious violations of
this regulation within a thirty-six-month period, the Board of Health
shall hold a hearing in accordance with Subsection D of this section
and may permanently revoke a tobacco product sales permit.
(4)
A.
Refusal to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall
result in the suspension of the tobacco product sales permit for 30
consecutive business days.
B.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco products while his or her
C.
§ 149-19 AGAWAM CODE § 149-22
140:150
§ 149-23. Noncriminal disposition.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the
noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, or by
filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
§ 149-24. Separate violations.
Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 149-25. Enforcement.
§ 149-26. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 149-27. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective as of October 1, 2018.
permit is suspended shall be subject to the suspension of all Board-of-
Health-issued permits for 30 consecutive business days.
The Agawam Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent to
suspend or revoke a tobacco product sales permit, which notice shall
contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a
hearing, which date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date
of said notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have
an opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of
the Board of Health's decision and the reasons therefor in writing.
After a hearing, the Agawam Board of Health shall suspend or revoke
the tobacco product sales permit if the Board of Health finds that a
violation of this regulation occurred. For purposes of such suspensions
or revocations, the Board shall make the determination
notwithstanding any separate criminal or noncriminal proceedings
brought in court hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws
for the same offense. All tobacco products, as defined herein, shall be
removed from the retail establishment upon suspension or revocation
of the tobacco product sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco
products, as defined herein, shall constitute a separate violation of this
regulation.
D.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Agawam Board of Health
or its designated agent(s).
A.
Any resident who desires to register a complaint pursuant to the
regulation may do so by contacting the Agawam Board of Health or its
designated agent(s), and the Board shall investigate.
B.
§ 149-22 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 149-27
140:151
Chapter 155
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs and other animals — See Ch. 96.
Loitering — See Ch. 117.
Parades — See Ch. 124.
§ 149-27 AGAWAM CODE § 149-27
140:152
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 155-1. Department of Public Works established.
A Department of Public Works is hereby established for the town, to be
under the control of a Superintendent of the Department. The
Superintendent shall be appointed by the Mayor. This Department shall
include the Water, Highway, Sewer and Engineering Departments.
§ 155-2. Temporary repairs on private streets. [Amended 9-18-1989
by TOR-89-15]
§ 155-3. Establishment and maintenance of sidewalks.
The Town Council may, if in its judgment the public convenience so requires,
establish and grade sidewalks in the streets and may assess the abutters
on such sidewalks 1/2 the cost thereof, the residue to be paid by the town.
No such sidewalk shall be dug up or obstructed without the consent of
the Town Council or the Mayor. The Town Council may, if in its judgment
the public convenience so requires, grade and construct sidewalks and
complete partially constructed sidewalks in any street with or without
edgestones, may cover the same with brick, flat stones, concrete, gravel
or other appropriate material and may assess not more than 1/2 of the
costs proportionally upon the abutters on such sidewalks; but no abutter
Pursuant to MGL C. 40, § 6N, the Agawam Department of Public Works
is authorized to make temporary repairs to private ways and
unaccepted streets that have been open to public use for a minimum of
six years.
A.
Such repairs shall include the filling of holes in the subsurface of such
ways and repairs to the surface materials thereof. Materials for such
repairs, where practical, should be the same as or similar to those used
for the existing surfaces of such ways, but may include surfacing the
ways with bituminous materials, including but not limited to bituminous
concrete.
B.
Drainage, as determined by the Department of Public Works to be
necessary as a result of the repairs, may also be done. Said repairs
need not be requested by a petition of the abutters, but may be initiated
by the Department of Public Works upon the determination that the
repairs are required by public necessity.
C.
There shall be no betterment assessments for these repairs, nor shall a
cash deposit from any abutters be required.
D.
The Town of Agawam shall not be liable on account of any damage
whatsoever caused by such repairs, and MGL C. 84, § 25, shall not
apply. The Town of Agawam shall not be liable to any abutter for any
claim arising out of said repairs.
E.
§ 155-1 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 155-3
140:153
shall be assessed an amount exceeding 1% of the valuation of his abutting
estate as fixed by the last preceding annual assessment for taxes. There
shall be a deduction from the assessment for sidewalks so constructed
with edgestones and covered any amount previously assessed upon the
abutting land and paid for the cost of the construction in any other manner
of such sidewalk. Such deduction shall be made proportionately from the
assessment upon abutters who are owners of the land in respect of which
such former assessments were paid. Such sidewalks when so constructed
and covered shall be maintained at the expense of such town. In estimating
the damage sustained by the construction of such sidewalks, the benefit, if
any, to the property of the party by reason thereof shall be allowed in setoff.
§ 155-4. Excavations.
§ 155-5. Congregating to obstruct free passage prohibited.
Three or more persons shall not stand together or near each other in any
street, sidewalk or on any footwalk in the town so as to obstruct the free
passage for foot passengers, and any persons so standing shall move on
immediately after a request to do so by the Chief of Police or any police
officer.
§ 155-6. Obstructing streets prohibited.
No person, officers or boards having authority to repair or construct
highways or a person acting under the authority of any of them shall dig
up, open or excavate in any street without first obtaining permission, in
writing, so to do from the Department of Public Works and, if the Mayor
so requires, executing and delivering to the town an agreement under
seal to indemnify the town and save it harmless from all loss, cost or
damage caused to it thereby and to replace the material and substances
so dug up or removed to the satisfaction of the Department of Public
Works. Such permission shall state the place where and the manner in
which such opening or excavation may be made. Whoever does so open,
dig up or excavate in any street shall properly guard such opening or
excavation and the substance or material removed therefrom and shall
keep the same properly lighted from sunset until sunrise.
A.
No person shall dig up, cut up or despoil any portion of any street,
except that any owner whose land abuts upon any street may grade or
otherwise beautify such street immediately in front of his own parcel
in such manner as will not interfere with public travel in the spaces in
such street reserved or generally used for such travel.
B.
No person shall allow a horse or vehicle under his control to stand or
be driven in any street in such a manner as to unreasonably obstruct
travel in the same.
A.
No person shall allow any vehicle under his control while not in use to
stand in any street, nor shall he use any portion of any street for storing
the same.
B.
§ 155-3 AGAWAM CODE § 155-6
140:154
§ 155-7. Obstructions near intersections prohibited.
No person shall grow, cause to grow, construct, cause to be constructed or
maintain any shrubs, trees, plants, fences or other things to any height at or
near any intersection of ways within the town which shall obstruct the view
of operators of vehicles passing along the traveled way.
§ 155-8. Depositing certain materials prohibited.
§ 155-9. Water flow from private property onto streets.
§ 155-10. Snow and ice removal; penalty.
No person shall place any chattels whatsoever in or upon any portion of
any street so as to block or obstruct the same.
C.
No person shall hitch or tie or allow his horse or other animal to be
hitched or tied to any tree in any street.
D.
No person shall throw or place or cause to be thrown or placed any
ashes, cinders, garbage, refuse or decaying or other foreign matter in
any street.
A.
No person shall throw or place or cause to be thrown or placed in
any street or upon any sidewalk any glass, broken crockery, scrap iron,
nails, whole or broken bottles or any other article that would be liable
to injure the feet of horses or pedestrians or injure or damage the tires
of bicycles or any other vehicle which as wheels with tires composed in
whole or in part of rubber.
B.
No person shall allow water, drainage or any fluid or other refuse
matter from any sink, sink drain, sewer or cesspool situated on land
which he owns or occupies to flow or run into or over any street.
A.
No person shall allow water from any eaves spout, eaves trough leader
pipe, spout, trench, ditch or other natural or artificial channel which he
owns or which is under his control to discharge onto or upon any street
if the same shall tend to injure such street or make travel therein less
secure or easy.
B.
The tenant or occupant and, in case there is no tenant or occupant,
the owner or persons having the care of any estate abutting upon any
street, lane, court or square within the town where there is a sidewalk
which now is established or set apart as such shall remove, within 24
hours after the ceasing to fall, any snow thereon.
A.
When any snow shall be collected or deposited upon any sidewalk
mentioned in the preceding subsection, either by falling from some
adjacent building or by drifting upon such sidewalk, the tenant or
occupant or the owner or persons having the charge of the estate
abutting upon such sidewalk shall within 24 hours after its being
collected or deposited cause the same to be removed.
B.
§ 155-6 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 155-10
140:155
§ 155-11. Plowing of sidewalks by Department of Public Works.
The Department of Public Works shall have the authority to plow snow from
sidewalks where children are required to walk to school on main arteries,
including both paved and dirt sidewalks.
§ 155-12. Ball playing.
No person shall throw a ball, stone or other missile in, upon or across
any street, except that the Town Council may set apart various parts of
the streets in which persons may play ball under such conditions and
restrictions as it may determine.
§ 155-13. Discharge of firearms across streets prohibited.
No person shall discharge any missile from any air gun or air rifle, slingshot
or other like instrument within, upon, over or across any street.
§ 155-14. Animals crossing sidewalks.
No person shall lead, ride or drive any horse, mule, cow or meat cattle upon
or over any sidewalk except to cross the same.
§ 155-15. Damaging sidewalks and tree belt prohibited; penalty.
[Amended 5-4-1992 by TOR-92-9; 3-6-1996 by TOR-95-10]
Whenever any sidewalk mentioned in Subsection A shall be
encumbered with ice, it shall be the duty of the tenant or occupant
and, in case there is no tenant or occupant, the owner or persons
having the charge of the estate abutting upon such sidewalk to cause
such sidewalk to be made safe and convenient for transit by removing
the ice therefrom or by covering the same with sand or some other
suitable substitute within 24 hours after such sidewalk shall become so
encumbered.
C.
No persons plowing, pushing or shoveling snow or ice from private
parking lots, driveways or sidewalks in or upon any street or public way
shall leave any ridge of ice or snow or other debris upon such public
way as to cause hazardous or dangerous conditions.
D.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $25. Each twenty-four-hour period that said
violation is permitted to continue after receipt of the initial written
notice shall constitute a separate violation and shall be punished by
a fine of not less than $25 per twenty-four-hour period. No additional
written notice need be given for continuing violations. The Agawam
Police Department, the Agawam Department of Public Works and the
Agawam Department of Inspection Services shall be empowered to
enforce the provisions of this section, and they may utilize the
noncriminal disposition procedure provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D, as
amended from time to time. [Amended 2-3-1997 by TOR-96-9]
E.
§ 155-10 AGAWAM CODE § 155-15
140:156
§ 155-16. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of this Article shall be punished by a
fine of not more than $100 and not less than $20.
§ 155-16.1. Alternative proceedings for violations. [Added 6-6-2005
by TOR-2005-3]
No person shall damage any sidewalk owned by the town. Damage
to any sidewalk includes dislodging a portion of the pavement, and/
or cracking and suppressing a portion of the pavement. Any person
violating the provision of this section shall be punished for each offense
with a fine commensurate with a total replacement cost of the damaged
section of the sidewalk.
A.
Sidewalks and tree belts.
This subsection shall not apply to property which is zoned
agricultural and which is actively being utilized for agricultural
and/or horticultural use.
(1)
The tenant or occupant of any real estate in the town which abuts
on any public or private way in the town and, in case there is
no tenant or occupant, the owner of such real estate, shall keep
that portion of the public or private way commonly known as the
"sidewalk" and the "tree belt" mowed and free and clear of all
litter, debris, noxious weeds, brush, any other kind of rubbish and
automobiles and shall maintain the same in a clean and sanitary
manner and also have uninterrupted clear vision at all
intersections.
(2)
B.
Any violation of this chapter, Chapter 155, may, in the discretion the
Inspector of Buildings, or his designee, or any police officer as directed
by the Police Chief or his designee, be enforced by the noncriminal
complaint method for which provision is made, and/or as set forth in
MGL c. 40, § 21D, as amended from time to time, that is, noncriminal
disposition. Fines issued pursuant to § 155-16.1 shall be as follows:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense and each subsequent offense: $100.
A.
Each day on which a violation exists shall constitute and be deemed a
separate offense.
B.
§ 155-15 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 155-16.1
140:157

ARTICLE II
Betterments
§ 155-17. Assessment of costs.
The Town Council is authorized to lay out ways therein and may, at any
time within two years after the passage of an order laying out, relocating,
altering, widening, grading or discontinuing a way and after the work has
been completed or the way has been discontinued, if such order declares
that such action has been taken under the provisions of law authorizing
the assessments of betterments, and if in its opinion any land receives a
benefit or advantage therefrom beyond the general advantage to all land
in the town, determine the value of such benefit or advantage to such
land and assess upon the same a proportional share of the cost of such
laying out, relocation, alteration, widening, grading or discontinuance; but
no assessment shall exceed 1/2 of the amount of such adjudged benefit or
advantage.
§ 155-18. Notification to abutters.
The Town Clerk shall notify all abutters who shall be affected by a vote of
the Town Council which will affect them under the town's Betterment Act.
This notice shall be mailed no less than 30 days before the Council meeting
at which the vote thereon shall be taken. In case of special meetings, two
weeks shall be sufficient.
§ 155-19. Reassessment.
§ 155-20. Surrender of land.
An owner of land abutting on any such way liable to such assessment may
give notice, in writing, to the Town Council before the estimate of damages
is made that he elects to surrender his land, and if the Town Council
adjudges that the public convenience and necessity require the taking of
such abutting estate for the improvements named, it may take the whole
thereof and shall thereupon estimate its value, excluding the benefit or
If such assessment is invalid and has not been paid or has been
recovered back, it may be reassessed by the Town Council to the
amount for which the original assessment ought to have been made,
and it shall be a lien upon the land and shall be collected in the same
manner as reassessed taxes.
A.
The cost so assessed shall include all damages for land and buildings
taken. The damages for land taken shall be fixed at the value thereof
before such laying out, relocation, alteration, widening, grading or
discontinuance and shall also include the value of all buildings on
the land a part of which is taken, deducting therefrom the value of
materials removed and of all buildings or parts of buildings remaining
thereon. Such cost shall be paid in the manner and upon the conditions
required in like proceedings.
B.
§ 155-17 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 155-20
140:159
advantage accruing from such improvements. Such owner shall convey the
estate to the town and may recover therefrom in any action of contract the
value so estimated. The town may sell any portion of such land which is not
needed for such improvements.
§ 155-21. Apportionment of assessment.
If any owner any time before demand gives notice to the Town Council
to apportion the assessment into three equal parts and certify its
apportionment to the assessors, who shall add one of such parts, with
interest from the date of the apportionment, to the annual tax of such land
for each of three years next ensuing. All such assessments which remain
unpaid after they become due shall bear interest until the payment thereof.
§ 155-22. Appeal.
§ 155-23. Assessments made upon leased lands.
If any assessment is made upon land the whole or part of which is leased,
the owner shall pay the assessment and may collect of the lessee an
additional rent for the portion so leased equal to 10% per annum on that
portion of the amount paid which the leased portion bears to the whole
estate after deducting from the whole amount any money received for
damages to such land in excess of what he has necessarily expended
thereon by reason of such damages.
A person who is aggrieved by the doings of the Town Council may
within one year file a petition in the Superior Court for the county in
which the land is situated and after notice to the land shall have a trial
by a jury therein, and upon request of either party the jury shall take a
view.
A.
If the jury does not reduce the assessment, the respondent shall recover
costs, which shall be a lien upon the land and shall be collected in the
same manner as the assessment; but if the jury reduces the assessment,
the petitioner shall recover costs.
B.
§ 155-20 AGAWAM CODE § 155-23
140:160
ARTICLE III
Street Acceptance
[Added 12-18-1978; amended 6-2-1986 by TOR-86-13; 1-19-1999 by
TOR-98-8]
§ 155-24. Procedure adopted.
In accordance with MGL C. 82, the Town of Agawam hereby adopts the
following procedure for the acceptance of streets within the town as public
ways, whereupon the responsibilities for those streets so accepted by the
Town Council shall thereafter rest with the town as set forth in the
Massachusetts General Laws and town ordinances.
§ 155-25. Establishment of Street Acceptance Committee as agent
for Council.
There is hereby established a Street Acceptance Committee, which shall be
the agent of the Town Council, as defined by the Massachusetts General
Laws, for purposes of holding public hearings, making recommendations to
the Town Council and otherwise processing petitions for street acceptance.
The Committee shall be comprised of three Councillors appointed by the
Council President, and the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works. The terms of the Councillors shall be coterminous with their Town
Council terms.
§ 155-26. Initiating acceptance of way.
Owners of land in the town may petition the Town Council for the
acceptance of a street as a public way by filing with the Town Clerk
a petition bearing the signatures of at least 75% of the owners of lots
abutting the way as indicated by the records of the Office of the Assessor.
The Superintendent of Public Works may, with the approval of the Mayor,
petition the Town Council for the acceptance of a street as a public way
without the requirement of a petition bearing the signatures of any abutting
owners. The Planning Board may petition the Town Council for the
acceptance of a street within an approved subdivision as a public way
without the requirement of a petition bearing the signatures of any abutting
owners.
§ 155-27. Adoption of regulations and forms.
The Street Acceptance Committee may adopt, with the approval of the Town
Council, regulations and forms for the street acceptance process. Such
regulations shall be available to the public in the Office of the Town Clerk.
§ 155-24 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 155-27
140:161

ARTICLE IV
Trench Permits
[Added 12-1-2008 by TOR-2008-5]
§ 155-28. Authority to issue trench permits.
Pursuant to Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 82A and 520 CMR 14.00,
as amended from time to time, the Superintendent of Public Works or
his designee is designated as the permitting authority for the issuance of
trench permits in the Town of Agawam. In the issuance of trench permits,
the Superintendent of Public Works or his designee shall follow the
requirements of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 82A and 520 CMR
14.00, as amended from time to time.
§ 155-29. Trench permit fee.
The fee for a trench permit in the Town of Agawam shall be $25. The Town
of Agawam shall be exempt from the payment of trench permit fees under
this article.
§ 155-28 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 155-29
140:163
Chapter 159
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Fees — See Ch. 103.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 175.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 155-29 AGAWAM CODE § 155-29
140:164
ARTICLE I
Authority and Interpretation
§ 159-1. Adoption of rules.
Under the authority vested in the Planning Board of the Town of Agawam
by MGL c. 41, § 81-Q, the Board hereby adopts these rules and regulations
governing the subdivision of land in the Town of Agawam. Such rules and
regulations shall be effective on and after the first day of June 1954. This
authority shall be interpreted according to the directive of MGL c. 30, § 61
and 62.
§ 159-2. Amendment of statute. (Approved 7-18-1972)
Section 2 of Chapter 30 of the Massachusetts General Laws is hereby
amended by inserting after § 60 the following two sections:
"Section 61. All agencies, departments, boards, commissions and
authorities of the commonwealth shall review, evaluate and determine
the impact on the natural environment of all works, projects or
activities conducted by them and shall use all practicable means and
measures to minimize damage to the environment. Unless a clear
contrary intent is manifested, all statutes shall be interpreted and
administered so as to minimize and prevent damage to the
environment. Any determination made by an agency of the
commonwealth shall include a finding describing the environmental
impact, if any, of the project and a finding that all feasible measures
have been taken to avoid or minimize said impact.
"As used in this section and Section 62, damage to the environment'
shall mean any destruction, damage or impairment, actual or probable,
to any of the natural resources of the commonwealth and shall include
but not be limited to air pollution; water pollution; improper sewage
disposal; pesticide pollution; excessive noise; improper operation of
dumping grounds; impairment and eutrophication of rivers, streams,
floodplains, lakes, ponds or other surface or subsurface water
resources; and destruction of seashores, dunes, marine resources,
wetlands, open spaces, natural areas, parks or historic districts or
sites. Damage to the environment shall not be construed to include any
insignificant damage to or impairment of such resources.
"Section 62. No agency, department, board, commission or authority
of the commonwealth or any authority of any political subdivision
thereof shall commence any work, project or activity which may cause
damage to the environment until 60 days after it has published a final
environmental impact report in accordance with the provision of this
section or until 60 days after a public hearing on said report, provided
that research, planning, design and other preliminary work necessary
to describe and evaluate such project for the purposes of this section
may be undertaken.
A.
§ 159-1 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-2
140:165
"An environmental impact report shall contain detailed statements
describing the nature and extent of the proposed work and its
environmental impact; all measures being utilized to minimize
environmental damage; any adverse short-term and long-term
environmental consequences which cannot be avoided should this
work be performed; and alternatives to the proposed action and their
environmental consequences. The preparation of said report shall be
commenced during the initial planning and design phase of any work,
project or activity subject to this section, and the report shall be
so prepared and disseminated as to inform the originating agency,
reviewing agencies, the appropriate regional planning commission, the
Attorney General and the public of the environmental consequences
of state actions and the alternatives thereto prior to any commitment
of state funds and prior to the commencement of the work, project
or activity. All reviewing agencies and any state agency, department,
board, commission, division or authority which has jurisdiction by law
or special expertise with respect to any environmental impact involved
shall affix their written comments to the final impact report. In order
to ensure an interdisciplinary review, the Secretary of Environmental
Affairs shall, in conjunction with any agency involved, jointly approve
the selection of any consultant engaged to prepare the draft or final
impact report.
"The secretaries of the executive officer shall each promulgate rules
and regulations approved by the Secretary of Environmental Affairs
to carry out the purposes of this section which shall be applicable
to all agencies, departments, boards, commissions, authorities or
instrumentalities within each of such executive offices and which shall
conform to the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act,
Public Law 81-190, and amendments thereto. Any draft report, final
report and all written comments required by said regulations shall be
public documents. Said reports shall be submitted to the Secretary of
Environmental Affairs, who shall issue a written statement indicating
whether or not in his judgment said reports adequately and properly
comply with the provisions of this section.
"For the purposes of carrying out the provisions of this section,
funds made available for the purpose of design of or planning or
performing said work, project or activity shall be available and may be
expended for the research, preparation and publication of the reports
required by this section and expenses incidental thereto, and said
funds may be transferred or otherwise may be made available to other
state departments and resource agencies designated by the Secretary
of Environmental Affairs for the purpose of meeting the expenses
incurred in evaluating the draft or final impact report.
"Section 3. Section 61 of Chapter 30 of the Massachusetts General
Laws, inserted by Section 2 of this Act, shall take effect on December
31, 1972, and Section 62 of said Chapter 30, inserted by said Section
2, shall take effect on July 1, 1973."
§ 159-2 AGAWAM CODE § 159-2
140:166
Attention is directed also to the National Environmental Policy Act of
1969, Public Law 91-190.
B.
§ 159-2 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-2
140:167

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 159-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT or SUBDIVIDER — The owner of record of the tract of land to
be subdivided, or his agent duly authorized in writing.
BOARD — The Planning Board of the Town of Agawam.
LOT — An area of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used
or available for use as the site of a principal building and its accessory
buildings. A "lot" within a subdivision shall mean such an area whose
boundaries are recorded and which area has no interior division.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land into two or more lots in
such manner as to require provisions for one or more new ways not in
existence when the Subdivision Control Law17 became effective in the Town
of Agawam to furnish access for vehicular traffic to one or more such lots,
and shall include resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdivision of the land or territory subdivided.
§ 159-4. Plan believed not to require approval.
Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds
or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of land and who believes
that his plan does not require approval under the Subdivision Control
Law18 may submit his plan, two originals and two copies, minimum,
and application Form A19 to the Planning Board, accompanied by the
necessary evidence to show that the plan does not require approval.
Said person shall file, by delivery or registered mail, a notice with the
Town Clerk stating the date of submission for such determination and
accompanied by a copy of said application. A filing fee of $50 plus
$20 per lot shall accompany the application. [Amended 4-5-1990;
9-18-2008]
A.
Said plan shall be at a scale no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet and
shall be 24 inches by 36 inches or 18 inches by 24 inches in size and
shall show all existing structures and their relationship to the proposed
property lines. The plan shall be of such sheet size and layout so as to
conform to the regulations of the Registry of Deeds. A block space, 3.5
inches wide by four inches high, shall be available adjacent to the right
on the bottom margin for the endorsement of the Planning Board.
B.
If the Board determines that the plan does not require approval, it shall
without a public hearing and within 21 days of the submission endorse
C.
17.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG, inclusive.
18.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
19.Editor's Note: Form A is on file in the Planning Department offices.
§ 159-3 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-4
140:169
§ 159-5. Submission of plans required; consent of Board required.
on the plan the words "Planning Board Approval Under Subdivision
Control Law Not Required." Said plan shall be returned to the
applicant, and the Board shall notify the Town Clerk of its actions.
If the Board determines that the plan does require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, it shall within 21 days of submission of said
plan so inform the applicant and return the plan. The Board shall also
notify the Town Clerk of its determination.
D.
Any plan so endorsed shall be recorded with the Registry of Deeds
within six months. Proof of recording shall be submitted to the Planning
Board. Failure to record the plan within six months and provide proof of
recording will negate the action of the Board. In addition, no building
permit will be issued until a certified copy of the registered plan is
received by the Agawam Department of Public Works. [Amended
3-19-1992; 6-18-1992]
E.
No person shall make a subdivision within the Town, or proceed with
the improvement or sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of
ways, or the installation of municipal services therein, unless and until
a preliminary and definitive plan involved therefrom of such subdivision
has been submitted to and approved by the Planning Board as
hereinafter provided.
A.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any
lot in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the Town, without the consent of
the Planning Board. The consent of the Board shall be conditional upon
conformance with the applicable zoning ordinances20 and the provision
of adequate ways and utilities furnishing access to each site of such
building the same as otherwise required for lots in a subdivision.
B.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 159-4 AGAWAM CODE § 159-5
140:170
ARTICLE III
Plan Submission and Approval Procedure
§ 159-6. Preliminary plan.
General.
An application for approval of a preliminary plan of a subdivision
shall be submitted to the Planning Board by the applicant, who
is defined in § 159-3. The submission of such a preliminary plan
will enable the subdivider, the Board, other municipal agencies
and owners of property abutting the subdivision to discuss and
clarify the problems of such subdivision before a definitive plan is
prepared.
(1)
A definitive plan will not be reviewed unless a preliminary plan has
been submitted and subsequently approved. Rules and regulations
in effect at the time of the definitive submission shall apply unless
the definitive plan is submitted within seven months of the date of
preliminary submission, in which case the rules and regulations in
effect on the earlier date shall still apply.
(2)
A.
Method of submission.
An application for approval of a preliminary plan shall be submitted
within 14 days prior to the first regular meeting of the Board for
that month. The application shall be placed on the agenda for
review on the first regular meeting of the month. If the application
is deemed incomplete, the Board, by vote, may reject the plan, and
no further action shall be taken by the Board until the applicant
resubmits an amended application. The decision shall be filed with
the Town Clerk; the applicant shall be notified by certified mail.
(1)
Notice shall be given to the Town Clerk when the preliminary
application is filed with the Planning Board. A filing fee of $250 plus
$25 per lot or any part thereof shall accompany the application.
Payment shall be made by check payable to the Town of Agawam.
Should the application be determined to be incomplete, the fee
shall be returned and all privileges shall be voided. [Amended
9-18-2008]
(2)
B.
Contents of application.
Preliminary submissions shall include the following:
(a) A completed Form B.21
(b) A statement of interest in the land by the applicant.22
(1)
C.
21.Editor's Note: Form B is on file in the Planning Department offices.
22.Editor's Note: The statement of interest is on file in the Planning Department offices.
§ 159-6 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-6
140:171
A location map of the site and surroundings sufficient to locate
the site from existing intersections, pump stations, etc. The
scale shall be one inch equals 1,200 feet.
(c)
An environmental study. The environmental study need not be
compiled by a professional agency. The applicant may make the
observation and determinations himself, with such assistance
from engineers, nursery men, etc. as is necessary for accuracy
in the technical areas. Photographs to support the
observations should be included. The short form contained in
Chapter 30, § 62, of the Massachusetts Environmental Act may
be used for guidance. The study shall be presented in report
form with drawings or maps as needed for clarification. The
study shall contain:
The relationship of the proposed development to the
Master Plan, Zoning Map, policies and controls for the
affected area.
[1]
Existing topography, water table, drainage features,
natural geologic elements, stands or groves of trees, shrub
rows or other wildlife habitats, scenic qualities, easements
and rights above, on or under the land and the current
nature of man's use of the area; a topographic sheet with
existing and finished contours at two-foot intervals; spot
elevations as needed. Contour lines shall extend at a
minimum 30 feet beyond the property lines.
[2]
The effect of the proposed development, both positive and
negative, upon the environment, including consideration
of those elements in Subsection C(1)(d)[2] above; visual,
including but not limited to aesthetic considerations and
signs and architectural elevations; traffic, pedestrian and
vehicular, within and in the surrounding areas servicing
the proposal; solid waste containment and disposal; air
and water quality; also radiation and hazardous
substances control; historic architectural and
archaeological preservation; and outdoor recreation, if
involved in existing or proposed development. Does the
proposal involve a filing under the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40?
[3]
(d)
A preliminary plan, which shall include:
A lot survey with existing easements, abutters and zone
lines; existing streets abutting the proposal (type of street,
see § 159-8B).
[1]
A topographic plan showing:
Existing contours at two-foot intervals extending at
least 30 feet beyond the property lines.
[a]
[2]
(e)
§ 159-6 AGAWAM CODE § 159-6
140:172
§ 159-7. Definitive plan.
Environmental elements, including such things as the
following: all areas regulated by the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, shall be
verified by the Agawam Conservation Commission
through a determination of applicability; existing
stone walls, fences, existing buildings, trees with a
diameter greater than eight inches measured five feet
above the ground, shrub rows, rock ridges and
outcroppings, water bodies and any other noteworthy
feature of the land.
[b]
Proposed street and lot lines sketched in; spot grades
on the center lines of streets (high spots, low point,
intersection); indication of the types of streets. (See
Article IV, Design Standards.)
[c]
[3] Indication of sewerage, water and surface water systems.
(f) An attested copy of the deed of the property.
Plans shall be presented in one original plus four copies, minimum.
Other documents shall be presented in two copies. One set will be
returned to the applicant as endorsed.
(2)
Action of the Board. The Board shall confer with any boards or
commissions which have an interest in the proposal. Within 45 days
after submission of a preliminary plan, the Board shall approve,
approve with amendments or disapprove the plan. The applicant shall
be notified by certified mail. The Town Clerk also shall be notified.
In the case of disapproval, the Board shall state in detail its reasons
therefor. Section 81S of Chapter 40 of the Massachusetts General
Laws shall apply. The Planning Board shall also notify abutters to the
proposal of the submission and shall have the submission available for
their review at the Town Hall.
D.
Timing.
No person shall submit a definitive plan of a subdivision to the
Planning Board for approval unless a preliminary plan has been
approved by the Board. The definitive plan shall not vary
substantially from the approved preliminary plan.
(1)
The definitive plan shall conform to the applicable Zoning
Ordinance.
(2)
A.
Method of submission.
An application for approval of a definitive plan shall be submitted
within 14 days prior to the second regular meeting of the Board for
the month.
(1)
B.
§ 159-6 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-7
140:173
The application shall be placed on the agenda for submission
review on the second regular meeting of the month. If the
application is deemed incomplete, the applicant will be notified by
certified mail that the plans will not be further reviewed and that
after the required public hearing the Board, by vote, may reject the
plans due to improper submission.
(2)
If, prior to the public hearing, the applicant completes the
application, the amended submission shall be accompanied by a
request for an appropriate extension of time.
(3)
The applicant shall file by delivery or registered mail a notice with
the Town Clerk stating the date of application for such approval
and accompanied by a copy of the complete application (Form C).23
(4)
A filing fee of $500 plus $75 per lot or any part thereof shall
accompany the application. Payment shall be by check payable to
the Town of Agawam. [Amended 9-18-2008]
(5)
Land which is to be secured by conservation easement or deeded
to the Town as public open space and is so indicated on the plan
shall not be subject to the acreage filing fee.
(6)
Contents of application. Submission of a definitive plan application shall
include the following:
(1) A statement of interest in the land by the applicant.24
(2) An attested copy of the deed of the property.
An updated environmental study (reference to previous study and
to include any changes which have occurred in the time interval).
(3)
Final plans and specifications as required:
A title sheet showing the index to drawings and a location map
at a scale of one inch equals 1,200 feet.
(a)
A lot survey with road layout and lot lines suitable for filing
with the Registry of Deeds. See Subsection G(2). Roadway
layout, roadway center line, and property lines shall be tied
into the Agawam Coordinate System. Coordinate traverse
point locations can be obtained from the Engineering Division.
After the definitive plan is approved, the applicant shall
provide the Engineering Division with a computer disk
containing the following: Coordinates of roadway layout and
center line data, property line data, and all plan and profile
drawings. The computer disk shall be supplied in an AutoCAD
or DXF format, unless otherwise specified by the City Engineer.
[Amended 12-5-1996]
(b)
(4)
C.
23.Editor's Note: Form C is on file in the Planning Department offices.
24.Editor's Note: The statement of interest is on file in the Planning Department offices.
§ 159-7 AGAWAM CODE § 159-7
140:174
A topographic sheet with existing and finished contours at twofoot
intervals; spot elevations as needed. Contour lines shall
extend at a minimum 30 feet beyond the property lines. Center
lines of roads with stations and elevations shall be shown.
Where septic tanks and leach fields are being used, areas of
leach fields shall be shown by spot elevations. The general
location of proposed buildings shall also appear on this plan,
and the finished grade of land at the four corners.
(c)
Road layouts and profiles, including those of all utilities. (See
Article IV.) Curb cuts and driveways within the street line shall
be shown.
(d)
(e) Detail sheets as needed.
(5) A statement of the time-development sequence.
A plan showing the sequence of development. All bonding must
conform to these divisions.
(6)
A Town-development relationship study, for information purposes
only:
The impact on utilities and services which will be required to
service the development.
(a)
The tentative sale price of houses, type of housing and square
footage of finished living space per unit.
(b)
(7)
A report of test borings and soil samples, water table tests and soil
absorption tests (percolation tests):
Borings and soil samples. Borings and soil tests shall be made
by a reputable soil testing firm approved by the Town Engineer.
Borings shall be made in general every 250 feet along the
center line of each roadway or closer if required by the Town
Engineer and in easements at the discretion of the Town
Engineer. The borings shall extend to a depth of one foot below
the deepest utility. The borings should be shown on the profiles
of the construction plans and should indicate the type of soil
and the depths at which they are encountered, the standard
penetration resistance (N) of each type of soil and the elevation
of the water table. In addition, soil samples shall be taken at
the street borings of the material which will form the subgrade
of the proposed roadways. A sieve analysis shall be made of
these samples with the percent passing the one-half-inch, No.
4, No. 10, No. 40 and No. 200 sieves being reported. Also, the
liquid limit, plasticity index and group index of the samples
shall be determined and reported. The developer may provide
test pit logs from backhoe-dug test pits at the above-described
locations. These test pits will be provided at the developer's
(a)
(8)
§ 159-7 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-7
140:175
option and will not necessarily relieve him of the requirements
for penetration tests and samples noted above.
Soil absorbency tests and water table observation tests.
All percolation tests (soil absorbency tests) shall be made
at the final location and elevation of the proposed leaching
field and wherever else determined by the Town Engineer.
All tests will only be performed during the period of April
1 to June 15, provided that all frost is out of the ground.
Soil with a percolation rate of over 15 minutes per inch
shall not be suitable for septic tanks and leach fields. Soil
with a percolation rate of over one minute per inch shall be
unsuitable for subsurface leaching fields and street drains.
A groundwater observation hole a minimum of seven feet
in depth must be measured from the elevation of the
property after finished grading. All tests must be made in
the presence of the Town Engineer or his agent. Where the
test is to be made in filled ground for sanitary sewerage
disposal purposes, the fill must be in place at least six
months prior to the date on which the test is made. Tests
made under this section may be utilized by the Board of
Health, provided that any additional requirements of that
Board have been complied with.
[1]
Plans shall be presented in two sets of original or
reproducible drawings and a minimum of five sets of
copies. All other documents shall be presented in three
copies. One set of original plans and one copy of other
documents will be returned to the applicant as endorsed.
[Amended 9-18-2008]
[2]
(b)
Preparation of definitive plan. The definitive plan shall be prepared by
an engineer and/or surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly drawn in
black India ink upon Mylar. The plan shall be at a scale of one inch
equals 40 feet or such other scale as the Board may accept to show
true bearings, curve data and accurate dimensions. Sheet sizes shall
not exceed twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches. The definitive plan
shall contain the following information:
(1) The subdivision name, boundaries, North point, date and scale.
The name and address of the record owner, subdivider and
engineer or surveyor who shall indicate by stamp registration in
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(2)
The names of all abutters as they appear on the most recent tax
list.
(3)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, lots, easements
and public or common areas within the subdivision. (The proposed
names of proposed streets shall be shown in pencil until they
(4)
D.
§ 159-7 AGAWAM CODE § 159-7
140:176
have been approved by the Board.) Contents of titles, covenants
and easements shall be reproduced in full either on the plan or
appended thereto.
Sufficient data to determine the location, direction and length of
every street and way line, lot line and boundary line and to
establish these lines on the ground.
(5)
The locations of all permanent monuments properly identified as to
whether existing or proposed.
(6)
The locations, names and present widths of streets bounding,
approaching or within reasonable proximity of the subdivision.
(7)
Suitable space to record the action of the Board and the signatures
of the members of the Board (or officially authorized person). The
block shall be three and five-tenths by seven (3.5 x 7) inches,
minimum.
(8)
Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals as
required by the Board.
(9)
Profiles on the center lines of proposed streets at a horizontal scale
of one inch equals 40 feet and vertical scale of one inch equals four
feet, or such other scales acceptable to the Board. All elevations
shall refer to the Town datum. A minimum of one bench mark shall
be provided based upon Town (United States Geological Survey,
National Geodetic Vertical Datum) datum.
(10)
The proposed layout of storm drainage, public water supply and
public sewage disposal systems. If wells and/or septic tanks and
leach fields are intended to be utilized, these shall be shown by
general indication of location with spot elevations on the finished
grading sheet. The Board of Health reserves the right to make final
determination concerning location and specifications of private
water and sewage systems.
(11)
Review by Board of Health as to suitability of the land.
The Planning Board shall, within 10 days after submission of a plan,
consult with the Board of Health. If the Board of Health is in doubt
as to whether any of the land in the subdivision can be used as
building sites without injury to the public health, it shall so notify
the Planning Board, in writing, within 30 days. Any approval of
the plan by the Planning Board shall then only be given on the
condition that the lots or land as to which such doubt exists shall
not be built upon without prior consent of the Board of Health, and
shall endorse on the plan such condition, specifying the lots or land
to which said condition applies.
(1)
The data obtained in § 159-7C(7) shall be submitted by the
Planning Board to the Board of Health for its review.
(2)
E.
§ 159-7 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-7
140:177
Any lot so located that it cannot be served by a connection to the
municipal sewer system shall be provided with a septic tank and
drain field satisfactory to the Board of Health.
(3)
Public hearings. Before approval of a definitive plan is given, a public
hearing shall be held by the Planning Board. Notice of such hearing
shall be given by the Board at least 14 days prior thereto by advertising
in an official publication of, or in a newspaper of general circulation
in, the Town of Agawam. A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the
applicant and to all owners of land abutting the subdivision and within
500 feet of it, as appearing in the most recent tax list. A petition
for a change of zone when necessary shall be entered and heard
concurrently with the subdivision approval hearing if the Council has
referred a zone change request back to the Board. The Planning Board
may notify the Pioneer Valley Planning Commission (PVPC) and
abutting communities if the proposal would have regional significance.
F.
Action of the Board; approval or disapproval.
Board action.
The Planning Board shall confer with any boards or
commissions which have an interest in the proposal. The action
of the Board in respect to such plan shall be by vote. The
certificate of such action shall be filed with the Town Clerk and
sent by registered mail to the applicant.
(a)
After the public hearing as required above, the Board shall
approve or, if the plan does not comply with the Subdivision
Control Law or the rules and regulations of the Planning Board
or the recommendation of the Board of Health or its agent,
shall approve with modification or disapprove such plan. In the
event of disapproval, the Planning Board shall state in detail
wherein the plan does not conform to the rules and regulations
of the Board or to the recommendation of the Board of Health
or its agent, and the Board shall revoke its disapproval and
approve the plan which, amended, conforms to such rules and
regulations or recommendations. Final approval, if granted,
shall be on the condition that the plan meets approval under
the Wetlands Act, MGL c. 131, § 40.
(b)
Final approval, if granted, shall be endorsed on the original
drawing of the definitive plan by the signatures of a majority
of the Board, but not until the statutory twenty-day appeal
period has elapsed following the filing of the certificate of the
action of the Board with the Town Clerk, and said Clerk has
notified the Board that no appeal has been filed. After the
definitive plan has been approved and endorsed, the applicant
shall furnish the Board with three extra endorsed lot layout
sheets and the book and page of the Registry of Deeds (and/or
Land Court) where such plan is recorded.
(c)
(1)
G.
§ 159-7 AGAWAM CODE § 159-7
140:178
Rescission of approval.
A covenant filed with the Registry of Deeds and described in
Subsection H below shall contain the following statement: "The
construction of all ways and the installation of all municipal
services shall be completed in accordance with the applicable
rules and regulations of the Board within ________ months from
date of endorsement. Failure to so comply shall automatically
rescind approval of this plan."
(a)
Time shall be determined from the time-development
sequence.
(b)
Any bond allowed under Subsection H below shall be drawn
to accomplish the intent and purpose of this section. Promptly,
the applicant shall furnish the Planning Board with the book
and page of the Registry of Deeds (and/or Land Court) wherein
the covenant is recorded.
(c)
(2)
Performance guaranty. Before endorsement of approval on the
definitive plan, the Board shall require the guaranty of installation of
all work required by this regulation which shall be performed by the
applicant or his agent by a covenant running with the land which shall
be filed with the Registry of Deeds, or by posting of bond or depositing
moneys with the Town Treasurer.
Covenant. [See Subsection G(2) above.]
Such covenant shall state that no lot in the subdivision shall be
conveyed other than by mortgage deed and no building shall
be erected thereon until the improvements specified in the
regulations are constructed and installed so as to serve the lots
adequately. Such condition shall be endorsed upon the plan
or contained in a separate vote or agreement which shall be
referred to on the plan and recorded in the Registry of Deeds.
When the applicant has completed the required improvements
specified in the regulations, including the documents for street
acceptance (Subsection J), for any lots in a subdivision, he
may request a release of the covenant for said lots. If the
improvements have been completed to the satisfaction of the
Board, the Board will then execute and deliver to the applicant
such release, which shall be in the form for recording in the
Registry of Deeds. The Planning Board may require a deposit
of security (cash only) and agreement to guarantee the
performance of the work until the lots are improved.
Thereafter the conditions relating to such lots so released shall
terminate.
(a)
The applicant shall furnish the Board with one copy of the
recorded covenant.
(b)
(1)
(2) Bond.
H.
§ 159-7 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-7
140:179
The applicant may elect to post a performance bond for part
or all of the work to be accomplished according to the plan
showing sequence of development. The performance bond and/
or deposit money shall be an amount determined by the Board
to be sufficient to cover the cost of all improvements specified
in these regulations for the division of work and as described in
a related bond agreement. All surety bonds shall be submitted
to the Counsel from the Planning Board for approval as to
form prior to submission to the Town Treasurer for approval
as to sufficiency and custody. Bonds shall be written for the
time required as specified in the time-sequence of development
statement and related bond agreement.
(a)
Pump station; utility services; binding of corporations.
If a pump station is included in the definitive plan, this
work shall be secured separately and completed as to
operational capacity, standby power and warning system
before a covenant relating to any lots shall be released.
[1]
The utility services, gravel base and base coat of blacktop
shall be accomplished under covenant, cash security or a
security bond (such bond in an amount twice the amount
of cash security needed). The remainder of the work shall
be secured by cash security or by a security bond (such
bond in an amount twice the amount of cash security
needed). The amount of security specified shall include
reasonable attorney's fees and related engineering costs.
[2]
Corporate owners shall produce proper authority for the
signer of the performance agreement to bind the
corporation, and the corporation major stockholder shall
bind himself personally to the terms of the performance
agreement.
[3]
(b)
Extension of time. If the time schedule is altered, notice must be
given to the Planning Board which, at its discretion, may extend
the time of completion, provided that any securities then held by
the Town must be reviewed and increased as necessary to cover
any increased cost of improvements. As part of the increased costs,
the cost increment due to inflation of construction costs shall be
added to the bond or cash security posted by the applicant. The
Engineering News Record Construction Cost or similar index most
accurately reflecting Agawam’s liability, as determined by the City
Engineer, will be used to arrive at the increased construction cost.
[Amended 12-5-1996]
(3)
Upon request, partial release of securities shall be made upon
acceptance by the Board of the work completed.
(4)
§ 159-7 AGAWAM CODE § 159-7
140:180
Building lot bond. A performance bond will be required of
contractors or other parties constructing residences upon vacant
lots where curbs, sidewalks, treebelts and other municipal facilities
have been placed at the lot frontage. The requirements for this
bond shall conform to the applicable provisions of Subsection H(2)
of these regulations. The bond amount shall be based upon the
potential damage of Town facilities plus administrative costs. It
shall be the responsibility of the developer to ensure that all
permitted but uncompleted residences existing in the subdivision
at the time of subdivision bond release have proper building lot
bonds.
(5)
Inspection fee. [Added 3-21-1991]
There shall be a fee instituted to pay for the costs of inspection.
The fee shall be based upon the linear footage of roadway,
water lines, sewer lines and drainage lines. The footage shall
be as measured on the approved definitive plans. Any
substantial increase in constructed footages over the plan
footage shall result in a prorated increase in fee. Roadways
shall be measured along the center line, from its beginning
intersection with an existing street layout line or other
beginning point to the final intersection with another street or
existing layout line, so as to encompass all proposed rights-ofway.
Culs-de-sac shall be measured on the basis of a center
line extending straight through the center of the cul-de-sac to
the far edge of the layout. Water line connections and building
sewers in the right-of-way will not be included in the
measurement for fee determination, except where their length
exceeds 40 feet.
(a)
The unit rate of inspection fee levied shall be $1.28 per linear
foot measured on each of the four categories cited above.
The total inspection fee shall be equal to the unit rate times
the total footage of each line category of inspection (roadway,
water, sewer and drain lines) as measured by the City
Engineer. The fees described above must be paid prior to
the commencement of construction, but these fees need only
be paid beforehand for the particular phase of work to be
undertaken, e.g., roadway, sewer, water or drain. When
warranted by inflation or other factors, the unit inspection fee
will be increased as proposed by the Agawam Department of
Public Works and approved by the Planning Board. [Amended
9-19-2013]
(b)
(6)
Notification of completion. Upon completion of the subdivision, the
applicant shall notify the Planning Board that the subdivision is ready
for final inspection with respect to the removal of the bond.
I.
J. Documents for acceptance of street by Council.
§ 159-7 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-7
140:181
Upon completion of the subdivision, the applicant shall provide
the Town with an as-built plan suitable for presenting to the Town
Council for acceptance of the street. Remaining securities held
by the Town will not be released until an as-built plan has been
certified by the Board as completed for submission to the Council.
(1)
The applicant shall provide the Town with a standard hold-harmless
agreement regarding any claims created by virtue of any actions
taken by the developer and a statement from the applicant that
he gives up the right to any claims he may hold within the
development.
(2)
§ 159-7 AGAWAM CODE § 159-7
140:182
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 159-8. Streets.
Location and alignment.
All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the
opinion of the Board, they will provide safe vehicular travel and
discourage nonterminal traffic and excessive speed. Due
consideration shall also be given by the subdivider to the
attractiveness of the street layout in order to obtain the maximum
livability and amenity of the subdivision.
(1)
The proposed streets shall conform to the master or study plan
when adopted in whole or in part by the Board.
(2)
Provision satisfactory to the Board shall be made for the proper
projection of streets, or for access to adjoining property which is
not yet subdivided.
(3)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted.
(4)
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than
60°.
(5)
The minimum distance between adjacent parallel streets is 300 feet
at intersections. This provision shall include streets on both sides
of the street intersected. There shall be no offsets at intersections
with four or more legs. [Amended 3-21-1991]
(6)
No new streets shall be designed so as to create zoning violations.
[Added 4-5-1990]
(7)
A.
Type of streets.
Any proposed street shall be indicated on the plans as being one of
the following classes:
Place: These streets shall be not over 500 feet in length, unless
otherwise allowed by the Board, with no allowance for future
extension. A maximum average daily traffic (ADT) of 100
vehicles per day will be allowed for a street to be classified as
a place.
(a)
Lane: The major purpose of these streets shall be to provide
access to lots. They would be streets not subject to nonterminal
traffic. The ADT for this type of street would be between 100
and 400 vehicles per day.
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 159-8 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-8
140:183
Subcollector: The ADT for this type of street would be between
400 and 1,000 vehicles per day. For the most part this type of
street will serve several places or lanes.
(c)
Collector: The ADT for this type of street would be between
1,000 and 3,000 vehicles per day.
(d)
Arterial: The ADT for this type of street would be over 3,000
vehicles per day.
(e)
The ADT of a street shall be determined by applying a factor of
10 vehicles per day per lot served either directly or indirectly by
the street plus an allowance for through traffic where applicable.
The classification of each street in a subdivision and an estimate
of its ADT should be included in or with the plans. The Planning
Board reserves the right to make the final decision regarding the
classification of a street and its estimated ADT. Consideration must
be given to future traffic from undeveloped land which would be
served by the proposed street system.
(2)
C. Design requirements. See Table 4.1.25
Intersections. The intersection of places and lanes with other streets
shall have a property line radius of 15 feet and a curbline radius of
25 feet. The intersections of all other streets shall have a property
line radius of 25 feet and a curb radius of 35 feet. The Planning
Board reserves the right to increase these radii wherever it may deem
necessary for public safety. Maximum grade allowed within 100 feet
of an intersection, measured from the outer gutter line, is 2.5%.
[Amended 3-21-1991]
D.
Dead-end streets. [Amended 3-15-2001]
“Dead-end streets” for the purpose of these regulations is a street
meeting the design criteria for either a place, lane, subcollector,
collector, or arterial which has only one means of access/egress.
(1)
Dead-end streets shall not be longer than 500 feet measured from
the nearest intersecting through street unless, in the opinion of the
Board, a greater length is necessitated by topography or other local
conditions.
(2)
In order for a street not to be considered a dead-end street, there
shall be at least two means of egress on to through streets. The
two means of access/egress shall be separated by the distance of at
least 300 feet.
(3)
Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end with a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet
and a property line diameter of at least 120 feet.
(4)
E.
25.Editor's Note: Table 4.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-8 AGAWAM CODE § 159-8
140:184
§ 159-9. Typical cross section.
A typical cross section can be found in Figure 4.2.26
§ 159-10. Easements.
§ 159-11. Sewerage.
(5) Minimum gutter grades on culs-de-sac will be 1.00%.
Easements for proposed or future utilities across lots or centered on
rear or side lot lines shall be provided and shall be at least 20 feet wide
with provisions made for access thereto.
A.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way
30 feet in width shall be provided. In addition to providing for
construction, maintenance and access, said easements shall contain
flowage rights. In the event that a stream is of a seasonal nature or the
exact course cannot be determined, then total flowage rights across the
land in question shall be provided.
B.
When, in the opinion of the Planning Board, pedestrianways or bicycle
paths should be provided to connect with adjacent land, an easement
(or deed) shall be granted to the Town for such purpose. To the greatest
extent possible, pedestrianway easements shall coincide with those of
underground utilities.
C.
Wherever possible, sanitary sewers shall be installed to serve a
proposed subdivision. The sewers shall be designed so that the velocity
of the flow will be at least two feet per second during periods of peak
flow. The sizing of sanitary sewers shall be as specified in the Sanitary
Sewer Study for the Town of Agawam, 1972, by Tighe & Bond and/or
as approved by the Town Engineer. The total design of the system shall
also meet with the approval of the Town Engineer.
A.
In areas where sanitary sewers are not presently available but where
provisions are made for their future construction in the Sanitary Sewer
Study and the Town's capital budget program, then a capped sanitary
system, including laterals, shall be installed.
B.
Sewage pumping stations or lift stations, where necessary and allowed,
shall meet with the approval of the Town Engineer. In general these
stations will only be allowed where called for in the Sanitary Sewer
Study. In some cases stations other than those shown in the study will
be allowed if it can be demonstrated that the station will be able to be
eliminated by trunk sewer construction in the foreseeable future. The
costs of operating and maintaining a station shall not be assumed by
C.
26.Editor's Note: Figure 4.2 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-8 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-11
140:185
§ 159-12. Drainage.
the Town until one year from the date of completion of the last house in
the last section of the subdivision.
The sewer lateral to each lot shall be shown on the plans. During the
time the applicant is responsible for the station he shall enter into an
agreement with the Town of Agawam relative to its maintenance and
operation.
D.
A system of drains shall be installed to collect stormwater from the
proposed streets and lots and to transmit the water to a point where it
may be discharged in a natural watercourse or stream. The drains shall
be designed to have a minimum velocity at design flow of three feet
per second and a maximum velocity of 10 feet per second. The sizing of
storm drains and culverts shall be as specified in the Report on Storm
Drainage for the Town of Agawam by Tighe & Bond, 1972, and/or as
approved by the Town Engineer.
A.
In general, surface water from the lots shall not be deposited directly
into the ways. The area within the setback line may be graded to
drain toward the street line. All other surface water from individual
lots shall be handled insofar as possible within the lots themselves.
Developers shall provide for lot surface drainage by a system separate
from drainage of the street, by the use of swales, culverts, retention
ponds, yard drains and piping, riprapped outlets at the water body,
etc., in a manner which shall protect the natural water table unless the
lowering of the water table is necessary for the health of the occupants.
Strict attention shall be paid to the relationship of leaching fields to
surrounding grading. Surface water systems shall not connect into the
road drainage system except by permission of the Board, in which case
such condition shall be noted on the approved plan. The total design of
the system shall also meet with the approval of the Town Engineer.
B.
Where, in the opinion of the Town Engineer and/or Planning Board,
the discharge of stormwater from a subdivision will alter the character
of a watercourse to overflow its banks (confines), then the applicant
will be required to submit drainage and flowage easements along said
watercourse to a point where it is determined by the Town Engineer
and/or Planning Board that the effect of the stormwater drainage
discharge will have a negligible effect on the watercourse. The
easements and flowage rights shall be of such width to cover the extent
of the suspected flooding. These easements and flowage rights will be
required both within and outside of the boundaries of the proposed
subdivision. The total design of the system shall also meet with the
approval of the Town Engineer.
C.
All subdivisions shall be constructed in conformance with the Town
Storm Drainage Ordinance.27 Detention ponds will be utilized as
D.
27.Editor's Note: See Art. VII of Ch. 175, Water and Sewers.
§ 159-11 AGAWAM CODE § 159-12
140:186
required, and each detention pond will be fenced except as otherwise
required by the Department of Public Works. Construction standards
shall comply with Department of Public Works Standards. No dry wells
or leaching fields for the underground disposal of stormwater will be
allowed. No stormwater holding ponds without positive surface outlets
shall be allowed.
Lot grading plan procedures. The Town of Agawam requires the
following procedure to be followed for lot grading plans for all
subdivisions approved after January 1, 2004. [Added 3-4-2004;
amended 1-19-2006]
Review scope. This review/approval process will address drainage
and runoff concerns for the lot in question, adjacent lots, and
the subdivision as a whole only. The elevation of the foundation
is reviewed for comparison to adjacent grades, and generally for
comparison to adjacent homes. This review does not address the
constructability of the foundation.
(1)
Procedure overview.
Step 1: Lot grading plan approval. The owner's engineer/
surveyor submits information for review and approval to
Agawam DPW Engineering. It is hoped that the owner is part
of this process in order to expedite Step 2.
(a)
Step 2: Builder/owner sign-off. The owner and builder send a
letter to DPW indicating that the approved lot grading plan will
be complied with during construction. The owner/builder signoff,
including all information shown in the sample letter, must
be forwarded to DPW within one week after Step 1 is complete.
The white form will be forwarded from DPW to the Building
Department for the building permit after this step is complete.
(b)
Step 3: Construction field check. The builder/owner will
contact DPW Engineering to schedule a field check on the top
of foundation wall to ensure compliance with the approved lot
grading plan. The fee for this inspection is $70. The builder/
owner must allow a forty-eight-hour window for DPW to
perform the field check. DPW is available Monday through
Friday 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. except holidays. The builder will
be contacted by Agawam DPW with the results of the field
check. Failure by the builder to comply with the approved lot
grading plan will result in DPW notifying the Planning Board.
The Planning Board will then request the Building Department
to issue a stop-work order for the lot until a resolution can be
agreed upon.
(c)
Step 4: Upon completion of construction and prior to a
certificate of occupancy being issued by the Inspector of
Buildings, the builder/owner will submit an as-built plan to
(d)
(2)
E.
§ 159-12 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-12
140:187
§ 159-13. Water.
§ 159-14. Other utilities.
Underground electric and telephone lines and gas mains, including service
connections, shall be shown on the plans. The location of streetlighting
standards shall be indicated on the plans and the lighting shall be of a
type adopted for use in the Town of Agawam. The location and design of
streetlighting systems shall meet the requirements of the Department of
Public Works. Letters from respective utility companies shall be submitted
to the Board indicating their approval of the utility design.
§ 159-15. Open spaces.
Before approval of a plan, the Board may also in proper cases require the
plan to show a park or parks suitably located for playground or recreation
purposes or for providing light and air. The park or parks shall not be
unreasonable in area in relation to the land being subdivided and to the
prospective uses of such land. The Board may, by appropriate endorsement
on the plan, require that no building be erected upon such park or parks
without its approval.
the Inspection Services Department. The as-built plan shall
be prepared by a registered land surveyor. Failure to submit
the as-built plan shall result in a hold on the issuing of the
certificate of occupancy. If the as-built plan shows deviation
from the lot grading plan, the builder/owner will be required
to receive approval for the new plan from the Planning Board
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy.
Water mains and appurtenances such as hydrants, valves, blowoffs and
air release valves shall be installed to serve all lots on each street in
the subdivision. The sizing of water mains shall be as specified in the
Water Distribution Study when completed and/or as required by the
Town Engineer. In general the minimum size water main that will be
allowed is an eight-inch-diameter line.
A.
Hydrants shall be installed to provide fire protection to the subdivision.
The maximum distance allowed between hydrants is 500 feet. Wherever
possible, hydrants should be located at lot lines.
B.
All intersections of water mains shall be fully valved. Also, main line
valves shall be installed every 1,000 feet along a water main.
C.
The water service connection to each lot shall be indicated on the plans.
The total design of the system shall also meet with the approval of the
Town Engineer.
D.
§ 159-12 AGAWAM CODE § 159-16
140:188
§ 159-16. Protection of natural features.
Strict regard shall be shown for all natural features, such as large trees,
watercourses, scenic points, historic spots and similar community assets
which, if preserved, will add attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
§ 159-17. Pedestrianways and bicycle paths.
Provisions for pedestrian and bicycle access shall be made in all
subdivisions connecting public open space or commercial areas. When
roads do not connect with the adjacent subdivisions or open land, such
nonvehicular access shall be provided. The pedestrian/bike path shall be
eight feet in paved width with a minimum easement or deeded width of 16
feet. All ways shall be clearly marked and landscaped to protect adjoining
lot owners. Such ways shall be secured by easement or deeded to the Town.
§ 159-16 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-17
140:189

ARTICLE V
Construction Standards and Required Improvements
§ 159-18. Department of Public Works Construction Standards;
preconstruction conference. [Amended 12-5-1996]
§ 159-19. Street and roadway.
The Town of Agawam Department of Public Works Construction
Standards, as amended from time to time, shall apply to all subdivisions
and are hereby incorporated herein by reference. The Town of Agawam
Department of Public Works Construction Standards are on file and
may be viewed at the offices of the Agawam City Clerk, Department of
Public Works and Planning Department.
A.
Prior to ordering materials or starting any construction, the subdivider
together with his contractor and engineer (if applicable) shall arrange
for a meeting with the Engineering Division and the City Planner.
At this meeting, the rules for conducting construction operations in
the subdivision and on city streets will be outlined and discussed.
Notices to be given, methods and materials to be employed, how utility
connections are to be made, fees required and other operational
matters will be discussed.
B.
The entire area of each street or way shall be cleared of all stumps,
brush, roots, boulders, like material and all trees not intended for
preservation.
A.
All loam, clay, peat or other yielding material shall be removed beneath
all street layouts to a depth specified by the Town Engineer and shall
be replaced with a granular material acceptable to the Town Engineer.
B.
Whenever it is necessary to install fill to bring a roadway to subgrade,
said fill shall be of a granular material satisfactory to the Town
Engineer. All fill shall be placed in eight-inch layers compacted to not
less than 95% of the maximum dry density, as specified in Section
150.62 of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Department of
Highways Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges (MHD
Specifications), as amended. [Amended 12-5-1996]
C.
Wherever the borings indicate a groundwater within four feet of the
proposed roadway surface or wherever the soil particle size indicates
the possibility of a capillary rise of water in the subgrade soil, subdrains
shall be installed under both shoulders of the roadway. The design
and depth of the subdrain shall meet with the approval of the Town
Engineer.
D.
Wherever rock, in the opinion of the Town Engineer, is encountered, it
shall be excavated to a depth of four feet below the subgrade of the
roadway for the full width of the street layout. The excavated rock shall
be replaced with a granular material satisfactory to the Town Engineer.
E.
§ 159-18 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-19
140:191
Roadways shall be brought to the subgrade elevation prior to the
installation of the water mains, storm drains, sanitary sewer or other
utilities. Additional requirements for design of pavement for certain
subgrade soils may be necessary.
F.
The subgrade of the roadway shall be compacted to a density and by
a method approved by the Town Engineer prior to the placing of the
subbase or base of the roadway.
G.
Gravel subbase. [Amended 3-21-1991; 12-5-1996]
The material used for the gravel subbase shall be gravel approved
by the City Engineer, which meets the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts Department of Highways Standard Specifications
for Highways and Bridges (MHD Specifications), as amended,
Material Specification M 1.03.0 Type b (three-inch maximum size)
and conforms to construction methods stipulated in Section 401.60,
except that all courses shall be laid in depths not exceeding four
inches compacted depth.
(1)
The maximum size aggregate for subbase courses shall not exceed
four inches. The cost of any soil tests needed to determine the
suitability of a material for use as a subbase shall be borne by the
developer.
(2)
The gravel shall be spread and compacted in layers not exceeding
six inches in depth compacted measurement. The gravel shall be
compacted to the density specified in § 401 of the MHD
Specifications.
(3)
H.
Gravel base. The material used for gravel base shall be dense-graded
crushed stone approved by the City Engineer, which meets MHD
Specification M 201.7 for material and is placed in conformance with
Section 402 for construction. All courses of gravel base shall be laid
in depths not exceeding four inches compacted depth. [Amended
3-21-1991; 12-5-1996]
I.
Pavement. The material used for the roadway finish course shall be
Class I bituminous concrete Type I-1 applied in two courses. The
material and work shall conform to § 460 of the MHD Specifications
and shall meet with the approval of the Town Engineer. The installation
of all subsurface utilities within the roadway shall be completed before
placement of the first (binder) course. Where there is concern over
possible settlement, the City Engineer may require one winter season
to elapse between utility installation and top course pavement
installation. In no event shall the interval between placement of binder
course and top course of pavement exceed two years. The construction
of bituminous concrete pavement shall terminate on November 15 and
shall not be resumed prior to April 1 unless specifically allowed, in
writing, by the Town Engineer. No paving shall be done when the air
temperature in the shade is 40° F. or less nor where the material
J.
§ 159-19 AGAWAM CODE § 159-19
140:192
§ 159-20. Sanitary sewers.
on which the pavement is to be placed contains frost. A tack coat of
bitumen at the rate of 0.05 to 0.10 gallon per square yard shall be
applied to the base course of pavement, all as determined be the City
Engineer. Material and placement shall be as approved. The tack coat
shall be only applied to the extent that it can be covered with the
surface course within one day. [Amended 12-5-1996]
Roadway pavement design. Using soil information obtained as required
in § 159-7C(8), a pavement design shall be prepared utilizing California
bearing ratio values or equivalent values obtained for the subgrade.
This will normally be required in clay, loam, peat or silt subgrade
materials or as otherwise required by the Town Engineer. The design
shall consider and employ, as needed, increased thickness of the gravel
subbase, use of geotextile fabric and/or plastic grids, use of subdrains
and other measures necessary. (See also Subsections C and E.) This
design shall be included in the definitive plans submitted for review by
the Planning Board. See Table 5.128 for minimum thickness of the gravel
base, subbase and pavement.
K.
Bituminous concrete curbs shall be installed on both sides of each
roadway, except at intersections, using bituminous concrete Type I-1
and an approved curb forming machine. All curbs shall have a minimum
reveal of six inches and shall be installed on a bituminous base. At
driveways, all curbs shall be installed so as to return to the sidewalk.
At intersections, Type VB granite curbing shall be installed along the
arc of the curves. The granite curbing shall have a six-inch reveal and
a width at the top of six inches. The curbing shall be set by a method
approved by the City Engineer. [Amended 4-5-1990; 12-5-1996]
L.
Sanitary sewer mains and laterals shall be polyvinyl chloride pipe
conforming to ASTM D 3034-SDR 35. The minimum size for sewer
mains shall be eight inches while the minimum size of sewer laterals
shall be four inches.
A.
All sanitary sewers, sewer force mains and sewer laterals shall be
installed in first-class bedding and in accordance with the Department
of Public Works Specifications. Sewers shall be installed to the line and
grade indicated on the plans.
B.
Only precast concrete manholes of a design approved by the Town
Engineer shall be installed on a sanitary sewer main. For the most part
sanitary sewer manholes shall be installed no further than 300 feet
apart and the sewer shall be laid in a straight line between manholes.
C.
Before any sanitary sewer will be accepted by the Board, it must
pass an infiltration or exfiltration test, at the discretion of the Town
Engineer, made in accordance with the Department of Public Works
D.
28.Editor's Note: Table 5.1 is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 159-19 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-20
140:193
§ 159-21. Drainage.
§ 159-22. Water.
Specifications. Said test will be made at the developer's expense and
shall be made under the direction of the Town Engineer.
No groundwater or surface water shall be discharged into the sanitary
sewer. No storm drain, foundation or cellar drain or roof leader may be
connected to a sanitary sewer or sewer lateral.
E.
Where rock is encountered, it shall be removed to a depth of one
foot below the flowline of the sewer and the pipe laid in a properly
compacted granular material approved by the Town Engineer.
F.
Only granular material approved by the Town Engineer shall be used as
backfill in any trench excavation.
G.
Storm drains shall be reinforced concrete pipe conforming to ASTM
C-76, Class 3 minimum, polyvinyl chloride pipe conforming to ASTM
D3034, SDR35 or polyvinyl chloride ASTM F-794. Bedding for various
types of storm drains shall be as approved by the Engineer.
A.
All storm drains, including catch basin leaders and culverts, shall be
installed in first-class bedding. All work and materials shall be in
accordance with the Department of Public Works Specifications.
B.
Precast concrete or concrete block manholes of a design approved
by the Town Engineer shall be used on storm drains. In general the
distance between manholes shall not be greater than 300 feet.
C.
Catch basins in general shall be installed at intervals of not more than
300 feet on both sides of a roadway and at intersections as necessary.
The basins shall be of the Connecticut Basin type and shall conform
to the Department of Public Works Construction Standards or shall be
approved by the Town Engineer. [Amended 12-5-1996]
D.
Where rock is encountered, it shall be removed to a depth of one
foot below the flowline of the drain and the pipe laid in a properly
compacted granular material approved by the Town Engineer.
E.
Only granular material approved by the Town Engineer shall be used as
backfill in any trench excavation.
F.
When warranted by local water table conditions, the Planning Board
may require that foundation subdrains be installed by the developer.
G.
All water mains shall be installed using ductile iron pipe conforming to
ANSI A21.51, Class 52, with full thickness cement lining conforming to
ANSI A21.4.
A.
The hydrants furnished shall meet the Town hydrant standards and
shall be of a type currently being used by the Town.
B.
§ 159-20 AGAWAM CODE § 159-22
140:194
§ 159-23. Sidewalks, tree belts and pedestrian and bicycle paths.
§ 159-24. Utilities.
Grate valves shall be of the New York pattern, Metropolitan-type
openings to the left, counterclockwise.
C.
All materials and work shall be in accordance with the specifications of
the Department of Public Works. All water mains shall be installed in
first-class bedding.
D.
Before any water main will be accepted by the Board, it must pass a
pressure and leakage test made in accordance with the Department of
Public Works Specifications. Said test will be made at the developer's
expense and shall be made under the direction of the Town Engineer.
Water mains shall be disinfected and tested for total coliform at the
developer's expense. Where the coliform test does not meet state
standards, reflushing, disinfecting and retesting will be required at the
developer's expense.
E.
All water services to the lots shall be installed using Type K copper
tubing at least 3/4 inch in diameter. The service connections shall have
a corporation with shutoff at the main and a curb stop at the street line.
F.
Where rock is encountered, it shall be removed to a depth of one foot
below the flowline of the water mains and connections and the pipe
laid in a properly compacted granular material approved by the Town
Engineer.
G.
Only granular material approved by the Town Engineer shall be used as
backfill in any trench excavation.
H.
There shall be cement concrete sidewalks constructed on both sides
of each street in the subdivision. The width of the sidewalks shall
be as specified under the Design Standards for the various classes
of streets. The construction must conform to the Town of Agawam
Department of Public Works Specifications for Construction of Cement
Concrete Sidewalks, April 1989. All materials and construction methods
shall be as specified in the Department of Public Works Specifications.
[Amended 4-5-1990]
A.
There shall be tree belts constructed on both sides of each street in
the subdivision. The width of the sidewalk shall be as specified under
the Design Standards for the various classes of streets. Loam shall be
placed to a minimum depth of six inches. Lime, fertilizer and grass seed
shall be applied as required in the specifications of the Department of
Public Works. The tree belts shall be reworked and reseeded until a
stand of grass satisfactory to the Town Engineer has been established.
B.
Pedestrianways and bicycle paths as shown on the plans shall be eight
feet wide and constructed according to this section.
C.
§ 159-22 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-24
140:195
§ 159-25. Inspections. [Amended 3-21-1991]
The developer shall notify the Department of Public Works in writing at
least 48 hours in advance of the time when he plans to begin or resume
any work on the improvements required in a subdivision. The Department
of Public Works shall assign an inspector to inspect the work. The Town
of Agawam shall charge the developer at the rate set by the Department
of Public Works as specified in § 159-6H(6) for inspection work in the
subdivision. No work shall be accepted by the Board which has not been
inspected on a daily basis during its progress. Failure of the developer to
notify the Department of Public Works or failure to have the work inspected
on a daily basis as it progresses shall be cause for the Town to require
the developer to excavate and reconstruct or do other things that may be
required to ensure that the work has been done in a satisfactory manner.
The presence of an inspector shall in no way relieve the developer from full
responsibility for the required work.
§ 159-26. Shade trees.
Streetlights shall be installed by the power company at the developer's
expense, and the developer shall be responsible for the cost of lighting
until the street is accepted by the Town. The streetlights and standards
shall be of the type adopted by the Town as a standard installation. The
lighting shall be installed on a street prior to occupancy of any house
on that street.
A.
All underground utilities, such as gas mains and electric and telephone
lines, including service connections, shall be installed prior to the
construction of the roadway surface, base or subbase. All methods used
to install these utilities shall be subject to the approval of the Town
Engineer. Only granular material approved by the Town Engineer shall
be used as backfill in any utility trench.
B.
Before release of the covenant, the developer shall deposit with the
Town of Agawam an amount of money sufficient to cover the
replacement of two shade trees per lot according to the specifications
of the Planning Board.
A.
The developer shall be responsible for providing, planting and
maintaining through one full year two living healthy trees or their
substitutes per lot. Such trees shall be 2.5 inches minimum in diameter,
balled and burlapped and planted in season and subject to direction of
the Tree Warden. Types of trees shall be selected from a list available
from the Planning Board which shall include native and hardy species
readily available locally.
B.
On each lot two shade trees shall be planted within 20 feet of the street
line and located so as not to conflict with underground utilities and
sight distances. On places at the discretion of the Tree Warden, shade
trees may be planted on the tree belt within the street right-of-way.
C.
§ 159-24 AGAWAM CODE § 159-27
140:196
§ 159-27. Clearing and grading.
To prevent wind and water erosion, the following measures must be
employed on all sites:
§ 159-28. Loam or topsoil.
No loam or topsoil shall be removed from the property until the subdivision
is complete, and then only with the permission of the Board of Appeals as
specified in § 180-8G of Chapter 180, Zoning.
§ 159-29. Permits.
Upon receipt of permits from the Inspector of Buildings to construct
dwellings, etc., each lot line must be clearly marked and lot identified by lot
and street number before any inspections are made. Compliance with the
Conservation Commission's regulations must be posted, if applicable.
§ 159-30. Excavations.
All excavations for pipe, etc., across streets and to dwellings shall be
properly protected and lighted at proper times, according to
recommendations of the Department of Public Works and the Chief of
Police. These excavations shall be properly backfilled and well-compacted
as soon after installation of pipe, etc., as is possible.
§ 159-31. Protection of natural features.
Regions of the site must be developed in separate increments so that
the disturbed area is kept to a minimum. At no time is the entire area
to be disturbed.
A.
B. Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected whenever possible.
All disturbed area shall be stabilized with a temporary vegetative cover
if to be left exposed for greater than one month, with the exception of
roadways which are to be treated with appropriate measures at the end
of each workday.
C.
D. All stockpiled soils shall be stabilized with temporary vegetative cover.
In any area outside the road right-of-way and building site (house plus
15 feet outside walls and leach field area), no tree over eight inches in
diameter measured five feet above the ground shall be removed without
the consent of the Tree Warden or his agent. Due regard shall be made
for life expectancy and health of the vegetation and the final proposed
grading. The developer shall notify the Tree Warden at least one week
prior to any clearing of the site. No evergreen tree or shrub shall be
removed without consent of the Tree Warden or his agent. Limits of
work may be delineated on the definitive plan, in which case no work
shall be performed, including clearing, outside those limits, but work
within may proceed without further consent.
A.
§ 159-27 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-31
140:197
§ 159-32. Cleaning up.
Before final inspection, the total area shall be cleared of debris, both natural
and construction materials generated by the construction.
§ 159-33. Monuments.
All proposed monuments shown on the definitive plan shall be installed and
their installation shall be certified by the developer's engineer or surveyor.
Monuments shall be of stone or cast concrete, four inches square and three
feet long, set flush with the finished grade. Three-fourths-inch to one-inch
steel pipes or gun barrels three feet long may be used at lot corners. Where
street monuments and lot corners occupy the same point, stone or concrete
monuments shall be used.
§ 159-34. Street acceptance.
Upon completion of any subdivision or any street therein and prior to the
final release of a bond or covenant, the developer shall submit to the Board
a final plan of each street layout, including lot frontage, bounds and pins
which have been set and ties to intersecting street layouts. This plan shall
be used as a street acceptance plan and shall be drawn in accordance
with standards set by the Town Engineer. The plan shall be prepared by
a registered professional land surveyor and shall be suitable for recording
in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. Accompanying this plan, the
developer shall supply the Board with a document releasing the Town from
any damages which he may incur by the acceptance of the street by the
Town.
All natural features to be preserved shall be suitably protected during
construction.29
B.
29.Editor's Note: Former Subsection C, as amended 9-18-1997, which immediately followed
and provided for a buffer strip, was repealed 10-28-2004.
§ 159-31 AGAWAM CODE § 159-34
140:198
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 159-35. Waiver of regulations.
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may
be waived when, in the judgment of the Board, such action is in the public
interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control Law.30
§ 159-36. Matters not covered by regulations.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to MGL c. 41, § 81-K to 81-GG, inclusive, and the Federal Environmental
Protection Act and the Massachusetts Protection Act.
30.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG, inclusive.
§ 159-35 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-36
140:199

ARTICLE VII
Floodplains
§ 159-37. Rules and regulations.
The Planning Board herewith stipulates rules and regulations for the
subdivision and/or development of land which lies within the floodplain as
described in the Town Ordinance.31
§ 159-38. Authority; priority of regulations.
Authority for these regulations is derived from the commitment of the Town
of Agawam to the Federal Insurance Administrator under the Federal Flood
Insurance Act. These rules and regulations shall take priority over any
conflicting regulations of the Planning Board.
The finished grade of land at all sides of any major building shall be set
at a minimum grade above flood level as determined by the Planning
Board from historic flood data.
A.
The total area may not be removed from the floodplain or graded in
such a way as to cause additional hazard to the remainder of the
floodplain areas. No more than one-third (1/3) of the total area may be
regraded or filled.
B.
More than one exit from the total area shall be provided for emergency
evacuations by clearing and suitable grading and related work, and no
obstructions to vehicular passage shall be allowed within the exit route.
This exit may not require paving or other surfacing. The developer shall
so note any deeds concerning obstructions to passage.
C.
Utilities. Town sewer systems shall be constructed to the specifications
of the Department of Public Works and Board of Health to ensure
safety from flooding. All water lines, gas and electric lines shall be
constructed with suitable area master shutoff valves. All aboveground
utility control boxes shall be constructed to avoid flood damage and to
elevations as determined by the Planning Board. Electric and telephone
lines shall be underground and all access to underground utilities shall
be constructed to the specifications of the Department of Public Works.
Any drainage pipes opening into the floodway (river or stream) shall be
constructed to the specifications of the Department of Public Works to
prevent flooding of the system.
D.
All plans reviewed by this Board which lie in the floodplain shall be
stamped or legally noted so that landowners and future occupants
shall be aware of their responsibilities. The notation shall be endorsed
on Form A, Subdivision Control Not Required, as well as Form B,
Subdivision Control, preliminary and definitive plans.32
E.
31.Editor's Note: See Art. XII of Ch. 180, Zoning.
32.Editor's Note: Forms A and B are on file in the Planning Department offices.
§ 159-37 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-38
140:201

ARTICLE VIII
Hiring Outside Consultants
[Added 1-17-2019]
§ 159-39. Rules for hiring outside consultants.
As provided by MGL c. 44, § 53G, the Planning Board may impose
reasonable fees for the employment of outside consultants, engaged
by the Planning Board, for specific expert services deemed necessary
by the Planning Board to come to a final decision on an application
submitted to the Planning Board pursuant to the requirements of the
Agawam Zoning Bylaws, the Agawam Subdivision Regulations, and
any other Town bylaw/ordinance, regulation, or rule as they may be
amended or enacted from time to time.
A.
Funds received by the Planning Board pursuant to these rules shall
be deposited with the Agawam Treasurer, who shall establish a special
account for this purpose. Expenditures from this special account may
be made at the direction of the Planning Board without further
appropriation as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53G. Expenditures from this
account shall be made only in connection with the review of a specific
project or projects for which a consultant fee has been collected from
the applicant.
B.
Specific consultant services may include but are not limited to the
engineering of roads and ways, private and public, driveways, grades,
grading, and sanitary systems, to hydrogeologic and drainage analysis,
to impact analyses of various kinds, and to environmental and land use
law. The consultant shall be chosen by, and report only to, the Planning
Board.
C.
The Planning Board shall give written notice to the applicant of the
selection of an outside consultant, which notice shall state the identity
of the consultant, the amount of the fee to be charged to the applicant,
and a request for payment of said fee in its entirety. Such notice shall
be deemed to have been given on the date it is mailed or delivered.
No such costs or expenses shall be incurred by the applicant if the
application or request is withdrawn within five days of the date notice
is given.
D.
The fee must be received in its entirety prior to the initiation of
consulting services. The Planning Board may request additional
consultant fees if necessary review requires a larger expenditure than
originally anticipated or new information requires additional consultant
services. Failure by the applicant to pay the consultant fee specified
by the Planning Board within 10 business days of the request for
payment shall be cause for the Planning Board to determine that the
application is administratively incomplete (except in the case of an
appeal). The Planning Board shall state such in a letter to the applicant
copied to City Solicitor. No additional review or action shall be taken
on the application until the applicant has paid the requested fee. For
E.
§ 159-39 SCHOOLS AND SCHOOL ZONES § 159-39
140:203
applications to be considered under the local bylaw/ordinance
regulations only, failure by the applicant to pay the consultant fee
specified by the Planning Board within 10 business days of the request
for payment shall be cause for the Planning Board to deny the
application.
The applicant may appeal the selection of the outside consultant to
the City Council, who may disqualify the outside consultant selected
only on the grounds that the consultant has a conflict of interest or
does not possess the minimum required qualifications. The minimum
qualifications shall consist of either an educational degree or three or
more years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. Such an
appeal must be in writing and received by the City Council and a copy
received by the Planning Board within 10 days of the date consultant
fees were requested by the Planning Board. The required time limits
for action upon the application shall be extended by the duration of
the administrative appeal. In the event that no decision is made by
the City Council within one month following the filing of the appeal,
the selection made by the Planning Board shall stand. The appeal to
the City Council shall not preclude further judicial review, if otherwise
permitted by law, on the grounds provided for in these rules for MGL c.
44, § 53G.
F.
§ 159-39 AGAWAM CODE § 159-39
140:204
Chapter 161
TAG SALES
§ 161-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and their derivations
shall have the following meanings:
DAYLIGHT HOURS — From 1/2 hour before sunrise to 1/2 hour after sunset.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — That property which is owned, utilized and
maintained by members of a household and acquired in the normal course
of occupying or maintaining a household and shall not include items
purchased for resale or obtained on consignment.
TAG SALES — All general sales open to the public conducted on a
residential premises for the purposes of disposing of personal property
and shall include but not be limited to all sales known as "tag," "garage,"
"lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "back yard," "patio," "flea market"
or "rummage." This definition shall not apply when five items or fewer are
held out for sale and all advertisements specifically name the items to be
sold.
§ 161-2. Sales of certain property prohibited.
No person shall sell or offer for sale, at any tag sale, any property other than
personal property as defined in § 161-1.
§ 161-3. Permit required.
No person shall conduct a tag sale until a permit for the same has been
issued by the Chief of Police or persons authorized by him. The Chief of
Police shall cause a permit log to be kept listing the permit number, the
address where the tag sale is to be conducted, the dates and times of the
tag sale and the name and telephone number of the permittee. The activity
conducted in accordance with a lawfully issued permit hereunder shall not
be deemed a violation of the Town of Agawam zoning ordinances.
§ 161-4. Limitations.
No person shall conduct a tag sale on more than six separate days in any
calendar year and no premises shall be the site of a tag sale for more than
six separate days in any calendar year. Tag sales shall be conducted during
daylight hours only, as defined in § 161-1.
§ 161-5. Display of property.
Personal property offered for sale at any tag sale shall be displayed only on
private property. No personal property offered for sale at any tag sale shall
be displayed in any public right-of-way.
§ 159-39 TAG SALES § 161-6
161:205
§ 161-6. Signs.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 180-85, signs promoting tag sales shall
not be erected more than two days prior to any tag sale and shall be
removed not more than 24 hours after the close of any tag sale. No sign
promoting any tag sale shall exceed four square feet on each side.
§ 161-7. Right of entry; enforcement.
The Chief of Police, the Chief of the Fire Department or the Inspector of
Buildings, or persons authorized by them, shall have the right to enter onto
private property showing evidence of a tag sale for the purpose of enforcing
this chapter and may close any tag sale for a violation of this chapter.
§ 161-8. Parking.
Where a tag sale is being conducted, the Chief of Police or persons
authorized by him may enforce temporary parking restrictions necessary to
the safe and orderly flow of traffic and the passage of emergency vehicles,
and to allow the passage of emergency vehicles, parking shall be allowed
only on one side of the road.
Chapter 163
TAXICABS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 169.
§ 163-1. Term defined.
Every motor vehicle used or to be used for the conveyance of persons for
hire shall be deemed to be a taxicab within the meaning of this chapter,
except a motor vehicle operated in a manner and for the purposes stated in
MGL C. 159A and a motor vehicle used for private livery purposes.
§ 163-2. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab in the town
without first obtaining from the Town Council the license or licenses
required by this chapter.
§ 163-3. Authority of Town Council.
The Town Council may license the operation of a taxicab and may license
a person to drive such a taxicab, and it may revoke such licenses at its
discretion.
§ 161-6 AGAWAM CODE § 163-4
163:206
§ 163-4. Taxicab stands.
No taxicab shall be allowed to stand or to wait for passengers on any public
way in the town, except on such portions thereof as may be designated
therefor by a license granted by the Town Council, which may revoke such
a license for a taxicab stand or change the location thereof at any time.
No person shall allow any vehicle to remain standing in any taxicab stand
except a taxicab licensed therefor.
§ 163-5. Term of license; transferability; fee.
Any license required by this chapter shall expire on the 30th day of April
following the date of issuance and shall not be transferred without the
consent of the Town Council. The fee for all such licenses shall be $20.
§ 163-6. Rates; rules and regulations.
No owner or driver of a taxicab shall charge any passenger any higher
rate for any service than authorized from time to time by rules, orders and
regulations of the Town Council. All owners and drivers of taxicabs licensed
under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to such further rules,
orders and regulations as may from time to time be promulgated by the
Town Council.
Chapter 169
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unregistered vehicles — See Ch. 172.
§ 163-4 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 163-6
169:207

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 169-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings:
BUS STOP — An area in the way set aside for the boarding or alighting from
and parking of buses.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a way ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections
or at any portion of a way clearly indicated for pedestrian use by lines on
the road surface or by other markings or signs.
INTERSECTING WAY — Any way which joins another at an angle, whether
or not it crosses the other.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a way into a strip of sufficient width to
accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
MOTOR VEHICLE — All vehicles constructed and designed for propulsion
by power other than muscular power.
OFFICIAL STREET MARKING — Any painted line, legend, marking or
marker painted or placed upon any way by public authority which purports
to direct or regulate traffic.
OPERATOR — Any person who operates a motor vehicle.
OWNER — A person, other than a lien holder, having title to a motor vehicle.
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, other than
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, while making
emergency repairs or while making arrangements for removal of a disabled
vehicle.
POLICE OFFICER or OFFICER — Any officer authorized to make arrests,
provided that he is in uniform or he displays his badge of office.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGN — All signs, markings and devices placed by
public authority for the purpose of guiding, directing, warning or regulating
traffic.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights placed
by public authority, whether manually, electrically, electronically, or
mechanically operated, by which traffic may be directed.
TRAILER — Any vehicle or object on wheels having no motive power of its
own, but which is drawn by, or used in combination with, a motor vehicle.
WAY — Any public highway, private way laid out under authority of statute
or way dedicated to public use.
§ 169-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-2
169:209
§ 169-2. Authority of Town Council.
The Town Council shall have the authority pursuant to MGL C. 40, § 22;
C. 40, § 22A; and C. 90, § 20A1/2 to make ordinances, orders, rules and
regulations for the regulation of motor vehicles used within the Town of
Agawam, with penalties for the violation thereof not to exceed those
specified in the Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 169-3. Authority of police officers.
§ 169-4. Designation of bus stops.
The Town Council shall designate, by majority vote, the location of all bus
stops.
§ 169-5. Coasting and sliding.
No person shall coast, course or slide with any sleigh, sled, or other vehicle
on or across any way or on the sidewalks of any way.
§ 169-6. Hitchhiking.
No person while standing, walking or running within the limits of a way
shall solicit verbally, by sign or by signal transportation for himself or for
other persons in any motor vehicle except motor vehicles operated for
carriage of passengers for hire.
§ 169-7. Soliciting from motor vehicles.
No person shall, for the purpose of soliciting any alms, contribution or
subscription or of selling any merchandise or ticket of admission to any
game, show, exhibition, fair, ball, entertainment or public gathering, signal
a moving motor vehicle on a way, cause the stopping of a motor vehicle on
Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be the duty of police
officers designated by the Chief of Police to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Such police officers are hereby authorized to direct all
traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signals in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that, in the
event of a fire or other emergency, officers of the Fire Department or
other authorized public employees may direct traffic as conditions may
require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter.
A.
Closing streets. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to close
temporarily any way in an impending or existing emergency or for any
lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided that there is
reasonable justification for the closing of the way.
B.
Annual accident report. The Chief of Police shall make an annual
written report of motor vehicle accidents to the Mayor on or before
March 1 of the succeeding calendar year.
C.
§ 169-2 AGAWAM CODE § 169-7
169:210
a way or accost any occupant of a motor vehicle stopped on a way at the
direction of a traffic sign, traffic signal or police officer.
§ 169-8. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to persons actually engaged
in work upon a way closed to travel or under construction or repair, to
public officials engaged in the performance of public duties or to drivers of
emergency vehicles while operating in an emergency when the nature of
the work requires a departure from any part of this chapter.
§ 169-9. Responsibility of vehicle owner for violations.
If a motor vehicle is found upon any way in violation of any provision of this
chapter and the identity of the operator cannot be determined, the owner of
such motor vehicle shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
§ 169-10. Violations and penalties.
Unless otherwise specified herein, the penalty for any violation of this
chapter shall be a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200.
§ 169-7 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-10
169:211

ARTICLE II
Signs, Signals and Markings
§ 169-11. Placement and maintenance; no-parking zones.
§ 169-12. Unofficial signs; removal.
No person shall place, maintain or display or cause to be placed, maintained
or displayed any unofficial sign, signal or marking which purports to be,
resembles or is an imitation of an official traffic sign, signal or marking
which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which hides from view
any official sign, signal or marking. The Chief of Police is hereby empowered
to remove without notice any unofficial sign, signal and marking which
violates this section.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works is hereby
authorized to place and maintain or cause to be placed and maintained
all official traffic signs, signals and markings. All official traffic signs,
signals and markings shall conform to the standards as prescribed by
the State Department of Public Works.
A.
Regulations relating to no-parking zones shall be effective only during
such times as a sufficient number of official no-parking signs are
erected and maintained designating the no-parking zone, provided that
such signs are visible to approaching operators.
B.
§ 169-11 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-12
169:213

ARTICLE III
Operation of Motor Vehicles
§ 169-13. Use of lanes.
§ 169-14. Overtaking and passing.
§ 169-15. Obstructing traffic.
§ 169-16. Following too closely.
No operator of a motor vehicle shall follow another motor vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the speed of
the motor vehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the way.
When any way has been divided into lanes, an operator of a motor
vehicle shall drive so as to be entirely within a single lane and shall not
move from the lane until he has first ascertained if such movement can
be made with safety.
A.
Upon all ways, the operator of a motor vehicle shall drive in the lane
nearest the right side of the way when such lane is available for travel,
except when overtaking another motor vehicle or when preparing for a
left turn.
B.
The operator of a motor vehicle shall not overtake and pass a motor
vehicle proceeding in the same direction unless there is sufficient clear
space ahead on the left side of the way to permit the overtaking to be
completed without impeding the safe operation of any motor vehicle
ahead.
A.
The operator of a motor vehicle who is about to be overtaken and
passed by another motor vehicle approaching from the rear shall give
way to the right in favor of the overtaking motor vehicle and shall not
increase the speed of the motor vehicle until completely overtaken by
the passing motor vehicle.
B.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle in such a manner as to obstruct
unnecessarily the normal movement of traffic upon any way. Officers
are hereby authorized to require any operator who fails to comply with
this section to move to the side of the way and wait until such traffic as
has been delayed to pass.
A.
No operator shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless
there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or
crosswalk and on the right side of the way to accommodate the motor
vehicle without obstructing the passage of other motor vehicles or
pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to
proceed.
B.
§ 169-13 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-17
169:215
§ 169-17. Operation on ways under construction or repair.
No operator shall enter upon any way when, by reason of construction,
surface condition, maintenance or because of some unprotected hazard,
such way is closed to travel and one or more signs, signals or markings have
been erected to indicate that the way is closed to travel or when so advised
by an officer or other public official.
§ 169-18. Operation on sidewalks.
No operator of a motor vehicle shall drive upon any sidewalk except at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 169-19. Funerals and other processions.
§ 169-20. Speed limit.
It shall be unlawful for any motor vehicle to travel over 25 miles per hour
over any of the ways of the Town unless such ways are lawfully posted for a
different speed.
§ 169-21. Obedience to stop signs and signals.
Every operator of a motor vehicle approaching an intersection of ways
where there is an official traffic sign bearing the word "stop" or a flashing
red traffic signal shall, before proceeding through the intersection, bring
the motor vehicle to a complete stop at such point as may be clearly marked
by a sign or line, or if no point is marked, then at a place between the stop
sign and the nearer line of the intersection. This section shall not apply
when traffic is being directed by a police officer.
§ 169-22. Operation of certain vehicles after sunset.
Any vehicle operated on the ways of the Town of Agawam which is not a
motor vehicle as defined by MGL C. 90, § 1, during the period from 1/2 hour
after sunset to 1/2 hour before sunrise shall display two flashing red lights
in the reverse direction. Each red light shall be a minimum of at least six
inches in diameter and mounted three feet from the ground.
It shall be the duty of every operator in a funeral or other procession to
keep as near to the right edge of the way as possible, and to follow the
motor vehicle ahead as closely as is practicable and safe.
A.
At an intersection where a traffic control signal is operating, the
operator of the first motor vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall
be the only one required to stop for a red signal.
B.
At an intersection where a stop sign exists, the driver of the first motor
vehicle in a funeral or other procession shall be the only operator
required to stop before proceeding through the intersection.
C.
§ 169-17 AGAWAM CODE § 169-23
169:216
§ 169-23. Securing of loads.
No person shall operate or move a motor vehicle, trailer or other equipment
within the Town of Agawam unless such motor vehicle, trailer or other
equipment is constructed and loaded so as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking or otherwise escaping therefrom and unless such
motor vehicle, trailer or other equipment's load is fully and adequately
secured.
§ 169-23 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-23
169:217

ARTICLE IV
Parking
§ 169-24. General prohibitions; fines.
No person shall:
(1) Park a motor vehicle within a designated no-parking zone.
(2) Park a motor vehicle so as to obstruct snow or ice removal.
(3) Park a motor vehicle so as to obstruct a sidewalk.
(4) Park a motor vehicle so as to obstruct a driveway.
(5) Park a motor vehicle so as to obstruct a crosswalk.
(6) Park a motor vehicle over one foot from the curb or edge of the way.
(7) Park a motor vehicle within an intersection.
Park a motor vehicle within 30 feet of an intersecting way.
[Amended 9-3-2002 by TOR-2002-2]
(8)
(9) Park a motor vehicle with the left wheels to the curb.
(10)Park a motor vehicle within a designated bus stop area.
(11)Park a motor vehicle within five feet of a bus stop sign.
Park a motor vehicle so as to leave less than a ten-foot-wide
unobstructed lane.
(12)
(13)Park a motor vehicle which is unregistered on a way.
Park a motor vehicle with the engine operating and leave it
unattended.
(14)
(15)Park a motor vehicle on a way within a designated no-passing zone.
Park a motor vehicle within a restricted area during a winter
parking ban.
(16)
Park a motor vehicle within a restricted area during an emergency
parking ban.
(17)
Park a motor vehicle within any grassed, lawn or landscaped area
on the grounds of any municipal or school building, park or
playground.
(18)
(19)Park a motor vehicle on a way while displaying advertising.
(20)Park an unattended trailer on a way.
(21)Park a motor vehicle within a fire lane.
A.
§ 169-24 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-24
169:219
§ 169-25. Removal of vehicles parked in violation; fine.
(22)Park a motor vehicle within 10 feet from a hydrant.
(23)Park a motor vehicle so as to obstruct a handicap ramp.
(24)Park a motor vehicle in a designated handicap parking area.
The following shall be the established schedule of fines for the abovereferenced
parking offenses:
Pursuant to MGL C. 90, § 20A 1/2, the penalty for offenses in
Subsection A(1) through (21) inclusive shall be a fine in the amount
of $15 if paid within 21 days; the fine shall increase to $20 if paid
thereafter but before the parking clerk reports to the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles; and the fine shall increase to $35 if paid thereafter.
(1)
Pursuant to MGL C. 90, § 20A 1/2, the penalty for offense in
Subsection A(22) shall be a fine in the amount of $50 if paid within
21 days; the fine shall increase to $60 if paid thereafter but before
the parking clerk reports to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles; and
the fine shall increase to $100 if paid thereafter.
(2)
Pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 22A, the penalty for violations of
§ 169-24A(23) and/or § 169-24A(24) of the Code of the Town of
Agawam shall be a fine in the amount of $300, and all funds
received from fines assessed for violations of § 169-24A(23) and/
or § 169-24A(24) of the Code of the Town of Agawam shall be
allocated to the local Commission on Disabilities in accordance
with MGL c. 40 § 22G; and any vehicle parked or standing in
violation of § 169-24 A(23) and/or § 169-24A(24) of the Code of the
Town of Agawam, or on any part of any way under the control of
the City of Agawam in such a manner as to obstruct any curb ramp
designed for use by handicapped persons as means of egress to a
street or public way, or to occupy or obstruct any parking space
reserved for a vehicle used by a disabled veteran or handicapped
person whose vehicle bears the distinguishing license plate, or
displays the special parking identification plate authorized by
section two of chapter ninety, or bears the official identification of
a handicapped person issued by any other state, or any Canadian
province, may be removed as provided in accordance with MGL c.
40 § 22D. [Amended 7-6-2004 by TOR-2004-8]
(3)
B.
The Chief of Police or his designee may remove or cause to be removed
any motor vehicle parked in violation of this chapter. Such power
to remove shall not extend to a motor vehicle owned by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any political subdivision thereof,
owned by the United States Government or any instrumentality thereof
or registered to a member of a foreign diplomatic corps or foreign
consular officer who is not a citizen of the United States, which bears a
distinctive number plate or other conspicuous marking.
A.
§ 169-24 AGAWAM CODE § 169-25
169:220
§ 169-26. Winter parking ban; fine.
§ 169-27. Emergency parking ban; fine.
§ 169-28. Handicapped parking spaces; fine.
Any person whose motor vehicle is removed shall be subject to an
additional fine in the amount of $25 and is fully responsible for all
charges and expenses incurred for removal and storage of such motor
vehicle.
B.
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his designee
may declare a limited parking ban on the ways within the Town during
the period beginning November 15 through April 15 for the purposes
of snow and ice removal. The Superintendent or his designee shall
announce all such limited parking bans to the press prior to their
declaration.
A.
The Superintendent of Public Works or his designee may remove or
cause to be removed any motor vehicle parked in violation of the
winter parking ban. Such power to remove shall not extend to a motor
vehicle owned by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any political
subdivision thereof, owned by the United States Government or any
instrumentality thereof or registered to a member of a foreign
diplomatic corps or foreign consular officer who is not a citizen of
the United States, which bears a distinctive number plate or other
conspicuous marking.
B.
Any person whose motor vehicle is removed shall be subject to an
additional fine in the amount of $25 and is fully responsible for all
charges and expenses incurred for removal and storage of such motor
vehicle.
C.
The Chief of Police or his designee may declare an emergency limited
parking ban on the ways within the Town during the period of any
emergency. The Chief or his designee shall announce all such limited
parking bans to the press if their duration shall exceed 24 hours.
A.
The Chief of Police or his designee may remove or cause to be removed
any motor vehicle parked in violation of the emergency parking ban.
Such power to remove shall not extend to a motor vehicle owned by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any political subdivision thereof,
owned by the United States Government or any instrumentality thereof
or registered to a member of a foreign diplomatic corps or foreign
consular officer who is not a citizen of the United States, which bears a
distinctive number plate or other conspicuous marking.
B.
Any person whose motor vehicle is removed shall be subject to an
additional fine in the amount of $25 and is fully responsible for all
charges and expenses incurred for removal and storage of such motor
vehicle.
C.
§ 169-25 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-28
169:221
Pursuant to MGL C. 40, § 21, Clause (23), any person or body that
has lawful control of a public or private way or improved or enclosed
property used as off-street parking areas for businesses, shopping
malls, theaters, auditoriums, sporting or recreational facilities or
cultural centers, residential dwellings or for any other place where
the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees shall reserve
parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for motor vehicles of
disabled veterans and handicapped persons if the number of parking
spaces in any such area is 15 or more. The parking spaces reserved for
motor vehicles of disabled veterans and handicapped persons shall be
clearly marked by pavement markings and signs or other designation
approved by the Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
or his designee. The parking spaces for disabled veterans and
handicapped persons shall be of such a size as determined by the
Superintendent of the Department of Public Works or his designee, but
in no event less than 12 feet in width. The parking spaces for disabled
veterans and handicapped persons shall be as near as possible to a
building entrance or walkway and adjacent to curb ramps or other
unobstructed methods permitting sidewalk access to disabled veterans
and handicapped persons.
A.
The number of parking spaces reserved for disabled veterans and
handicapped persons shall be determined in accordance with the
following formula:
If the total number of parking spaces is more than 15 but less than
25, then there shall be at least one designated parking space for
disabled veterans and handicapped persons.
(1)
If the total number of parking spaces is more than 25 but less than
40, then there shall be 5% of the spaces but not fewer than two
designated parking spaces for disabled veterans and handicapped
persons.
(2)
If the total number of parking spaces is more than 40 but less than
100, then there shall be 4% of the spaces but not fewer than three
designated parking spaces for disabled veterans and handicapped
persons.
(3)
If the total number of parking spaces is more than 100 but less than
200, then there shall be 3% of the spaces but not fewer than four
designated parking spaces for disabled veterans and handicapped
persons.
(4)
If the total number of parking spaces is more than 200 but less than
500, then there shall be 2% of the spaces but not fewer than six
designated parking spaces for disabled veterans and handicapped
persons.
(5)
If the total number of parking spaces is more than 500, then there
shall be 1 1/2% of the spaces but not fewer than 10 designated
parking spaces for disabled veterans and handicapped persons.
(6)
B.
§ 169-28 AGAWAM CODE § 169-28
169:222
Any person who has lawful control who does not reserve and properly
mark parking spaces for disabled veterans and handicapped persons as
required by this section shall be punished by a fine of $50. Each day
said violation continues shall constitute a separate violation hereof.
C.
§ 169-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 169-28
169:223
Chapter 172
VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 169.
§ 172-1. Number on private property restricted.
No person, business, corporation, enterprise or other legal entity shall
allow or permit the presence of more than one unregistered vehicle on the
property he, she or it owns, rents, leases, occupies or which is otherwise
under his, her or its control in violation of the provisions of Chapter 180,
Zoning, of the Code of the Town of Agawam.
§ 172-2. Service of notice of violation.
The Building Department and/or the Police Department shall have the
authority and power to issue a written notice ordering removal of
unregistered vehicles in violation of Chapter 180, Zoning, of the Code. Said
notice shall order removal within 14 days of receipt and shall be served:
§ 172-3. Compliance with fourteen-day notice period.
No person, business, corporation, enterprise or other legal entity shall allow
or permit said unregistered vehicles to remain upon the property he, she
or it owns, rents, leases, occupies or which is otherwise under his, her or
its control for any period of time after expiration of the fourteen-day notice
period.
§ 172-4. Violations and penalties.
Whoever violates this chapter shall be fined not more than $300 but not
less than $100 per vehicle for the first offense. Second and subsequent
offenses shall result in a mandatory fine of $500 per vehicle. The Building
Department and/or the Police Department shall be permitted to remove
unregistered vehicles in violation of Chapter 180, Zoning, of the Code of
the Town of Agawam, provided that they have served written notice in
Personally by a duly authorized member of the Police Department and/
or the Building Department;
A.
B. By leaving a copy at the last and usual place of abode or business;
By sending a copy by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, at the last known address; or
C.
If the address is unknown, and service in hand is not possible, by
posting a copy in a conspicuous place on or about the property.
D.
§ 169-28 AGAWAM CODE § 172-4
172:224
accordance with the terms outlined above and 30 days has elapsed from
the time written notice was received by the alleged violator. The Town of
Agawam shall be entitled to restitution for any and all costs incurred in
the removal, towing, storage and disposal of said unregistered vehicles. The
Town of Agawam shall store all vehicles removed for a minimum of fourteen
days prior to arranging for disposal of said vehicles. Whoever violates any
provision of this section shall pay to the Town of Agawam all costs and
expenses, including reasonable attorney's fees, incurred by the town in
the enforcement and prosecution of this section. Each day said violation
is permitted to continue after expiration of the fourteen-day notice period
shall constitute a separate violation of this section. This section shall not
apply to duly licensed Class I, II and III dealers.
§ 172-5. Alternative proceedings for violations. [Added 6-6-2005 by
TOR-2005-1]
Chapter 175
WATER AND SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
Any violation of this chapter, Chapter 172, may, in the discretion of the
Inspector of Buildings, or his designee, or any police officer as directed
by the Police Chief or his designee, be enforced by the noncriminal
complaint method for which provision is made, and/or as set forth in
MGL c. 40, § 21D, as amended from time to time, that is, noncriminal
disposition. Fines issued pursuant to § 172-5 shall be as follows:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense and each subsequent offense: $100.
A.
Each day on which a violation exists shall constitute and be deemed a
separate offense.
B.
§ 172-4 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 172-5
172:225

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 175-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. Word usage. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
Definitions. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the
meanings of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows:
ABUTTER — One who holds title to real property within the limits of an
improvement area, and his successors in title.[Added 8-12-1981]
APPLICANT — Any abutter, his agent, representative or assign
requesting approval to discharge wastewater into Town sewer facilities
or to connect to the Town drainage system.[Added 8-12-1981]
AUTHORIZED ENFORCEMENT AGENCY — The Department of Public
Works, its employees, or agents designated to enforce this chapter on
the behalf of the Superintendent.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
AVERAGE DAILY FLOW — The total volume of sewage in gallons
measured at a metering station or other point during a continuous
period of 365 days divided by 365.[Added 1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4]
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMP) — Structural or
nonstructural practices which temporarily store or treat urban
stormwater runoff to reduce flooding, remove pollutants, or reduce
pollutants at their source.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
BOD (denoting "biochemical oxygen demand") — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a
drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and
other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it
to the building sewer, beginning 10 feet outside the inner face of the
building wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the
public sewer or other place of disposal.
BUSINESS UNIT — An individual commercial user or dry industry, but
excluding any wet industry as defined herein, such that each individual
business in a shopping center or industrial complex shall constitute
one business unit.[Added 8-12-1981; amended 7-10-1989 by
TOR-89-9]
CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS — Pollutant discharge
limitations for specific industrial user categories promulgated under
federal law by the United States Environmental Protection
Agency.[Added 1-21-1986]
B.
§ 175-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-1
172:227
CITY — The City of Springfield, its Director of Public Works or other
designated representative.[Added 1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4]
CLEAN WATER ACT — The federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments
thereto.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and
sewage.
COMMERCIAL USER — A classification of user which includes all retail
and wholesale establishments, institutions and offices, including but
not limited to office buildings, restaurants, retail and wholesale outlets,
service agencies, agents, brokers, professional offices, etc., both for
profit and nonprofit.[Added 8-12-1981]
DEP or DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION — A
department of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts which regulates
environmental concerns, including but not limited to the Wetland
Protection Act and as co-permittee-of certain NPDES permits with the
EPA.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The administrative body for
public works in the Town of Agawam.
DETENTION POND or RETENTION POND — A natural or man-made
drainage holding area and appurtenances, including outlet or control
structure, dam, emergency spillway, etc.[Added 7-9-1984]
DISCHARGE — The following are the definitions of terms used in this
section:[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Same as stormwater system, storm sewer
system.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
DIRECT STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated
or untreated stormwater directly to the MS4, which may or may
not subsequently discharge to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, including rivers, streams, brooks, or wetlands.
(1)
ILLICIT STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any nonstormwater
discharge into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4),
except as specifically exempted in this code. DischargeS which are
in compliance with a NPDES stormwater discharge permit are not
illicit discharges.
(2)
INDIRECT STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated
or untreated stormwater to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, including rivers, streams, brooks, or wetlands,
without a connection to or discharge to the municipal separate
storm sewer system (MS4) before flows reach the water resource.
(3)
STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or
untreated stormwater to the Town’s MS4.
(4)
§ 175-1 AGAWAM CODE § 175-1
172:228
DRAIN LATERAL OR CONNECTION — Drainage service connections
are private structures to be owned and maintained by the property
owner to the point where it connects to a stormwater main, manhole,
or catch basin in the street right-of-way or Town’s easement.[Added
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
DRY INDUSTRY — A classification of user which includes all industries
which do not use water for processes, do not use large volumes of water
for cleaning, or for which total annual wastewater production is less
than 100,000 cubic feet.[Added 8-12-1981]
DUMPING — An act or omission of any person or entity, the proximate
result of which is the introduction of pollutant(s) to the MS4, which is
an illicit discharge.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
DWELLING UNIT — A single-family house, one apartment or one
condominium unit shall constitute one dwelling unit.[Added
8-12-1981; amended 7-10-1989 by TOR-89-9]
EPA or ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY — The United
States Environmental Protection Agency, a department of the federal
government that requires compliance with the Clean Water Act and
NPDES permitting.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
EXCESSIVE — Amounts of concentration of a constituent of a
wastewater which in the judgment of the municipality:
EXISTING DISCHARGE — Any discharge to the MS4 which is under
construction or operation at the time of the enactment of this
definition.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
FLOW ATTENUATION — Prolonging the flow time of runoff to reduce
the rate of the peak discharge.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling,
storage and sale of produce.
GENERAL BENEFIT AREA — The part of Town that is served, or has
the potential to be served, directly or indirectly, by the existing and
proposed system of sewerage or drainage, which shall include the area
within the improvement area.[Added 8-12-1981]
(1) Will cause damage to any facility;
(2) Will be harmful to a wastewater treatment process;
Cannot be removed in the treatment works to the degree required
in the limiting streams classification standards of the Connecticut
River and/or its tributaries;
(3)
(4) Can otherwise endanger life and/or property; or
(5) Can constitute a nuisance.
§ 175-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-1
172:229
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater
is replenished by precipitation through the percolation of runoff and
surface water through the soil.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
HYDROLOGY MODEL — [Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
ILLICIT CONNECTION — Any surface flow or conveyance of flows to
the MS4 which contains nonstormwater discharges except as exempted
within this chapter.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
ILLICIT STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Any nonstormwater discharge
into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), except as
specifically exempted in this chapter. Discharges which are in
compliance with a NPDES stormwater discharge permit are not illicit
discharges.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
IMPROVEMENT AREA — The area served by the proposed sewerage
or drainage project, the boundaries of which shall include only those
parcels or portions of parcels that could be directly connected to the
proposed common sewers or drains, such that a building sewer or drain
would not have to pass through adjacent private land to serve each
parcel.[Added 8-12-1981]
INDIRECT STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated
or untreated stormwater to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, including rivers, streams, brooks, or wetlands without
a connection to or discharge to the municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4) before flows reach the water resource.[Added
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
INDUSTRIAL USER — An industry discharging industrial wastewater
to a public sewer.[Added 1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4]
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial
manufacturing processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
INDUSTRY — An establishment with facilities for manufacturing,
processing, fabricating, finishing, assembling, testing or packaging
goods, including materials, chemicals, by-products and finished and
unfinished products. And furthermore, "industry" shall mean any
nongovernmental user of publicly owned treatment works identified
in the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1972, Office of
TR20, a watershed hydrology model developed by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service that is used to route a design
storm hydropgraph through a pond.
(1)
TR55, Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds, a publication
developed by the Natural Resources Conservation Service to
calculate stormwater runoff and an aid in designing detention
basins.
(2)
HydroCAD, a computer model which utilizes the TR20 or TR55
method for stormwater runoff modeling.
(3)
§ 175-1 AGAWAM CODE § 175-1
172:230
Management and Budget, as amended and supplemented, under the
following divisions:
INTERFERE — A discharge by an industrial user which, along or in
conjunction with discharges by other sources, inhibits or disrupts the
Town's wastewater work, its treatment processes or operations or its
sludge processes, use or disposal and which is a cause of a violation of
any requirement of the Town's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of
a violation, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by
the Town in accordance with the following statutory provisions and
regulations or permits issued thereunder for more stringent state or
local regulations: § 405 of the Clean Water Act, the Solid Waste Disposal
Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more commonly referred to as the
Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), and including state
regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared
pursuant to Subtitle D of the SWDA], the Clean Water Act, the Toxic
Substances Control Act and the Marine Protection Research and
Sanctuaries Act.[Added 1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4]
LOT — An area of land in one ownership, with definite boundaries, used
or available for use as the site for one or more dwelling or business
units.[Added 8-12-1981; amended 7-10-1989 by TOR-89-9]
MAXIMUM DAILY FLOW — The highest volume in gallons measured at
a metering station or other point during any continuous twenty-fourhour
period.[Added 1-21-1986]
MS4 or MUNICIPAL SEPARATED STORM SEWER SYSTEM — The
system of conveyances of mains, laterals, swales, catch basins, roadway
gutters, and other BMPs located within public ways and easements
established and conveyed and accepted by the Town for utility and
drainage purposes. Drainage structures constructed in accordance with
Planning Board requirements for subdivisions and meeting DPW
requirements shall also be part of the MS4.[Added 5-15-2006 by
TOR-2006-2]
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake
or other body of surface or ground water.
NPDES: NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
— Permitting required by the EPA for various types of discharges to the
waters of the United States.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
(1) Division A, Agriculture, Forestry and Fishing.
(2) Division B, Mining.
(3) Division D, Manufacturing.
Division E, Transportation, Communications, Electric, Gas and
Sanitary Services.
(4)
(5) Division I, Services.
§ 175-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-1
172:231
NON-STORMWATER DISCHARGE — Discharge which is composed of
constituents which are not stormwater except as specifically exempted
within the chapter.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
OWNER — The owner or occupant of land, and in the case of permit
applications under Article III, any person intending to acquire an
ownership interest in land.[Added 7-9-1984]
PARCEL — Real property within the limits of an improvement area, or
general benefit area, consisting of one lot; or two or more potential lots,
calculated on the basis of zoning in effect at the time of assessment,
which are under one ownership.[Added 8-12-1981; amended
7-10-1989 by TOR-89-9]
PASS-THROUGH — The discharge of pollutants through the Town's
wastewater works into navigable waters in quantities or concentrations
which, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources,
are a cause of a violation of any requirement of the Town's National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit, including an increase
in the magnitude or duration of a violation.[Added 1-21-1986]
PERMITTING AUTHORITY — The Department of Public Works.[Added
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
PERSON — Any individual, firm, company, association, society,
corporation or group, including a city, county or other governmental
unit.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT — Any element or property of sewage, agricultural,
industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or
other matter, whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, that
is or may be introduced into any sewage treatment works or waters of
the commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, without limitation:[Added
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
(1) Paint, varnish, and solvents.
(2) Oil, anti-freeze, and other automotive fluids.
(3) Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes.
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned
objects, ordnance, accumulations and floatables.
(4)
(5) Pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers.
(6) Hazardous materials and wastes.
(7) Sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens.
(8) Dissolved and particulate metals.
(9) Animal wastes and pet wastes.
§ 175-1 AGAWAM CODE § 175-1
172:232
POTENTIAL UNIT — A dwelling or business unit not in existence at
the time of assessment, but which could be built on a parcel or a
portion thereof and connected to a common sewer or drain at a later
date, provided that potential units shall be calculated on the basis of
zoning in effect at the time the assessment is made.[Added 8-12-1981;
amended 7-10-1989 by TOR-89-9]
PRIVATE WAY — A right-of-way which has been established by a Town
Board, but which has not been accepted as a public way. This right-ofway
may or may not have roadway or utility structures for use by the
public or abutters within its established area.[Added 5-15-2006 by
TOR-2006-2]
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a
degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions
normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2
inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER — Any sewer owned and maintained by the
Town.[Amended 1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4]
PUBLIC WAY — A right-of-way which has been established and
accepted as a public way by the appropriate Town entity. It shall include
those structures which have been built for the use of the public for
highway purposes including all utilities owned by the Town above and
below ground.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
SANITARY LATERAL OR CONNECTION — Sanitary service connections
are private structures to be owned and maintained by the property
owner to the point where it connects to a sanitary main in the right-ofway
or Town’s easement; same as “building sewer.”[Added 5-15-2006
by TOR-2006-2]
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
storm-, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted.
SD PERMIT or STORM DRAIN PERMIT — A permit given by the DPW to
applicants which authorizes the discharge of runoff directly to the MS4
and indirectly to the waters of the commonwealth.[Added 5-15-2006
by TOR-2006-2]
SERVICE AREA — The area served or capable of being served in
the future by the proposed pressure improvement system.[Added
7-10-1989 by TOR-89-9]
SERVICED PROPERTY — A part or all of a parcel within an
improvement area that could be directly served by the new sewerage
or drainage system, regardless of whether or not any dwelling or
(10)Rock, sand, salt and soils.
(11)Construction wastes and residues.
(12)Noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
§ 175-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-1
172:233
business units are actually connected to the sewers or drains.[Added
8-11-1981; amended 7-10-1989 by TOR-89-9]
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together
with such ground-, surface and storm waters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SEWERED STREET — A public way or a way which the Town Clerk
certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or a way shown on a
plan approved in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, 33 or a
way in existence when the Subdivision Control Law became effective
in the Town, which contains sewerage or drainage facilities to serve
the existing and potential dwelling and business units abutting the
street.[Added 8-12-1981]
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration of flows during normal
operation.
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "storm sewer") — A sewer, ditch or
channel which carries storm- and surface waters, other than unpolluted
cooling water. Except where the context would clearly designate one or
the other, the term encompasses both underground piping and surface
drainage easements containing ditches, swales, channels or detention
or retention basins for the handling of water.[Amended 7-9-1984;
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEM — Publicly owned facilities by which
stormwater is collected and/or conveyed, including, but not limited
to, public roads with drainage systems.[Added 5-15-2006 by
TOR-2006-2]
STORMWATER DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
stormwater to the Town’s MS4.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
SUPERINTENDENT — The Superintendent of Public Works of the Town
of Agawam or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
SURFACE WATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) pursuant to 314 CMR
3.00 that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts.[Added 5-15-2006 by
TOR-2006-2]
33.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K through 81GG, inclusive, and Ch. 159, Subdivision of
Land.
§ 175-1 AGAWAM CODE § 175-1
172:234
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering and are referred to as nonfilterable
residue in the laboratory test prescribed in Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater.
TOTAL NUMBER OF UNITS — The summation of all existing and
potential dwelling and business units in an improvement area or
general benefit area.[Added 8-12-1981; amended 7-10-1989 by
TOR-89-9]
UNDEVELOPED LAND — A part or all of a parcel that is devoid of
any existing dwelling or business units and does not abut a sewered
street.[Added 8-12-1981]
USER — The person, as defined herein, who holds title to real property
within the limits of an area serviced by a sanitary sewer, and his
successors in title, who discharges a wastewater. The term "user" shall
exclude any entity having a specific agreement in force, approved by
the Environmental Protection Agency, for the handling and treating of
its wastewater by the Town.[Added 8-12-1981]
WASTEWATER — The fluids flowing through the Town sewage system
and may be a combination of the liquid and liquid-borne wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants or
institutions.[Added 8-12-1981]
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
WATER RESOURCE — Same as “waters of the commonwealth.”[Added
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the
jurisdiction of the commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers,
streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands,
coastal waters, and groundwater. These are protected water resources
through state and/or federal regulation.[Added 5-15-2006 by
TOR-2006-2]
WET INDUSTRY — A classification of user which includes any industry
that produces more than 100,000 cubic feet of wastewater per year,
or an industry that discharges any volume of wastewater of greater
strength than residential wastewater or contains constituents which
require pretreatment in accordance with this chapter shall be classified
as a "wet industry" for purposes of this chapter.[Added 8-12-1981]
YARD DRAIN — Private catch basin located within lawn area and
connected to the MS4 or discharges to a dry well or indirect discharge
to waters of the commonwealth.[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
§ 175-1 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-2
172:235
§ 175-2. Notification of spills to public storm drain system (MS4).34
[Added 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
Notwithstanding other requirements of local, state or federal law, as soon
as a person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for
emergency response for a facility or operation, has information of or
suspects a release of materials at that facility or operation resulting in
or which may result in discharge of pollutants to the municipal drainage
system, the person shall take all necessary steps to ensure containment
and cleanup of the release. In the event of a release of oil or hazardous
materials, the person shall immediately notify the municipal fire and police
departments and DPW. In the event of a release of nonhazardous material,
the reporting person shall notify the DPW no later than the next business
day. The reporting person shall provide to the DPW written confirmation of
all telephone, facsimile or in-person notifications within three business days
thereafter. If the discharge of prohibited materials is from a commercial or
industrial facility, the facility owner or operator of the facility shall retain
on-site a written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent
its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years.
§ 175-3. Repair and replacement of water mains by Town.
The Town may repair or replace water mains located in an unaccepted
street which has been dedicated for public use upon presentation to the
Department of Public Works of a plan of the street and easements to
water lines for the entire street, certified as to correctness by an attorney
acceptable to the Town Council.
§ 175-4. Water bills to become a lien.
Water bills are a lien upon the real estate owner, and unpaid accounts will
bear interest and be added to the tax bill.
§ 175-5. Power of Town to maintain and protect water supply.
The Town, for the purpose of supplying itself and its inhabitants with water
for the extinguishment of fires and for domestic and other purposes, upon
the advice and approval of the State Board of Health may from time to time,
as in its opinion necessity requires, take by purchase or otherwise and hold
any lands within the limits of such Town, together with any water or water
rights therein, and also all lands, rights-of-way and easements necessary for
procuring, holding, protecting and distributing such water, may purchase
water to be held by it protected and distributed for such purposes and
upon such condition from neighboring municipalities and in general may do
such things as are necessary for the purpose of securing, maintaining and
protecting such water system or supply. It may also establish hydrants and
fountains, regulate the use of such water and fix and collect rates to be paid
for the use of the same.
34.Editor’s Note: The material contained in former § 175-2, Deposit of certain substances
prohibited, was moved to § 175-36A.
§ 175-2 AGAWAM CODE § 175-6
172:236
§ 175-6. Power of Town to construct and maintain certain
appurtenances.
The Town may construct and maintain upon lands so taken wells, either
artesian or of other kinds, filter beds, reservoirs, galleries, dams,
standpipes, pumping stations and other necessary work, machinery and
structures, may make such excavations, procure and operate such
machinery and do such other things as may be necessary for providing and
maintaining an effective system of water supply and it may lay and maintain
such aqueducts, conduits, pipes and other works over or under any ways
within such Town in such manner as shall not unnecessarily obstruct the
same.
§ 175-7. Registration of land procured.
The Town shall file and cause to be recorded in the Registry of Deeds for
the county a description sufficiently accurate for identification of all lands,
rights-of-way, water rights, watercourses or easements which it shall take
hereunder, otherwise than by purchase, together with a statement of the
purpose for which the same are taken, within 90 days of the date of such
taking. Such statements shall be signed by the Mayor.
§ 175-8. Payment of damages.
The Town shall pay all damages to property sustained by any person or
corporation by the taking of any land, right-of-way, water sources, water
right or easement or by reason of any other thing done by such Town under
authority of this article. Any person or corporation entitled to damages
under this article who fails to agree with the Town as to the amount thereof
may have the same assessed and determined in the manner provided by
law in the case of land taken for the laying out of highways by making
application therefor within one year after the taking of such land or other
property or the doing of any other injury under the authority of this article,
but no application shall be made after the expiration of such year. No
application shall be made for such assessment of damage for the taking of
any water or water rights or any injury thereto until the water is actually
withdrawn or diverted by the Town under the authority of this article, and in
such last named case, a description and statement shall be deemed to have
been filed for the purpose of such assessment and determination until such
water is actually withdrawn or diverted.
§ 175-9. Establishment of rates.
The Department of Public Works shall fix just and equitable prices and rates
for the use of water, subject to the approval of the Town Council, and shall
prescribe the time and manner of payment. The income of the water works
shall be applied to defraying all operating expenses, interest charges and
payments on principal as they accrue upon any bonds, notes or scrip issued
under the authority of this article. If there should be a net surplus remaining
after providing for such charges, it shall be used for such new construction
§ 175-6 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-9
172:237
as the Department of Public Works may determine upon; and in case a
surplus should remain after payment for such new construction, the water
rates shall be proportionately reduced. No money shall be expended for
new construction by the Department of Public Works except from the net
surplus, unless the Town appropriates money therefor.
§ 175-9 AGAWAM CODE § 175-9
172:238
ARTICLE II
Assessments for Sewers and Drains
[Added 8-1-1983 by TOR-83-19]
§ 175-10. Calculation and method of assessment.
A proportionate cost of each extension of the sewerage or drainage
system, including the cost of all required appurtenances thereto, shall
be distributed between the Town and the abutters in an equitable
manner, based on the final cost of the project, to be calculated as
follows:
The final cost of the project shall be the sum of the following:
The total cost of any general benefit facilities within the
improvement area, including but not limited to facilities
planning for and construction of pumping stations, force
mains, trunk and interceptor sewers or main drains, land
acquisition and easements.
(a)
The total cost of special benefit facilities, including all eightinch-
diameter common sewers or twelve-inch-diameter drains
and appurtenances thereto. For trunk and interceptor sewers
of larger than eight-inch diameter or main drains of larger
than twelve-inch diameter, the Superintendent shall estimate
the equivalent cost of eight-inch-diameter common sewers or
twelve-inch-diameter drains and shall include the estimated
cost thereof in his calculation of the total cost of special benefit
facilities within the improvement area. The remainder of the
cost of trunk and interceptor sewers or main drains shall be
proportioned as general benefit facilities costs by the
Superintendent.
(b)
The total cost and expenses incidental to the installation and
connection of building sewers or drains in accordance with
§ 175-33.
(c)
(1)
The assessment for an individual dwelling or business unit shall
be the sum of a general benefit assessment and a special benefit
assessment.
The general benefit assessment shall be calculated based on
the total cost of all general benefit facilities within the general
benefit area, less any state and federal aid attributable to
general benefit facilities, but including any debt contracted for
general benefit facilities and interest thereon, divided equally
by the total number of units within the general benefit area.
The general benefit assessment shall be made in lieu of
payment of an entrance fee under § 175-32. The cost of general
benefit facilities attributable to undeveloped land not abutting
a sewered street shall not be assessed until such properties
(a)
(2)
A.
§ 175-10 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-10
172:239
§ 175-11. Portion of cost to be paid by Town.
are serviced by public sewerage or drainage. The rate of
assessment for general benefit facilities shall be equal to the
amount of the entrance fee at the time the assessment is made,
except where general benefit facilities are being installed
under § 175-11A(6) whereunder the rate of assessment shall
be the entrance fee plus the total cost of the general benefit
facilities.
The Town Council shall determine whether it shall pay the
whole or a portion or none of the cost of the special benefit
facilities, and if a portion, that portion shall be in accordance
with § 175-11. The proportionate cost of the special benefit
facilities to be paid by the abutters shall be divided equally
among the total number of units within the improvement area.
The special benefit assessment shall be made on all developed
and undeveloped land abutting the proposed sewers or drains.
Assessments on each parcel shall be based on the maximum
total number of units that could be directly served by the
special benefit facilities, calculated on the basis of zoning in
effect at the time of assessment.
(b)
In making assessments for sewers and drains, the Town shall use
the following procedures with regard to public notice and
assessment orders:
Whenever the Town Council determines that it shall pay only
a portion or none of the special benefit facilities cost, the
Council shall, by a majority vote, pass an order stating that
betterments are to be assessed. The order of public notice shall
contain a description of the improvement area by listing the
names of the proposed sewered streets, a locus map and the
estimated maximum amount of the general and special benefit
assessments. Failure to give notice under this subsection shall
not affect the Council's authority to make assessments at a
later date.
(a)
After the sewerage or drainage work is completed, the
Superintendent shall calculate the rates of assessment in
accordance with this chapter. A majority vote of the Town
Council shall be required to make an order of assessment. The
order of assessment shall contain the name of each owner and
the amount of the general and special benefit assessments on
each parcel, as well as a reference to the book and page where
the deed for each parcel is recorded.
(b)
(3)
The Council Clerk shall record public notice and assessment orders in
the Hampden County Registry of Deeds within 30 days after adoption
of the orders.
B.
§ 175-10 AGAWAM CODE § 175-11
172:240
If the Town Council votes to pay less than the whole cost of the special
benefit facilities, in providing for the payment of the remaining portion
of said system or systems, the Town shall utilize the method of
assessment described in § 175-10 and the provisions of Chapters 80
and 83 of the General Laws relative to the assessment, apportionment,
division, reassessment, abatement and collection of assessments, to
liens therefor and to interests thereon:
Where sanitary sewer facilities are installed generally to serve
existing homes, businesses or industries, the Town will pay a
portion of the total special benefit costs based on the greater of the
following methods of calculating its proportionate share:
Fifty percent of the total cost of the special benefit facilities
less any state and federal aid attributable to special benefit
facilities within the improvement area, provided that if the
total grants in aid equal or exceed 50%, the Town shall pay no
portion of the cost of the special benefit facilities, and if there
is no grant, the Town shall pay 50%.
(a)
The difference between the total cost of the special benefit
facilities less any state and federal aid attributable to special
benefit facilities within the improvement area, and the product
of $2,000 multiplied by the Engineering News Record
Construction Cost Index (ENR Index) at the time the project is
bid, divided by a base ENR Index of 3600, multiplied further
by the total number of units within the improvement area, so
that the special benefit assessment for an individual dwelling
or business unit would not be greater than $2,000 at an ENR
Index of 3600, as adjusted to reflect average construction costs
at the time the project is bid.
(b)
(1)
Where sanitary sewer facilities are being installed to serve a
proposed housing, commercial or industrial development and
where the developer/owner requests the Town to make such an
installation and the Town agrees to install such facilities, the Town
will pay no portion of the cost and the developer/owner shall pay
the entire cost of all special benefit facilities for the installation.
(2)
Assessments for which an extension or deferral of payment is made
under § 175-15 will be assumed by the Town for the period of
deferment. However, the Town shall be reimbursed by the abutter
if the extension is terminated for any reason, as provided in said
section.
(3)
The full amount of any abatement granted will be paid for by the
Town.
(4)
The Town will pay all costs and expenses resulting from
maintenance, repairs and replacement of any existing common
sewer or drain, unless otherwise stated in the order of assessment
or assessed under Subsection A(2).
(5)
A.
§ 175-11 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-11
172:241
§ 175-12. Payment of assessments and charges required.
The owner of any parcel within an improvement area who desires, or is
required by a board or commission of the Town or any state or federal
agency, to connect to the sewerage or drainage system shall pay at the time
of issuance of the connection permit the full general and special benefit
assessment, unless the full benefit assessment has already been paid or
apportioned in accordance with § 175-13, and shall be responsible for the
payment of all user charges required by this chapter, plus the charges for
making the connection(s) to the common sewer or drain under § 175-33, and
all other applicable fees as determined by the Superintendent. All money
collected for sewer purposes shall be allocated to the sewer fund and all
money collected for drainage purposes shall be allocated to the general
fund.
§ 175-13. Method of payment; apportionment.
All assessments arising from the extension of and/or the connection to
the Town sewerage or drainage system shall become liens against the
properties to which they apply in accordance with the provisions of the
General Laws. The abutters, whether or not they actually connect to the
sewerage or drainage system, shall pay the full assessment as a lump
sum payment, or a portion of the assessment in a lump sum payment,
and the balance in annual payments, with interest at a rate equal to 2%
above the rate of interest chargeable to the Town for the project to which
the assessment relates. The Assessors may apportion the balance of the
assessment into equal principal payments, not exceeding 20, for a term
running with the bond issue for the project, or for any other period allowed
under the provisions of MGL c. 80, § 13.
§ 175-14. Abatements and redetermination.
The portion of the total cost of any general benefit facilities not
assessed under § 175-10 will be assumed by the Town. However,
the Town shall be reimbursed for such costs, through future
general benefit assessments or the payment of entrance fees.
(6)
It is the intent of this article that the portion of the cost of new sewers
to be paid for by the Town, including any debt contracted for sewer
purposes and interest thereon, shall be paid for with money received
from user charges in accordance with this chapter and Chapter 83
of the General Laws. However, any bonds issued by the Town for
sewer purposes shall be general obligation bonds. The Town's share
of new drains, including any debt contracted for drainage purposes
and interest thereon, shall be paid for with money appropriated by or
general obligation bonding approved by the Town Council.
B.
In the event that a parcel or a portion of a parcel is included in the
improvement area which cannot be completely served by a gravity
connection between the building sewer or drain and the common sewer
A.
§ 175-11 AGAWAM CODE § 175-14
172:242
§ 175-15. Extensions and deferrals.
or drain, or cannot be served in its entirety, the assessment against the
property shall be adjusted accordingly:
Owners of properties served only partially by new sewers or drains
shall pay an assessment based on the number of minimum-sized
lots, in accordance with the requirements of the Zoning Ordinance,
35 which can be served, provided that the portion not served is not
in common use with the portion served.
(1)
An owner of a developed parcel which cannot be served by a
gravity connection between the building sewer and public sewer
shall pay an assessment which is reduced by the amount equal
to the extra cost of providing a suitable pumping or lifting device
adequate to lift the wastewater from the building plumbing system
and discharge it to the public sewer. The owner shall fully
document the extra cost involved to the satisfaction of the
Superintendent. The resulting reduction in the assessment shall
not exceed the least of the reasonable extra cost to the owner, or
1/2 of the full assessment. This abatement shall not apply to drain
connections requiring sump pumps.
(2)
Property owned by charitable organizations and nonprofit
organizations shall not be exempt from payment of assessments
and charges.
(3)
In the event that the Board of Appeals grants a variance from the
Zoning Ordinance 36 on a parcel or a portion of a parcel within the
improvement area allowing for the construction of one or more dwelling
or business units in excess of the number of units that could have been
built on the basis of zoning in effect at the time of assessment, the Town
Council may redetermine the assessment, with interest.
B.
The Town Council, when making an order of assessment for new sewers
or drains, shall extend the time for payment for such assessments made
on undeveloped public land and land under conservation or agricultural
preservation restriction, provided that the extension shall expire at the
time the restriction is removed, the use changes or the land is built
upon. Undeveloped public land shall include all Town, county, state,
and federally owned land, except public land that is dedicated to park
or conservation use, which shall not be assessed under this article.
Land subject to a conservation or agricultural preservation restriction
shall be as defined in MGL c. 184, § 31. Assessments on portions of
such parcels occupied by existing buildings shall not be extended, and
the owners thereof shall be required to pay a proportional assessment
based on the actual number of dwelling or business units served. The
A.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 175-14 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-15
172:243
order of assessment may provide that interest will not be charged on
such extensions of time for payment.
An abutter may, within six months after the assessment is made, make
application to the Town Council for an extension of time for payment
of all or a portion of his assessment on land that is not built upon, in
accordance with the conditions provided hereinafter:
All of the assessment on potential units within a parcel of
undeveloped land in agricultural use or used as a cemetery may be
extended.
(1)
A portion of the assessment on potential units within a parcel of
undeveloped land in use other than for agricultural purposes or as
a cemetery may be extended up to an amount equal to the greater
of:
(a) Forty percent of the assessment on the potential units, or
The amount that could be extended under Subsection B(3)
below.
(b)
(2)
Table.
A portion of the assessments on potential units within a parcel
abutting a sewered street may be extended based on the
following table:
Number of
Potential Units
(PU's)
Percent of Assessment That Shall Not
Be Extended
1 or 2 50% of the assessment on PU's
3 to 7 The sum of:
50% on the first 2 PU's
40% on the remaining PU's
8 and over The sum of:
50% on the first 2 PU's
40% on the next 5 PU's
25% on the remaining PU's
(a)
The above schedule shall apply only to contiguous parcels; the
total assessment on holdings by a single abutter of several
individual scattered parcels shall not be considered.
(b)
(3)
B.
Any extensions of time for payment granted under Subsection B(1)
through (3) above shall be subject to an annual payment of the interest
on the amount so extended, calculated at the rate provided by MGL
c. 83, § 19. All extensions of time for payment ordered by the Town
Council shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds by
the Council Clerk within 30 days after adoption of the order.
C.
§ 175-15 AGAWAM CODE § 175-15
172:244
The Town hereby adopts MGL c. 80, § 13B, with regard to deferral and
recovery agreements with persons 65 years of age or older, for the total
deferment of the sewer and drain assessment on a parcel or a portion
of a parcel which is the place of residence of said person or persons,
provided that any application for deferral shall be filed with the Council
Clerk within six months after the assessment is made.
D.
§ 175-15 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-15
172:245

ARTICLE III
Assessments for Water System Expansion
[Added 7-10-1989 by TOR-89-9]
§ 175-16. Pressure improvement systems required.
§ 175-17. Method of assessment.
The water system of the Town of Agawam has been designed and
constructed to provide service to buildings and land at or below the
elevation of 270 feet above mean sea level. Any extension of the water
system above this elevation will require the installation of a water
pumping system and/or elevated tank, hereinafter referred to as
pressure improvement systems, to provide adequate pressure and flows
in accordance with standards of the Department of Environmental
Quality Engineering, the Agawam Department of Public Works and
the Agawam Fire Department. All such pressure improvement systems
shall meet with the approval of the Agawam Department of Public
Works.
A.
In the case of individual buildings where the water system can provide
a minimum of 20 pounds per square inch of intake pressure at normal
operation of a pressure improvement system under all conditions,
including fire flow, the system shall be installed, operated, maintained,
repaired and replaced by the owner of the building.
B.
In the case of a multibuilding or multilot development where there
will be individual owners, the Agawam Department of Public Works
shall install a pressure improvement system. The cost of such system,
including construction, engineering, inspection, administration,
operation and maintenance, and depreciation shall be assessed against
all property that will or may in the future be served or benefited by the
pressure improvement system. Any such pressure improvement system
shall be designed and constructed to provide service to all contiguous
land at or above the elevation of 270 feet above mean sea level.
C.
In making assessments for water pressure improvement systems, the
Town shall use the following procedure with regard to public notice and
assessments orders:
Whenever the Town Council determines that a pressure system
shall be constructed by the Town, the Council shall, by a majority
vote, pass an order stating that betterments are to be assessed.
This order of public notice shall contain a description of the service
area and serviced property, a locus map and the estimated
maximum amount of the assessment. Failure to give notice under
this section shall not affect the Council's authority to make
assessments at a later date.
(1)
After the installation of the pressure improvement system is
completed, the Superintendent of Public Works shall calculate the
(2)
A.
§ 175-16 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-17
172:247
§ 175-18. Determination of assessment.
rates of assessment in accordance with this article. A majority
vote of the Town Council shall be required to make an order of
assessment. The order of assessment shall contain the name of
each owner and the amount of the assessment on each parcel, as
well as a reference to the book and page where the deed for each
parcel is recorded.
The Town Clerk shall record public notices and assessment orders
in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds within 30 days after the
adoption of the order.
B.
A proportionate cost of each pressure improvement system, including
all costs enumerated in § 175-16, shall be distributed in an equitable
manner among the serviced property in the service area of the pressure
improvement system. The distribution shall be on the basis of dwelling
units, business units and potential units all as defined herein. 37 The
total cost of the pressure improvement system shall be divided equally
among the total number of units within the serviced property of the
service area. The assessment shall be made against all developed and
undeveloped land within the serviced property of the service area.
Assessments on each parcel shall, in the absence of any approved
subdivision or development plans, be based on the maximum total
number of units that could be directly served by the pressure
improvement system calculated on the basis of zoning in effect at the
time of assessment.
A.
The total cost of the pressure improvement system which is to be
assessed shall be determined by the Superintendent of Public Works
and include the following:
Land costs, including interest on any borrowing, unless the land
occupied by the pressure improvement system is within a public
way or has been granted to the Town.
(1)
Construction costs, including interest on any borrowing, which
includes all costs for the construction of the pressure improvement
system and its appurtenances incurred by the Town.
(2)
Engineering costs, including interest on any borrowing, which
includes all design, permit acquisition, construction inspection and
contract administration costs incurred by the Town in the
construction of the pressure improvement system.
(3)
Operation, maintenance and repair costs, which shall be a sum of
money the interest income from which at a rate of return available
to the Town on its money market accounts at the time of
assessment determination, but not greater than 7%, will be
(4)
B.
37.Editor's Note: See § 175-1 of this chapter.
§ 175-17 AGAWAM CODE § 175-18
172:248
§ 175-19. Payment; special account.
§ 175-20. Abatements and redetermination.
sufficient to cover the average yearly operation, maintenance and
repair costs over the useful life of the system. These costs shall be
determined by the Superintendent of Public Works.
Depreciation costs, which shall be a sum of money the interest
income from which at the rate of return available to the Town
on its money market accounts at the time of assessment, but not
greater than 7%, will, over the useful life of the system, accumulate
sufficient interest without use of the principal to replace the
system. This cost shall be determined by the Superintendent of
Public Works.
(5)
All assessments arising from the expansion of the water system and
installation of a pressure improvement system shall become liens
against the properties to which they apply in accordance with the
provisions of the General Laws. The owner of any parcel within a
service area of a pressure improvement system shall pay theassessment
or proportional part thereof in full at the time of application for a
building permit for a dwelling or business unit(s) or, in the case of an
existing dwelling or business unit(s), the assessment or proportional
part thereof shall be paid in full upon connection to the water system,
unless the full assessment has already been paid or apportioned as
provided herein.
A.
The property owner shall pay the full assessment as a lump sum
payment or a portion of the assessment in a lump sum payment and the
balance in annual payments, with interest for any given calendar year
at a rate of 1/2% above the prime rate as published in the Wall Street
Journal for the first day of business following January 1 of the year
for which interest is being applied. The Assessor may apportion the
balance of the assessment into equal principal payments, not exceeding
20, for a term running with any bond issue for the project, or for
any other period allowed under the provisions of MGL c. 80, § 13.
[Amended 11-16-1991 by TOR-91-11]
B.
All moneys collected from the assessment for a water system expansion
and pressure improvement system shall be placed in a special interestbearing
account under the direction of the Superintendent of Public
Works, and such moneys and interest earned therefrom shall be used
solely for the costs enumerated in § 175-18 for each particular pressure
improvement system.
C.
In the event that a zone change is granted, a variance is granted by the
Board of Appeals or a special permit is issued by a Town agency that
allows for the construction on a parcel of more units than could have
been built upon the basis of zoning in effect at the time of assessment,
the Town Council may redetermine the assessment with interest.
A.
§ 175-18 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-20
172:249
§ 175-21. Exemptions, extensions and deferrals.
In the event that fewer units are constructed on a parcel than were
determined could have been built under the zoning at the time of
assessment, then the total assessment on the parcel shall hold and the
payment for each dwelling or business unit under § 175-19 shall be
increased in inverse proportion to the decreased number of units.
B.
Any land or parcel under conservation or agricultural preservation
restriction as defined in MGL c. 184, § 31, shall be exempt from
assessment under this article, except for the portion of said land or
parcels occupied by existing buildings, which shall be required to pay
a proportional assessment based on the actual number of dwelling or
business units served. Undeveloped public land, including all Town,
county, state and federal land, shall not be assessed under this article.
A.
An owner may, within six months after an assessment is made, make
application to the Town Council for an extension of time for payment of
all or a portion of his land that is not built upon in accordance with the
conditions provided hereinafter:
All of the assessments on potential units within a parcel of
undeveloped land or existing units not served by the Town's water
system may be extended. If such extension is granted, the
assessment amount so extended shall be subject to an eightpercent
annual interest charge compounded. This interest need
not be paid annually but shall accumulate as a lien against the
property. A condition of a grant of any extension shall be that the
assessment plus accumulated interest must be paid in full upon
development of the land at the time of building permit application
or upon connection of an existing unit to the water system.
(1)
All extensions of time for payment ordered by the Town Council
shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds by the
Town Clerk within 30 days after adoption of the order. Said order
shall clearly describe the conditions contained in Subsection B(1)
above.
(2)
B.
§ 175-20 AGAWAM CODE § 175-21
172:250
ARTICLE IV
Sanitary Sewers, Storm Drains and Connections
§ 175-22. Sewer and storm drain permit applicability. [Amended
7-9-1984; 1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4; 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
Sewer permits.
No authorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or
opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer without first
obtaining a written permit from the Superintendent.
(1)
Any person proposing a new discharge into the system or a
substantial change in the volume or character of pollutants that are
being discharged into the system shall notify the Superintendent at
least 45 days prior to the proposed change or connection.
(2)
In the case of industrial users, an industrial discharge permit shall
also be required under § 175-49, Industrial pretreatment program
requirements, prior to the issuance of a permit under this section.
If an industrial discharge permit is amended, modified, suspended
or revoked, then the permit issued under this section shall also be
amended, modified, suspended or revoked.
(3)
A.
Storm drain permits.
Applicability.
The following projects shall be required to comply with the
requirements of a storm drain permit:
[1] Any alteration to sites on parcels of one acre or greater.
Any alteration to individual lots less than one acre, but
which are contiguous or are deemed part of a common
project which is one acre or greater.
[2]
(a)
Exemptions.
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in
agriculture as defined by the Wetlands Protection Act
regulation 310 CMR 10.4.
[1]
Stormwater discharges resulting from the activities of
Subsection B(1)(a) and (b) which are subject to jurisdiction
of the Wetlands Protection Act and demonstrate
compliance with the Massachusetts Storm Water
Management Policy as reflected in an order of conditions
issued by the conservation Commission shall fall under the
DEP's jurisdiction for compliance and enforcement.
[2]
For total parcel areas less than three acres which have
proposed alterations of less than 10% of the parcel(s),
[3]
(b)
(1)
B.
§ 175-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-22
172:251
unless the nature of the proposed change is such that a
significant impact on adjacent properties or downstream
structures is anticipated. Changes at a site may not be
split or phased in order to use this exemption repeatedly.
This exemption is at the complete discretion of the DPW.
The down slope area to the alteration is left in a natural
state and undisturbed such that impacts are anticipated to
be insignificant.
[4]
The DPW Superintendent may waive strict compliance
with any requirement of this SD permit or rules and
regulations hereunder.
[5]
Permits and procedures.
Application. A completed application for a storm drain permit
shall be filed with the Department of Public Works. Approval
must be obtained from the DPW before the beginning of landdisturbing
activities that may result in the disturbance of an
area of an acre or more and/or an alteration of a site of an
acre. Approval to proceed with site changes will be contingent
on the application submission's completeness, demonstration
of compliance with design standards and inspections.
(a)
Inspections.
Inspections by DPW shall be scheduled as follows.
After placement of erosion control BMPs (This will
be before beginning of land-disturbing activities or
clearing.)
[a]
Before backfilling of any underground drainage
utilities or structures.
[b]
Walk through to determine final punch list of items
remaining.
[c]
Final inspection upon completion of all construction
and stabilization of disturbed areas.
[d]
Random inspections may be conducted to ensure
compliance with the permit provisions.
[e]
[1]
DPW access to make inspections. The filing of an
application for a storm drain permit with the DPW shall
be deemed as the property owner's permission to the
Department of Public Works to have the right to enter the
property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner
for the purpose of inspections. Included in the right to
enter a property is when the permitting authority has a
reasonable basis to believe that a violation of this chapter
[2]
(b)
(2)
§ 175-22 AGAWAM CODE § 175-22
172:252
is occurring or has occurred, and to enter when necessary
for the abatement of a public nuisance or correction of a
violation of the conditions of the storm drain permit or this
chapter.
Reporting.
Short-term. Periodic construction phase reporting on
erosion and sediment control best management practices
(BMP) inspections, maintenance, and repairs may be
required. Reporting requirements will be determined by
the location, size, and potential adverse impact of a
specific project. Reports will be made by the owner to the
DPW.
[1]
Long-term. The owner may be required to report
operation, inspections, maintenance, and repair activities
of the site drainage system to the DPW. This will be
dependent on the location, size, and potential adverse
impacts of a specific site. Reports will be made annually
by the owner to the DPW by January 31 for the previous
calendar year.
[2]
(c)
Enforcement. The Department of Public Works or an
authorized agent of the DPW shall enforce this chapter,
regulations, orders, violations notices, and enforcement
orders, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for such
violations.
Civil relief. If a person violates the provisions of this
chapter, regulations, permit, notice, or order issued
thereunder, the city may seek injunctive relief in the court
of competent jurisdiction restraining the person from
activities which would create further violations or
compelling the person to perform abatement or
remediation of the violation.
[1]
Orders.
The DPW or an authorized agent of the DPW may
issue a written order to enforce the provisions of this
chapter or the regulations thereunder, which may
include:
Elimination of illicit connections or discharges to
the MS4;
[i]
Performance of monitoring, analyses, and
reporting;
[ii]
That unlawful discharges, practices, or operations
shall cease and desist; and
[iii]
[a]
[2]
(d)
§ 175-22 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-22
172:253
§ 175-23. Sewer and storm drain installation fees. [Amended
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
All costs and expenses incident to the installation and connection of the
building sewer or storm drain on-site system shall be borne by the owner.
§ 175-24. Separate building sewer required; exception.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for any
building required to have sewage collection and treatment by a proper
government authority, with the following exception: all multiple-family
complexes, a commercial complex, or an industrial complex which has a
privately owned and maintained collector system.
§ 175-25. Use of old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only
when approved, in writing, by the Superintendent.
§ 175-26. Sanitary service connection and building sewer
connection layout and material requirements. [Amended 5-15-2006
by TOR-2006-2]
The size, slope, alignment and materials of construction of a building sewer
and the methods to be used in excavating, placing the pipe, jointing, testing
and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the
Remediation of contamination in connection
therewith.
[iv]
If the enforcing person determines that abatement or
remediation of contamination is required, the order
shall set forth a deadline by which such abatement
or remediation must be completed. Said order shall
further advise that, should the violator or property
owner fail to abate or perform remediation within
the specified deadline, the city may, at its option,
undertake such work, directly or through a contractor,
and expenses thereof shall be charged to the violator.
[b]
Within 30 days after completing all measures
necessary to abate the violation or to perform
remediation, the violator and the property owner will
be notified of the costs incurred by the city, including
administrative costs.
[c]
Rules and regulations. The Department of Public Works may adopt,
and periodically amend DPW policies relevant to the administration
of this chapter. These policies shall pertain to erosion and sediment
control, design guidelines, materials and construction
specifications and other issues related to public drainage system.
(3)
§ 175-22 AGAWAM CODE § 175-26
172:254
Building and Plumbing Code or other applicable rules and regulations of
the Town. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof,
the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the American Society for Testing and Materials and the WPCF Manual of
Practice No. 9 shall apply.
§ 175-27. Building sewer connection elevation. [Amended
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at
an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building
drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage
carried by such building drain shall be lifted by means approved by the
Town's Plumbing Inspector and discharged to the building sewer.
§ 175-28. Surface or ground water runoff connections to sanitary
system prohibited. [Amended 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior or interior
foundation drains, areaway drains or other sources of surface runoff or
groundwater to a building sewer or building drain which in turn is
connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
§ 175-29. Sewer connections to conform to certain requirements.
[Amended 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
Plumbing Code, 248 CMR: Board of State Examiners of Plumbers and
Gas Fitters/Building and/or other applicable rules and regulations of
the Town, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of
the American Society for Testing and Materials and the WPC Manual
of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and
watertight.
A.
Restaurants, banquet facilities, commercial kitchen requirements. Any
facilities at which on-site food preparation, food processing, foodhandling,
food service, or other related activities which may result
in fats, oils, and grease being introduced into the waste stream will
be required to design, install, and maintain an oil/water/grease
interceptor/separator appropriate for the intended use. No wastes
other than those requiring treatment or separation shall be discharged
into any interceptor or separator. [Amended 9-20-2010by
TOR-2010-5]
B.
Vehicle storage/maintenance facilities. Any commercial facilities which
store vehicles, wash vehicles, and perform vehicle maintenance will be
required to design, install, and maintain an oil and water, sand and
other substance separator, and to seal existing interior floor drains
which outlet to the public drainage or sanitary sewer systems. This may
also apply to facilities where motor oils, gasoline, antifreeze and similar
C.
§ 175-26 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-29
172:255
§ 175-30. Sewer and storm drain permit application; supervision of
connection. [Amended 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
hazardous liquid wastes are potentially generated or may potentially
spill. The system must comply with the Massachusetts Plumbing Code.
Sanitary service piping must be such that only wastes requiring
treatment or separation shall be discharged into the interceptor or
separator.
Existing use. Existing sites with uses as described in Subsections B and
C shall have until September 1, 2011, to install required equipment
and make required changes to the site. Failure to meet this deadline
will be considered a violation of the sewer permit for the site. Charges
shall be assessed by the Department of Public Works to the owner
of any property which falls under Subsections A, B, and C above to
cover materials, labor, equipment, and administrative costs incurred by
the Agawam DPW as a result of noncompliance, plugged sewer mains,
plugged sewer services and otherwise excessive fats, oil, grease and/
or grit inappropriately being discharged or deposited into the Town’s
sanitary sewer system. Additionally, the owner shall be subject to other
enforcement actions as described in § 175-54. [Amended
9-20-2010by TOR-2010-5]
D.
Sewer permit.
Application. The applicant for a building sewer permit or sanitary
sewer connection permit shall make application on a special form
furnished by the Town. The permit application shall be pertinent in
the judgment of the Superintendent.
(1)
Sewer service connection size material, and appurtenances, such
as cleanouts, oil and water separators, shall be installed by the
owner as directed by the DPW. The applicant for the building
sewer permit shall notify the Superintendent when the building
sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer.
The connection shall be made under the supervision of the
Superintendent or his/her representative.
(2)
A.
Storm drain permit.
A storm drain permit shall be required for projects as described in
§ 175-22B. The application shall include the following information,
which shall be reflected in the completed application form and
permit package.
(a) Site location and description.
(b) Owner information.
(c) Builder/contractor information.
(d) Project description.
(1)
B.
§ 175-29 AGAWAM CODE § 175-30
172:256
(e) Stormwater management plan.
(f) Certification statement.
(g) Application/review fee.
Storm drain (SD) permitting requirements. The following
components will be required to receive a storm drain permit at
the discretion of the Superintendent of the Department of Public
Works.
Application. This shall identify the site location, size of
parcel(s), name of larger project this site is a part of, owner
information, builder/contractor information, project
description.
(a)
Stormwater management plan.
The purpose of the Stormwater Management Plan is to
ensure that the runoff from a site has been treated for
water quality and quantity impacts during the construction
of the project and during the long term. This treatment
includes, but is not limited to, erosion and sediment
control to the extent practicable via structural and
nonstructural BMPs during construction and the
establishment of structural BMPs for long-term controls.
[1]
The Superintendent of the Department of Public Works
may require and alter as he sees fit the components of
the Stormwater Management Plan. All components of the
Stormwater Management Plan shall be prepared and
stamped by a licensed professional engineer. That
engineer shall be available during the construction phase
to advise the builder of any alterations required to protect
resource waters and adjacent properties as needed from
water volume and water quality impacts due to the project.
Temporary measures. This shall include a written
description of proposed temporary BMPs, a plan at an
appropriate scale of those BMPs, construction details,
a description of maintenance of proposed BMPs, a
maintenance schedule, and reporting requirements of
erosion and sediment controls and on-site hazardous
materials handling and storage, dust control, off-site
sedimentation measures, plan and procedures, and
certification by the contractor and all subcontractors
on the site of adherence to the described construction
phase plan. The Massachusetts Erosion and Sediment
Control Guidelines for Urban and Suburban Areas
prepared for the Massachusetts DEP, and others, shall
be used as guidance for appropriate erosion and
sediment control measures. In addition, the DPW may
[a]
[2]
(b)
(2)
§ 175-30 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-30
172:257
prepare and make available standards for temporary
BMP measures and may update those standards.
Permanent measures. This shall include a written
description of proposed permanent BMPs, a plan at
a scale of not less than one inch equals 40 feet of
those BMPs, construction details, computations in an
acceptable format, a description of long-term
maintenance of proposed BMPs, a long-term
maintenance schedule, and reporting requirements
for maintenance and inspections as specified by the
DPW. The DPW shall prepare and make available the
full standards for permanent BMP measures and may
update those standards.
[b]
Maintenance. A description of long-term maintenance
and inspection schedules shall be submitted for site
development projects.
[c]
Construction certification statement. A statement to
be signed by the contractor and all relevant
subcontractors shall be included in the SWM plan
certifying that they have read and understand the
construction phase requirements and agree to comply.
[d]
Certificate of completion. Once all work has been
complete, a final inspection has occurred, and the
installation has been approved, the DPW shall issue a
certificate of completion.
[e]
Inspections.
Compliance inspections shall be required as determined
by the Department of Public Works Superintendent or
agent. If in the course of inspections by DPW personnel of
temporary or permanent BMPs, it is determined that water
resources or the MS4 is not being adequately protected,
or that information submitted by the applicant in reporting
to the DPW is inadequate, has missing information, or
is insufficient, enforcement action will proceed at a level
which is appropriate at the discretion of the DPW given the
level of the perceived offense.
[1]
Construction phase inspections shall be conducted by the
owner or designee as required to determine the adequacy
of erosion and sediment controls. Depending on the results
of those inspections, sediment control BMPs shall be
repaired, maintained, or improved as necessary.
[2]
Operations inspections. The owner or designee is
responsible for performing all maintenance inspections as
described in the stormwater management plan. Those
[3]
(c)
§ 175-30 AGAWAM CODE § 175-30
172:258
inspections must be of adequate frequency and timing
to determine the functioning of short-term and long-term
stormwater BMPs. If deficiencies are found, they must
be remedied in a timely fashion. Adverse impacts off site
which are due to deficiencies in the functioning or
maintenance of short-term or long-term BMPs are the
responsibility of the storm drain permit applicant. The
right to enter adjacent properties and affect repairs/
remediation shall be the full responsibility of the storm
drain permit applicant.
Maintenance. The SD permit applicant shall be responsible for
adequate maintenance of BMPs described in the stormwater
management plan for short-term and long-term control
measures.
(d)
Reporting. Reporting requirements shall be based upon the
overall size of the project, the nature of proposed changes,
existing and proposed site conditions, the proximity of water
resource, and other pertinent factors. Reporting may include
construction phase reports, final or as-built reports, and
annual maintenance reports — Upon the completion of the
work the permittee shall submit a Final Storm Drain Report
(including certified as-built construction plans) from a
Professional Engineer (P.E.) or surveyor (RLS), certifying that
all stormwater management devices (catch basins, pipes,
detention devices, outlet control structures, vegetated swales,
channel improvements) and erosion and sediment control
devices, and approved changes and modifications, have been
completed in accordance with the conditions of the approved
permit. Any discrepancies should be noted in the cover letter.
(e)
Review/approval of storm drain permit. The review and
approval by the DPW of information submitted for compliance
with the storm drain permit does not relieve the applicant
of full responsibility for the adequate protection of water
resources as required by state and federal law, or to remediate
any adverse impacts to downstream or adjacent properties
adversely impacted by new runoff flow paths or flow regimes.
If, in the course of the construction and/or ongoing
maintenance of the proposed BMPs, it is determined by the
DPW, the Town, or any other authority which has jurisdiction
over the protection of water resources that the measures
currently implemented are inadequate, the owner of the site
shall be responsible for implementing improvements, adequate
maintenance, and inspections of the protection measures such
that the resource and adjacent properties are protected.
(f)
Certification statement. The storm drain permit applicant and
the builder/contractor certify that they shall comply with the
stormwater management plan, including all short-term and
(g)
§ 175-30 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-30
172:259
§ 175-31. Guarding of excavations; restoration of disturbed
property.
All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded
with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets,
sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of
the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the Superintendent.
§ 175-32. Schedule of entrance fees.
The Department of Public Works shall establish a schedule of entrance fees
and may amend the same from time to time. All fees regarding the Sewer
Use Ordinance shall require the approval by the majority vote of the full
Town Council. The entrance fee shall be a unit charge for each dwelling
or business unit serviced by a direct or indirect connection made to a
public sewer. This fee shall be paid prior to any work being commenced by
the Town or the owner to effect such connection. A single-family house or
one apartment unit shall constitute one dwelling unit, and each individual
business in a shopping center or business complex shall constitute one
business unit. This fee shall be paid for each unit connected directly to the
Town's sewer system as well as for each unit which is later added on to a
sewer system which eventually deposits sewage into the Town system. No
building sewer permit or sanitary sewer connection permit will be issued
unless the person applying for the permit has paid the required entrance
fee.
§ 175-33. Installation and connection costs.
Entrance fees as established under § 175-32 shall not include installation
and connection costs. All costs and expenses incident to the installation and
connection of the building sewers, the installation of or the connection of
sanitary sewers or storm drains shall be borne by the owner. The owner
shall indemnify the Town from loss or damage that may directly or indirectly
be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer or the connection
for the sanitary sewer or the storm drain. The Department of Public Works
shall establish a schedule of charges for the installation and connection of
building sewers and the installation of connections for sanitary sewers and
storm drains and may amend the same from time to time. No building sewer
permit or sanitary sewer connection permit or storm drain connection
permit will be issued unless the person applying for the permit has
long-term inspections, maintenance/repairs, and operation of
the drainage system, and reporting requirements.
Storm drain permit/review fees. The fee for review of any
storm drain permit application shall be based on the amount
of land to be disturbed at the site and the fee structure
established by Code. That fee shall be due before the approval
of the storm drain permit or before the beginning of landdisturbing
activities as appropriate.
(h)
§ 175-30 AGAWAM CODE § 175-33
172:260
deposited with the Town a certified check, payable to the Town of Agawam,
in the amount determined by the Department of Public Works. In the
event that the cost of the installation and connection of a building sewer
or the installation of a sanitary sewer or storm drain connection exceeds
the amount deposited with the Town by the owner, then the owner shall
reimburse the Town for all costs exceeding the amount deposited. If the
reimbursement is not made, the costs shall be considered a lien upon the
property served by said building sewer.
§ 175-34. Status of private sewers connected to public sewers.
All private sewers and drains laid by private parties in any street, court or
way open or proposed to be opened for public travel and accommodation
shall become public sewers or drains when connected to public sewers or
drains. After the adoption of this chapter, no such sewer shall be connected
with a public sewer and no such drain shall be connected with a public
drain until plans showing size, material, construction, depth and location
are approved by the Superintendent and until the owner shall convey, in
writing, to the Town exclusive control over the same, with the right to
enter such street, court or way and dig up the same so far as necessary
for repairing and controlling such sewer or drain and making connections
therewith.
§ 175-35. Stormwater management plan. [Added 7-9-1984;
amended 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
The stormwater management plan shall demonstrate a comprehensive plan
intended to address changes in runoff characteristics due to a proposed
construction project. Both short-term and long-term alterations in flow
paths, runoff volume, and runoff characteristics must be addressed. The
protection of regulated water resources is required. The use of natural
preexisting vegetation and/or the planting of native species to provide
runoff mitigation is strongly encouraged.
Stormwater management performance standards. The Superintendent
of the Department of Public Works may alter the stormwater
management performance standards at his discretion. These standards
do not relieve the applicant from complying with all state and federal
regulations.
A.
Construction erosion and sediment controls. Temporary control
measures to keep disturbed soils on the construction site, prevent
erosion and control and remove sedimentation due the construction
process. The Department of Public Works shall develop design
guidelines for this purpose. They shall be based upon Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection Erosion and Sediment Control
Policies. The erosion and sediment control plan shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer.
B.
Permanent measures; runoff quality and quantity best management
practices.
C.
§ 175-33 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-35
172:261
New development. New commercial, industrial, and residential
sites, unless exempted in § 175-22B, must comply with the
stormwater management performance standards.
(1)
Redevelopment. Previously developed sites must meet the
stormwater management standards to the maximum extent
practicable. However, if it is not practicable to meet all the
standards, the new (retrofitted or expanded) stormwater
management system must be designed to improve existing
conditions.
Stormwater management measures shall be required to satisfy
the control requirements and shall be implemented in the
following order of preference:
Flow attenuation and pollutant removal of runoff on site
to existing areas with grass, trees, and similar vegetation
and through the use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions with appropriate stabilization measures to
ensure long-term operation.
[1]
Stormwater detention pond for the temporary storage of
runoff, which is designed so as not to create a permanent
pool of water.
[2]
Stormwater retention structures for the permanent
storage of runoff by means of a permanent pool of water.
This type of system will not be allowed for subdivisions.
[3]
Retention and evaporation of stormwater on rooftops or in
parking lots. This type of system will not be allowed for
subdivisions.
[4]
(a)
Peak flow rates. Peak flow rates for the post-construction
conditions must not exceed the peak flow rates for the
preconstruction condition for one-hundred-year twenty-fourhour
design storm events. The two-year twenty-four-hour, tenyear
twenty-four-hour post-construction peak flow rate must
be mitigated to the maximum extent practicable.
(b)
Minimize pollutants. Best management practices shall be
employed to minimize pollutants in stormwater runoff prior
to discharge into a separate storm drainage system or water
body. Runoff from parking lots over two acres shall be treated
by oil and water separators or other controls to remove oil and
sediment.
(c)
Projects involving the storage or use of hazardous chemicals
or petroleum products shall incorporate handling and storage
best management practices that prevent such chemicals from
contaminating runoff from the site into infiltration systems,
(d)
(2)
§ 175-35 AGAWAM CODE § 175-35
172:262
receiving water bodies, or the MS4, and shall include a list of
such chemicals in the application.
Connection to MS4. If the destination for the outlet of a
detention system is the MS4, the applicant must evaluate the
existing capacity and condition of that system. If there are
existing deficiencies or extra capacity is not available to accept
additional flows from the project site, the applicant will be
required to design and construct improvements or reduce the
outlet flow rate based on existing capacity.
(e)
Emergency overflow. All detention ponds shall be designed
to provide an emergency overflow system, and incorporate
measures to provide a nonerosive velocity to flow along its
length and at any outfall.
(f)
Down stream structures. The designed release rate of any
stormwater structure shall be modified if any increase in
flooding or stream channel erosion would result at a down
stream dam, highway, structure, or normal point of restricted
stream flow.
(g)
Centralized detention facilities. Certain industrial areas have
centralized detention facilities. The following describes the
allowed percent of impervious area before on-site detention is
required.
Site Location
Site Impervious Area Credit
for Centralized Detention
Agawam Regional Industrial
Park Bowles Road, Almgren
Drive, Abrahms Drive
25%
Suffield St. Industrial Park
Gold Street
50%
Moylan Lane 25%
(h)
Detention ponds. The Department of Public Works shall
develop design guidelines for this purpose. These standards
may be updated from time to time. Public safety shall be
considered in the design of any stormwater facilities.
Detention ponds on private sites are encouraged to utilize the
DPW design guidelines; at the DPW's discretion certain design
standards may not apply to private sites. Detention ponds
within easements to the Town must follow all design standards
as directed by the DPW Superintendent.
(i)
(j) (Reserved)
(k) (Reserved)
§ 175-35 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-35
172:263
Detention pond maintenance requirements. Detention ponds
within easements to the Town of Agawam require minor
maintenance to be performed by the property owner on a
regular basis.
Remove clogs to the outlet structure caused by leaves,
branches, grass clippings, or other debris.
[1]
All grassed areas must be mowed a minimum of two times
per year (spring and fall) to reduce weed growth. If areas
become bare, they must be reseeded to sustain vegetative
cover.
[2]
Detention ponds and swales may not be filled in or altered
such that the intended design and functioning of the
drainage system is impaired.
[3]
Landscaping, fences, or other utilities or structures may
not be placed so that access to the detention pond or
drainage structures is impaired.
[4]
The area surrounding the fenced detention area is to be
kept landscaped or grassed.
[5]
(l)
Calculation submittals for review by the DPW shall include the
following components.
[1] Locus map.
Site plan. This plan must include all relevant information
for the hydrologic modeling of the site. Information shall
include preconstruction and post-construction conditions
at the same scale, which is appropriate for complexity and
size of the project.
[2]
Existing conditions and proposed impact mitigation;
description/investigation of both up-gradient conditions
which release runoff to the site and down-gradient areas
which are the destination of the runoff from the site in
question. The extent of this investigation must be such that
the project designer and the DPW reviewer can have a
good understanding of existing conditions, including flow
paths, flooding conditions, flow-limiting structures,
wetlands or other water resources' ability to withstand
current runoff flow rates and volumes. Proposed
structures and improvements must be such that they
extend far enough down stream to mitigate the proposed
development and increases in impervious areas.
[3]
Soil survey information; copy of Hampden County Soil
Survey Map with site clearly outlined at the scale of the
map. Copy must be clear such that soil type and hydrologic
[4]
(m)
§ 175-35 AGAWAM CODE § 175-35
172:264
soil group can be determined. Also, list the soil types, and
relevant characteristics for the purpose of modeling the
project's runoff.
Hydrologic modeling data. All areas shall be modeled
utilizing the TR 55 or TR 20 method of drainage
calculation as appropriate. Submittals shall include the
following information. Submittals will not be reviewed
until complete information is given in an easy-to-follow
format. The use of tables, summaries, and accompanying
back-up data is strongly encouraged.
Drainage subarea designations and outline locations
for pre- and post-construction condition.
[a]
Time of concentration path location, path length,
surface grade, soil type boundary location for pre- and
post-construction condition.
[b]
[c] Modeling method description.
Model data for pre- and post-construction conditions,
including model of all proposed flow rate control
structures.
[d]
Model output for pre- and post-construction
conditions, including model of all proposed flow rate
control structures.
[e]
Preconstruction peak flow rate and post-construction
peak flow rate at all design points for the site.
[f]
[5]
Design storm events. One-hundred-year twenty-four-hour
storm event: post-construction must not exceed the
preconstruction peak flow rate. Two-year twenty-fourhour,
ten-year twenty-four-hour peak flow rates must be
mitigated to the maximum extent practicable.
[6]
Detention pond design. Seasonal high groundwater
elevation must be determined by a certified soil evaluator
or certified professional soil scientist for the proposed
location of the detention pond. There must be a one-foot
separation between the lowest elevation of the detention
pond and the seasonal high groundwater elevation. The
side slopes of the detention pond must not exceed 3:1
and have a sinuous shape. Contributing area for each
detention pond shall be a maximum of 10 acres. It shall
be less depending on the characteristics of the
preconstruction site drainage pathways. An overland
spillway shall be included such that if the capacity of
the detention pond is exceeded or the outlet becomes
temporarily clogged, a defined overland flow path has
[7]
§ 175-35 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-35
172:265
been established which is adequately reinforced to resist
erosion and to protect adjacent property from drainage
flows.
Outlet to water resources. Structures shall adequately
dissipate energy of outlet effluent such that down stream
wetlands, brooks, streams, and adjacent properties are not
damaged by any increase in peak flows due to construction
phase and post-construction conditions. Analysis of
downstream conditions and natural drainage features
ability to adequately handle construction phase and postconstruction
flow will be performed, analyzed, and
reported as part of the storm drain permit application.
Appropriate remediation of down stream structures must
be proposed.
[8]
Summary table of peak flow comparisons of pre- and postdevelopment
runoff rates for the appropriate design storm
depending on the location relative to protected resource
waters.
[9]
Operation and maintenance, Long-Term.
An operation and maintenance manual shall be developed by the
project designer for the owner's use once construction on the
proposed system is complete. The manual will include a description
of each component of the drainage system, inspections,
maintenance, and the frequency of each for continued operation of
the system.
(1)
(2) See § 175-30B(5) for reporting requirements.
D.
Owner/contractor certification statement; performance; and certificate
of completion.
Certification. The owner or authorized representative and all
contractors and subcontractors shall sign certification statements
as part of the permit application and the stormwater management
plan. In signing the plan, the authorized representative certifies
that the information is true and assumes liability for the plan.
Official signatures provide a basis for an enforcement action to be
taken against the person signing the document.
(a) The owner certification statement shall read:
(1)
E.
§ 175-35 AGAWAM CODE § 175-35
172:266
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all
attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision
in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified
personnel properly gathered and evaluated the information
submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person(s) who manage
the system, or those persons directly responsible for
gathering the information, the information submitted is, to
the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and
complete.
Contractors and subcontractors certification statement.
Contractors and subcontractors certification statement
shall read:
"I certify under penalty of law that I understand the terms
and conditions of the Storm Drain Permit that authorizes
stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity
from the construction site identified as part of this
certification."
[1]
The storm drain permit application shall list all contractors
and subcontractors who will implement the measures
identified in the stormwater management plan.
[2]
(b)
Performance.
Subdivisions. The storm drain permit requirements shall be
included in the Planning Board's bond amount for subdivision
construction, in that the subdivision plans shall reflect the
requirements of the DPW storm drain permit. The bond
amount for the drainage system shall reflect all structures
proposed in the public way and within easements to be given
to the Town for drainage purposes.
(a)
Site plans. The DPW will request that the building occupancy
permit be withheld until the DPW has issued a storm drain
certificate of compliance for the proposed drainage system.
(b)
(2)
Storm drain permit certificate of compliance. A certificate of
compliance shall be issued by the Department of Public Works once
the following has been completed.
(a) A final inspection of the completed work by the Town Engineer.
Certification by a P.E. or R.L.S of the design volume of
detention facilities.
(b)
Submission of storm drain final report as described in
§ 175-30B(2)(e).
(c)
(3)
Storm drain permit fees. The Department of Public Works may charge
fees for application review and inspections.
F.
§ 175-35 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-35
172:267
Application fees shall be charged as follows, based upon the project
area of disturbance. The fee shall be due at the time of permit
application before review begins.
Permit Application Fees
Parcel Area or Area of
Disturbance
(acres) Fee
1 to 5 $200
Above 5 to 20 $700
Above 20 to 50 $1,500
Above 50 $1,500 plus $25 per acre above
50
(1)
Inspection fees shall be charged as follows, based upon the project
area of disturbance. The fee shall be due before land-disturbing
activities begin.
Inspection Fees
Parcel Area or Area of
Disturbance
(acres) Fee
1 to 5 $100
Above 5 to 20 $350
Above 20 to 50 $750
Above 50 $750 plus $10 per acre above 50
(2)
Determination of area of disturbance category. If the area of the
parcel(s) and area of project disturbance differ such that the area
of disturbance will be in a lower fee category, the applicant may
submit a certified statement by the project designer, a P.E., of the
project's area of disturbance. If during construction the area of
disturbance is expanded, the greater fee will be due before the
certificate of completion will be issued. Emergency remediation,
not included in the originally approved permit but required due to
field conditions, outside of the project site will not be included in
this area.
(3)
§ 175-35 AGAWAM CODE § 175-35
172:268
ARTICLE V
Use of Public Sanitary Sewers and Storm Drains
§ 175-36. Illicit discharges and connections. [Amended 5-15-2006
by TOR-2006-2]
Deposit of certain materials into sewer, manhole or catch basin
prohibited. No person shall place or throw any dead or decaying animal
or vegetable matter, ashes, bottles, broken glass, tin cans, stones, earth
or any other foreign substances into any sewer, manhole or catch basin.
A.
Prohibited discharges to sanitary system. No person shall discharge or
cause to be discharged any stormwater, surface water, groundwater,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or
unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer.
B.
Prohibited discharges to storm drain system. In order to prevent
pollutants from entering the Town's municipal separate storm sewer
system (MS4), the following activities are prohibited.
Illicit discharges. No person shall dump, discharge, cause or allow
to be discharged any pollutant or nonstormwater discharge into the
municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). Examples of illicit
discharges include, but are not limited to, antifreeze, motor oil,
pesticides, cleaning products, pet wastes, concentrated fertilizers,
concentrated herbicides, bleach, concrete wash water, sediment
laden construction runoff.
(1)
Illicit connection. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or
continue any illicit connection to the MS4, regardless of whether
the connection was permissible under applicable law, regulation or
custom at the time of connection.
(2)
Obstruction of MS4. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the
normal flow of stormwater into or out of the municipal storm drain
system without prior written approval from the Superintendent.
(3)
Exemptions.
Emergency activities that are immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property or the environment as determined
by the Department of Public Works, Police Department, or Fire
Department.
(a)
Roadway maintenance activities essential to public health and
safety.
(b)
The following nonstormwater discharges or flows are exempt
from the prohibition of nonstormwaters, provided that the
source is not a significant contributor of a pollutant to the
municipal storm drain system.
[1] Waterline flushing.
(c)
(4)
C.
§ 175-36 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-36
172:269
[2] Flow from portable water sources.
[3] Springs.
[4] Natural flow from riparian habitats and wetlands.
[5] Diverted stream flow.
[6] Rising groundwater.
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration as defined in 40
CFR 35 2005(20), or uncontaminated pumped
groundwater.
[7]
Water from exterior foundation drains, footing drains (not
including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl
space pumps, or air conditioning condensation.
[8]
[9] Discharge from landscape irrigation or lawn watering.
Water from individual residential car washing and
nonprofit or charitable organization as part of a fundraising
activity on behalf of said organization.
[10]
Discharge from dechlorinated swimming pool water (less
than one ppm chlorine), provided that the water is allowed
to stand for one week prior to draining and the pool is
drained in such a way as not to cause a nuisance.
[11]
[12]Discharge from street sweeping.
Dye testing, provided that verbal notification is given to
the DPW Superintendent prior to the time of the test.
[13]
Nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES
permit or a surface water discharge permit, waiver, or
waste discharge order administered under the authority of
the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the
Department of Environmental Protection, provided that
the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements
of the permit, waiver, or order and applicable laws and
regulations.
[14]
Discharge for which advanced written approval is received
from the Superintendent as necessary to protect public
health, safety, welfare or the environment.
[15]
Agricultural activities for normal maintenance or
improvement of land as defined by the Massachusetts
Wetlands Protection Act 310 CMR 10.04 and other
implementing regulations as appropriate. Activities not
exempted include spill of materials onto roadways from
hauling agricultural products or fertilizers.
[16]
§ 175-36 AGAWAM CODE § 175-37
172:270
§ 175-37. Discharge of unpolluted drainage.
Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to a
natural outlet if such outlet is reasonably accessible. If no such outlet is
available, such unpolluted wastes may be discharged into combined sewers
or storm sewers if approved by the Superintendent.
§ 175-38. Prohibited discharges. [Amended 7-9-1984]
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any of the following
described waters or wastes to any public sewer:
§ 175-39. Discharge of harmful substances.
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any substances,
materials, waters or wastes if it appears likely, in the opinion of the
Superintendent, that such substances, materials, water or wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process or equipment, have an adverse
effect on the receiving stream or can otherwise endanger life, limb or
public property or constitute a nuisance. In forming this opinion as to
the acceptability of these substances, materials, waters or wastes, the
Superintendent will give consideration to such factors as the quantities of
subject wastes in relation to flows and velocities in the sewers, the materials
of construction of the sewers, the nature of the sewage treatment process,
the capacity of the sewage treatment plant, the degree of treatability of
wastes in the sewage treatment plant and other pertinent factors. This
prohibition shall include but not be limited to the following:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil or other flammable or explosive
liquid, solid or gas.
A.
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids, liquids or
gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by interaction with other
wastes, to injure or interfere with any sewage treatment process,
constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance
or create any hazard in the receiving waters of the sewage treatment
plant.
B.
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size capable of
causing obstruction to the flow in sewers or other interference with the
proper operation of the sewage works, such as but not limited to ashes,
cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar,
plastics, wood, unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair
and fleshings, entrails and paper dishes, cups, milk containers, etc.,
either whole or ground by garbage grinders.
C.
Any liquid or vapor having a temperature in excess of 140° F., unless
the Town requires a lower temperature limit to ensure that the
temperature of influent wastewater at the Town's wastewater
treatment works does not exceed 104° F. [Amended 1-21-1986 by
TOR-85-4]
A.
§ 175-37 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-39
172:271
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 milligrams per liter or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures
between 32° and 150° F. (0° and 65° C.).
B.
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of 3/4
horsepower 0.76 horsepower metric] or greater shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Superintendent.
C.
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid, iron, pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not, unless
heavy metals and other sludge have been adequately removed from said
wastes in the opinion of the Superintendent.
D.
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc and
similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting an
excessive chlorine requirement, to such degree that any such material
received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment works
exceeds the limits established by the Superintendent for such
materials.
E.
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits which
may be established by the Superintendent as necessary, after treatment
of the composite sewage, to meet the requirements of the state, federal
or other public agencies or jurisdiction for such discharge to the
receiving waters.
F.
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the Superintendent in compliance
with applicable state or federal regulations.
G.
Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.6 or any waters
or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having any other corrosive
property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment
and personnel of the sewage works.
H.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as but not
limited to fuller's earth, lime slurries and lime residues) or of
dissolved solids (such as but not limited to sodium chloride and
sodium sulfate).
(1)
Excessive discoloration (such as but not limited to dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions).
(2)
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand or chlorine requirements
in such quantities as to constitute a significant load on the sewage
treatment works.
(3)
I.
§ 175-39 AGAWAM CODE § 175-39
172:272
§ 175-40. Powers of Superintendent regarding discharge of
deleterious substances.
§ 175-41. Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
Grease, oil and sand interceptors will be provided when, in the opinion of
the Superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid
wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable wastes,
sand or other harmful ingredients, except that such interceptors shall not
be required for private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors
shall be of a type and capacity approved by the Superintendent and shall be
located as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
§ 175-42. Maintenance of flow-equalizing facilities.
Where preliminary treatment or flow-equalizing facilities are provided for
any waters or wastes, they shall be maintained continuously in satisfactory
and effective operation by the owner at his expense.
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
slugs as defined herein.
(4)
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable to
treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes employed,
or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that the sewage
treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements of other
agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the receiving waters.
J.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be
discharged to the public sewers, which waters or wastes contain the
substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in § 175-39 of
this article, and which in the judgment of the Superintendent may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment
or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to life or
constitute a public nuisance, the Superintendent may:
(1) Reject the wastes,
Require pretreatment to a condition acceptable to the
Superintendent for discharge to the public sewers,
(2)
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge, and/or
Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer charges under
the provisions of § 175-45 of this article.
(4)
A.
If the Superintendent permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste
flow, the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Superintendent, and subject
to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances and laws.
B.
§ 175-39 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-43
172:273
§ 175-43. Control manhole.
When required by the Superintendent, the owner of any property serviced
by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances, in
the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of
the wastes. Such manhole, when required, shall be accessibly and safely
located and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
Superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
§ 175-44. Measurements, tests and analyses.
§ 175-45. Industrial wastes of unusual strength.
No statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the Town and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength of character may
be accepted by the Town for treatment, subject to payment therefor, by the
industrial concern. Such agreement may not waive pretreatment standards
(local and categorical), unless such a waiver is granted by mechanism
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water
and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of Standard Methods
for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the
American Public Health Association, and shall be determined at the
control manhole provided, or upon suitable samples taken at said
control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been
required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest
downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the
building sewer is connected. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb and property. The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pH's
are determined from periodic grab samples.
A.
All industries discharging into a public sewer shall perform such
monitoring of their discharges as the Superintendent and/or other duly
authorized employees of the Town may reasonably require, including
installation, use and maintenance of monitoring equipment, keeping
records and reporting the results of such monitoring to the
Superintendent. Such records shall be made available upon request
by the Superintendent to other agencies having jurisdiction over
discharges to the receiving waters.
B.
§ 175-43 AGAWAM CODE § 175-45
172:274
established under the General Pretreatment Regulations. Prohibited
discharge standards may not be waived under any circumstances.
§ 175-46. Septic tank solids.
No septic tank solids shall be discharged into the Town's sewage works. All
septic tank waste shall be discharged at a designated location at the Bondi
Island Treatment Plant.
§ 175-47. Waters contaminated with silt and sediment. [Added
7-9-1984]
No waters contaminated with silts or sediment shall be discharged into a
watercourse, detention area or storm drain.
§ 175-45 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-47
172:275

ARTICLE VI
Industrial Wastes
§ 175-48. Agreements for handling and treatment; charges.
§ 175-49. Industrial pretreatment program requirements. [Added
1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4]
The Department of Public Works, subject to the approval of the Mayor,
is authorized and empowered to enter into agreements or to make other
arrangements for handling and treating industrial wastes which in its
opinion are amenable to treatment in the Town's facilities.
A.
The Superintendent, subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall
determine charges to be levied against various industries for the
handling and treating of its industrial wastes.
B.
All persons discharging wastewater into a public sewer shall comply
with federal and state industrial pretreatment regulations, as amended.
Industrial users shall comply with federal and state general
pretreatment standards and with applicable categorical standards.
Compliance with such standards shall be achieved no later than the
date such standard is effective, unless a shorter compliance time is
specified by the Town or city.
A.
The city and Town personnel may randomly sample and analyze the
discharge of industries connected to a public sewer and may conduct
surveillance and inspection activities to identify, independent of
information supplied by such persons, occasional and continuing
noncompliance with this chapter, and the City of Springfield Sewer Use
Ordinance, as amended. Such authorization shall include the right to
enter private property to the extent necessary and the right to inspect
and copy records required to be kept under this chapter and other
applicable laws.
B.
Within 120 calendar days after the effective date of this amendment, all
industrial users shall apply to the city as permit holder for the operation
of the wastewater treatment facility for an industrial discharge permit.
Such application shall be made by completing a form developed by
the city. Beginning 240 calendar days after the effective date of this
amendment, no industrial user may continue to discharge wastewater
to a public sewer without an industrial discharge permit duly issued by
the city.
C.
The terms of an industrial discharge permit may be modified by the
city and a reasonable time provided for compliance with such modified
terms. Violations of the terms of such permits are violations of this
section. Where a conflict exists between the terms of a duly issued
permit and this section, this section shall govern, unless the permit is
more restrictive. Permits may be issued for a maximum period of three
D.
§ 175-48 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-49
172:277
years and may not be transferred to a new owner or occupant of the
premises without the written approval of the city and the Town.
Modification, suspension or revocation of permit.
A permit may be modified, suspended or revoked at the discretion
of the city.
(a) For violation of the terms and conditions of the permit.
(b) For violations of this article.
For violations of any state or federal statutory provisions or
regulations.
(c)
For falsification of any information or reports submitted to the
city.
(d)
(e) For tampering with any monitoring equipment or methods.
For changes in conditions, or the existence of a condition,
which requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the authorized discharge.
(f)
To require compliance with applicable pretreatment or other
water pollution standards promulgated by state or federal
agencies.
(g)
(1)
If the city or Town determines that conditions exist that constitute
an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or
an endangerment to the environment or which threaten to interfere
with the operation of the public sewer or wastewater facility, the
city or Town may immediately modify, suspend or revoke said
permit and shall give notice to the permit holder of said action and
the right of the permit holder to request a hearing before the city or
Town within 48 hours of the revocation, suspension or modification.
Upon notification of the permit holder's request for hearing, the
city or Town shall establish a hearing date and time within one
working day of the request for a hearing.
(2)
In all instances of revocation, modification or suspension of a
permit, the city shall notify the permit holder 14 days prior to
the effective date of said permit action, and of the permit holder's
right to request a hearing before the city within seven days of said
notice. Upon notification of the request for hearing, the city shall
establish a hearing date and time within seven days of the request
for a hearing.
(3)
If the permit holder does not request a hearing within the proper
time period, the action of the city shall become final. Following the
hearing, the city may take such action as it deems appropriate as
to the suspension, revocation or termination of said permit.
(4)
E.
§ 175-49 AGAWAM CODE § 175-49
172:278
All new industrial users proposing to discharge wastewater to a public
sewer shall apply to the city for an industrial user discharge permit at
least 60 calendar days before connecting to the public sewer. As part
of such application, the city may require the applicant to obtain written
certification from the appropriate federal and state regulatory agencies
as to whether the applicant falls within particular industrial categories
or subcategories for purposes of industrial pretreatment standards.
F.
Amendment application.
Within 90 calendar days after adoption by a federal or state
regulatory agency of a categorical pretreatment standard, existing
industries subject to such standards shall submit an industrial
discharge permit amendment application containing information
required under applicable federal and state industrial pretreatment
reporting regulations in the form required by the city. (Such permit
amendment application is in addition to the industrial user
discharge permit application required above.) Such information, as
a minimum, shall include:
The name and address of the facility, including the name of the
operators and owners.
(a)
(b) A list of all environmental permits held by or for the facility.
A brief description of the nature, average rate of production
and Standard Industrial Classification of the operations carried
out at such facility.
(c)
A schedule of actions to be taken to comply with the
categorical standards.
(d)
Information showing the measured average daily and
maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the public sewer
from regulated process streams and from other streams.
(e)
An identification of the industrial pretreatment standards
applicable to each regulated process.
(f)
An analysis identifying the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge.
(g)
(1)
The city may require that additional information be included in
such application.
(2)
G.
Beginning 180 days after the adoption of federal or state categorical
pretreatment standards, industries subject to such standards may not
discharge industrial wastes from processes regulated by such
categorical standards to a public sewer, unless an industrial discharge
permit amendment is approved by the city and its terms are being
met. Such permit amendment may include a compliance schedule for
activities necessary to meet pretreatment standards.
H.
§ 175-49 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-49
172:279
Within 90 days after the date for final compliance by existing industries
with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of
a new source, following commencement of the introduction of
wastewater into a public sewer, such industries shall submit a report
indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge
from the regulated process(es) governed by categorical pretreatment
standards and the average and maximum daily flow for these process
units. Such report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what
additional operation and maintenance practices or pretreatment is
necessary. Such industrial users shall also submit before June 1 and
December 1 each year, unless required more frequently by the city,
a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the
discharge, average and maximum daily flows and violations of
applicable categorical pretreatment standards. Additional
requirements for such periodic reports may be imposed by the city.
I.
Industrial users shall immediately notify the city and Town in person or
by telephone, followed by written notice of any slug discharged by such
user.
J.
Reports and permit applications submitted by industries under this
section shall be signed by an authorized representative. An authorized
representative may be:
A principal executive officer of at least a level of Vice President, if
the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
A general partner of the proprietor, if the industrial user is a
partnership or sole partnership.
(2)
A duly authorized representative of either of the individuals
designated above, if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the subject facility.
(3)
K.
Records.
Industries subject to the reporting requirements of this section
shall maintain records of information resulting from monitoring
activities required to prepare such reports. Such records shall
include for each sample:
The date, exact place, method and time of sampling the
name(s).
(a)
(b) The dates analyses were performed.
(c) The name(s) of the person(s) performing the analyses.
(d) The analytical techniques and methods used.
(e) The results of such analyses.
(1)
L.
§ 175-49 AGAWAM CODE § 175-49
172:280
Such records shall be maintained for a minimum of three years and
shall be made available for inspection and copying by the city or
the Town.
(2)
No person may utilize dilution as a means of complying with federal,
state or local discharge limitations. The city may impose mass
limitations (in addition to concentration limitations) on the discharge of
any pollutant by any person.
M.
The city shall annually publish a report of industrial users that were
significant violators during the previous 12 months in the largest daily
newspaper published in the Town where such industrial users are
located. For purposes of this provision, a significant violation includes:
A violation remaining uncorrected 45 days after notification of
noncompliance.
(1)
(2) A pattern of noncompliance over a twelve-month period.
(3) A failure to accurately report noncompliance.
(4) A violation resulting in the director's exercise of the city's powers.
N.
The annual operating costs incurred by the city of implementation
of the industrial pretreatment program, including the costs of labor,
equipment, monitoring, sample analyses by city and outside
laboratories and related items, shall be recovered from industrial users.
The city shall establish annual permit fees to be paid by industrial
users in the amounts necessary to recover such costs. The city may set
different levels of permit fees for various classes of industrial users and
may adjust such fees on an annual basis to ensure that the industrial
pretreatment program costs are fully recovered.
O.
Powers for self-help remedy.
The city or Town, after notifying the discharger by telephone or
in person, may immediately halt or prevent any discharge of
pollutants to a public sewer that reasonably appears to present
an imminent endangerment to the health or welfare of persons,
or any such discharge presenting, or which may present, an
endangerment to the environment or which threatens to interfere
with the operation of the city's wastewater work or the public
sewer. Actions which may be taken by the city or Town may include,
but are not limited to, seeking injunctive relief, entry on private
property to halt such discharge, blockage of a public sewer to halt
such discharge or demand of specific action by the discharger.
(1)
The city or Town is authorized to take all appropriate action to
enforce the terms of an industrial discharge permit or this section.
(2)
P.
Penalties. Persons violating permits issued by the city or this section
shall be penalized up to $1,000 per violation. The city or the Town
may initiate court action to impose the maximum penalties authorized
Q.
§ 175-49 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-49
172:281
herein and by other laws. Each day of a continuing violation shall be
considered a separate violation.
Power regarding injunctive relief. The city or Town may seek from a
court of competent jurisdiction an order enjoining the violation of any
provision of this section or permit issued by the city.
R.
§ 175-49 AGAWAM CODE § 175-49
172:282
ARTICLE VII
Protection From Damage and Maintenance
[Amended 7-9-1984]
§ 175-50. Damage to sewage works prohibited.
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy,
uncover, deface, contaminate or tamper with any structure, culvert,
channel, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the sewage works or
storm drainage system. Any person violating this provision shall be subject
to arrest and criminal prosecution.
§ 175-51. Soil erosion and sediment control plan. [Amended
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
See stormwater management plan requirements in § 175-35.
§ 175-52. Maintenance of surface storm drainage easements.
[Amended 5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
General requirements. The owner of land on which is located a surface
storm drainage easement shall not cause or permit the same to become
clogged or any water flow into or through the same to be impeded
by debris, siltation, vegetation (in excess of what is needed to control
erosion), the placement of any structure or otherwise; nor shall the
owner cause or permit any condition to exist, such as loss of suitable
ground cover, which would contribute to the erosion or siltation of
the drainage channel. Any continuing violation of this section after
reasonable notice from the Superintendent shall entitle the Town to
enter onto the easement to repair or correct the offending condition
and bill the costs thereof to the owner.
A.
Detention ponds; maintenance requirements. Detention ponds within
easements to the Town of Agawam require minor maintenance to be
performed by the property owner on a regular basis.
Remove clogs to the outlet structure caused by leaves, branches,
grass clippings, or other debris.
(1)
All grassed areas must be mowed a minimum of two times per year
(spring and fall) to reduce weed growth. If areas become bare, they
must be reseeded to sustain vegetative cover.
(2)
Detention ponds and swales may not be filled in or altered such
that the intended design and functioning of the drainage system is
impaired.
(3)
Landscaping, fences, or other utilities or structures may not be
placed so that access to the detention pond or drainage structures
is impaired.
(4)
B.
§ 175-50 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-52
172:283
The area surrounding the fenced detention area is to be maintained
and kept landscaped or grassed.
(5)
§ 175-52 AGAWAM CODE § 175-52
172:284
ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 175-53. Power and authority of inspectors. [Amended 7-9-1984;
1-21-1986 by TOR-85-4]
In addition to the rights set forth in § 175-49 of this chapter, the
Superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the Town having
proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all property
for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and
testing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 175-54. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
5-15-2006 by TOR-2006-2]
The Department of Public Works shall enforce this chapter, regulations,
orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders, and may pursue all civil
and criminal remedies for such violations.
Industrial pretreatment for sanitary system. The procedures and
penalties for those violating § 175-49 or any other provision of this
chapter relating to industrial pretreatment requirements are set forth
in § 175-49 only.
A.
Sanitary sewers and storm drain system. The enforcement procedures
to ensure compliance with the requirements of the storm drain permit
and pertaining to the sanitary system as described in this chapter shall
proceed as follows.
Step One: verbal notice of violation. If the violation is not addressed
to the satisfaction of the DPW and within an appropriate time frame
of seven days from the verbal notice of violation, enforcement shall
proceed to Step 2. The seven-day time period may be extended by
agreement between the DPW and the violator.
(1)
Step Two: written notice of violation. If the violation is not
addressed to the satisfaction of the DPW and within seven days
from the issuance of the written notice, enforcement shall proceed
to Step 3. The seven-day time period may be extended by mutual
agreement between the DPW and the violator. The written order
will describe maintenance, installation or performance of
additional erosion and sediment control measures, abatement or
remediation activities, required proposal for remediation by
professional design consultants and may include actions specified
in Subsection B(5), (6), (7) and (8).
(2)
Step Three: fines. Fines shall be levied against the owner of the
property which has caused the violation and/or the applicant for
the storm drain permit or sewer permit as appropriate for that
location. Fines shall be imposed up to a maximum of $300 per day
for each offense for a maximum of $3,000 per offense.
(3)
B.
§ 175-53 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-54
172:285
Step Four: Suspension of access to MS4 or the sewer system as
appropriate.
(4)
Emergency enforcement action. The Superintendent may
determine that an eminent threat to public health, safety, or the
environment exists. Skipping the normal order of enforcement
action may be required, including immediate implementation of
Step Four, suspension of access to the MS4. The DPW or
designated agent may take immediate action to suspend access to
the MS4 or perform actions to bring the site into compliance. The
DPW has the right to bill the violator for penalty fees, reasonable
costs of materials, and manpower to perform these emergency
actions, and administrative costs. Within 30 days after completing
all measures necessary to abate the violation or to perform
remediation, the violator and the property owner shall be notified
of the costs incurred by the Town, including administrative costs.
The violator or property owner may file a written protest objecting
to the amount or basis of costs with the DPW within 30 days of
receipt of the notification of the costs incurred.
(5)
Any bills sent to violators which remain unpaid for a time period of
30 days, or the time in which to protest, or within 30 days following
a decision by the DPW affirming or reducing the costs, or from a
final decision of a court of competent jurisdiction, the costs shall
become a lien against the property until paid.
(6)
Restoration of land. Any violator may be required to restore land
to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not
undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the DPW, or its
designated agent, may take necessary corrective action, the cost of
which shall become a lien upon the property until paid.
(7)
Hold on storm drain permit. No new DPW storm drain permits will
be issued to owners or contractors that have enforcement orders
currently in effect against any project. The hold will be released
once all remediation work is complete and approved by DPW.
(8)
Stop-work orders. The DPW may issue stop-work orders on any
project which is found in violation of the storm drain permit or
this chapter until adequate corrective action is complete to the
satisfaction of the DPW.
(9)
Noncriminal disposition. As an alternative to criminal prosecution or
civil action, the Town of Agawam may elect to utilize the noncriminal
disposition procedure set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, in which case the
Town of Agawam Superintendent of Public Works, or his/her designee
shall be the enforcing person. The penalty for the first violation shall be
$300. The penalty for the second violation shall be $300. The penalty
for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300. Each day or
part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
C.
§ 175-54 AGAWAM CODE § 175-54
172:286
§ 175-55. Liability for loss, damage and other expenses.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall become
liable to the Town for any expense, loss or damage, including reasonable
legal fees, occasioned the Town by reason of such violation.
§ 175-56. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby
repealed.
§ 175-57. Severability.
The invalidity of any section, clause, sentence or provision of this chapter
shall not affect the validity of any other part of this chapter which can be
given effect without such invalid part or parts.
§ 175-58. Licensing of contractors.
No contractor or person shall be allowed to install or repair a building
sewer and/or sanitary sewer or storm drain unless properly licensed by
the Superintendent. Such licenses shall be renewed annually. Fees for such
licenses shall be established by the Superintendent. Said licenses may
be canceled by the Superintendent, at his discretion, for violation of this
chapter.
§ 175-59. When effective.
This chapter shall be in full force and effect from and after its passage,
approval, recording and publication as provided by law.
Entry to perform duties under this chapter. To the extent permitted by
state law, or if authorized by the owner or other party in control of the
property, the Town of Agawam, the Superintendent of Public Works or
his/her designee, its agents, officers, and employees may enter upon
privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties
under this chapter and regulations and may make or cause to be
made such examinations, surveys or sampling as deemed reasonably
necessary.
D.
Appeals. The decisions or orders of the Superintendent of Public Works
shall be final. Further relief shall be to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
E.
Remedies not exclusive. The remedies listed in this chapter are not
exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal,
state or local law.
F.
§ 175-54 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-59
172:287

ARTICLE IX
User Charge
[Added 2-7-1977]
§ 175-60. User charge in addition to other fees.
All users shall pay regular charges for service as enumerated in § 175-61
in addition to charges and assessments for construction of the sewers,
entrance fee and connection charge, as provided for elsewhere in this
article and in this chapter.
§ 175-61. Rates.
User charges shall consist of a unit charge per 100 cubic feet of
wastewater discharged into the public sewers, plus surcharges for
excess strength of wastewater discharged. The unit charge and
surcharges shall be determined by the Department of Public Works with
Town Council approval. Where metering devices are not installed by the
owner for the purpose of measuring the actual quantity of wastewater
discharged, the water use measured by a standard Town water meter
shall be used for billing purposes. Where water meters are not installed
or where a user does not purchase water from the Town, then the owner
shall install a Town-approved wastewater metering device or, in the
case of a residential user, be charged in accordance with the following
flat rate schedule. The charges which follow apply to all classes of
users, including residential, commercial, institutional, governmental,
charitable and nonprofit.
A.
Rates. [Amended 9-18-2002 by TR-2002-19]
All users, unless otherwise specified in Subsection D herein, will
be charged at the rate of $2 per 100 cubic feet of wastewater
discharged into a public sewer. The amount of wastewater
discharged shall, in most cases, be determined from the Water
Department meter readings and shall be equal in volume to the
water measured by the water meter, with the following exception.
It is recognized that not all water consumed by a residential user
is diverted to the sewer. Some water is used for lawn sprinkling,
car washing and other uses which do not contribute wastewater
to the sewer. Therefore, the volume of wastewater discharged by
residential users shall be assumed to be 90% of the water metered,
and the sewer use charge shall be based on this reduced volume.
(1)
In the event that a residential user does not have Town water
service, then he shall be charged a flat rate of $180 per year per
dwelling unit, which is equivalent to a yearly wastewater discharge
of 9,000 cubic feet. A single-family home or single apartment shall
constitute one dwelling unit.
(2)
B.
§ 175-60 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-61
172:289
The above user charges shall be billed on a semiannual basis, and
bills will be issued in conjunction with the water bills. The minimum
charge for any billing shall be $20 to cover administrative costs.
(3)
A credit will be allowed for nonresidential users consuming metered
water which is not discharged into the wastewater collection system
(such as coolant water), provided that a separate Town-approved sealed
meter is provided by the owner to measure this water.
C.
Surcharges. Surcharges over and above the rate listed in Subsection
B(1) above will be levied against domestic, commercial and industrial
users who discharge above-average concentrations of wastewater into
the system. Surcharges shall be assessed at the following rates:
Type of Surcharge Unit Surcharge Per Unit
BOD* 1 lb. of BOD5 $0.0275 per lb.
Suspended solids** 1 lb. of SS $0.022 per lb.
NOTES:
*Pounds of BOD5 subject to a surcharge are calculated by the
following equation: (C2 - 300) x 0.00624 x Q = SS, subject to surcharge
where C2 is the concentration of suspended solids in milligrams per
liter of the wastewater and Q is the actual metered water use or
wastewater discharge measured in units of 100 cubic feet. The rates
assessed for surcharges may be adjusted from time to time to reflect
the current rates paid by the Town for the treatment of each pound
of BOD5 and each pound of suspended solids at the Bondi Island
Treatment Plan plus a ten-percent surcharge to cover the Town's
administrative costs.
D.
Metering, sampling, testing and billing shall be as follows:
All rates for users connected to the Town's water system are based
on metered use of water or metered discharge of wastewater.
(1)
The installation and maintenance of all wastewater meters and
sampling stations shall be at the expense of the owner. Such
installation shall be approved by the Town prior to its installation.
(2)
All sampling and testing to determine BOD{5} and suspended
solids shall be carried out by agents of the Town using the facilities
of the owner pursuant to Subsection E(2) above. The user shall
reimburse the Town for all expenses incurred by it in carrying out
sampling and testing.
(3)
Charges for all types of users will be assessed semiannually and
will be levied in conjunction with the water bills.
(4)
E.
§ 175-61 AGAWAM CODE § 175-62
172:290
§ 175-62. Initial user charges.
Initial user charges shall be levied in accordance with the rate schedule
presented in § 175-61 above on all property subject to the charges as
defined in § 175-60 above, beginning with all water bills issued as a result
of a series of water meter readings beginning January 1, 1977.
§ 175-63. Authority to collect charges; deposit in Sewer Use Fund.
The Superintendent shall forward to the Town Collector for collection
all user charges, including collection of capital, maintenance and
operation and other payments, from industries as specified in the
contracts, agreements and amendments thereto between the Town
and individual industries receiving service from the Town. The Town
Collector shall have the authority to use all legal means available to
collect charges and payments when due, including the collection of
delinquent payments through property liens. A late payment fee will
be charged on accounts which have not been paid within 60 days after
issuance of the bill. The owner of the property will be charged for all
sewer use fees, late payment fees and demand payment fees. The late
payment fee shall be 6% of the unpaid current bill amount. The demand
payment fee shall be 12% of the unpaid current bill amount.
A.
All charges and payment collected shall be deposited to the appropriate
account of the Sewer Use Fund established for the operation,
maintenance and improvement of the wastewater facilities under the
Sanitation Division of the Department of Public Works.
B.
§ 175-62 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-63
172:291

ARTICLE X
Industrial Users
§ 175-64. Treatment agreements.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Town of Agawam, acting through
its Department of Public Works, from entering into separate agreements
with industrial users for the handling and treating of industrial wastes as
specified in § 175-48 of this chapter, enacted July 1, 1974.
§ 175-65. Approval by Environmental Protection Agency required.
Said separate agreements must be approved by the Environmental
Protection Agency. All industries or industrial users as defined in § 175-1
shall be obligated to pay that portion of any federal grant amount made
after March 1, 1973, which is allocable to treatment of their wastes.
§ 175-64 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-65
172:293

ARTICLE XI
Backflow and Cross-Connection Regulations
[Added 7-5-1988 by TOR-88-10]
§ 175-66. Authority and responsibility.
Under Public Law 93-523, the Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, and
Massachusetts Regulation 310 CMR, § 22.22, Protection of Sources of
Water, the Water Purveyor has the primary responsibility for preventing
water from unapproved sources, or any other substances, from entering the
public potable water system.
§ 175-67. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to:
§ 175-68. Installation of backflow prevention devices.
The Superintendent of Public Works shall be responsible for the protection
of the public potable water distribution system from contamination or
pollution due to the backflow or back-siphonage of contaminants or
pollutants through the water service connection. If, in the judgment of said
Superintendent, an approved backflow prevention device is required at the
Town's water service connection to any customer's premises for the safety
of the water system, the Superintendent or his designated agent shall give
notice, in writing, to said customer to install such an approved backflow
prevention device at each service connection to his premises. The customer
shall, within 30 days, install such approved device or devices at his own
expense, and failure, refusal or inability on the part of the customer to
install said device or devices within 30 days shall constitute a ground for
discontinuing water service to the premises until such device or devices
have been properly installed.
Protect the public potable water supply of the area served by the
Agawam Department of Public Works from the possibility of
contamination or pollution by isolating within its customer's internal
distribution system(s) or its customer's private water system(s) such
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or back-siphon into
the public water supply system.
A.
Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual
or potential, between its customer's in-plant potable water system(s)
and nonpotable systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping
systems.
B.
Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will systematically and effectively prevent
the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems by crossconnection.
C.
§ 175-66 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-69
172:295
§ 175-69. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP — The unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or a faucet supplying water to
a tank, plumbing fixture or other device and the flood rim of said vessel.
An approved air gap shall be as required by Department of Public Works
standards.
APPROVED — Accepted by the Superintendent as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this regulation, or as suitable for the
proposed one.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply on or available to the
premises other than the purveyor's approved public potable water supply.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
under pressure into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system
from any source or sources other than its intended source.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER — A device or means designed to prevent
backflow or siphonage.
BACK-SIPHONAGE — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or
substances into the distributing pipes of a potable water supply system from
any source other than its intended source caused by the sudden reduction
of pressure in the potable water supply system.
CONTAMINATION — An impairment of the quality of the potable water by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials
to a degree which creates an actual hazard to the public health through
poisoning or through the spread of disease.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any physical connection or arrangement of piping
or fixtures between two otherwise separate piping systems one of which
contains potable water and the other nonpotable water or industrial fluids
REDUCED PRESSURE PRINCIPLE DEVICE — An assembly of two
independently operating approved check valves with an automatically
operating differential relief valve between the two check valves, tightly
closing shutoff valves on either side of the check valves, plus properly
located test cocks for the testing of the check and relief valves.
A.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — An assembly of two
independently operating approved check valves with tightly closing
shutoff valves on each side of the check valves, plus properly located
test cocks for the testing of each check valve.
B.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — A device containing one or two
independently operating loaded check valves and an independently
operating loaded air inlet valve located on the discharge side of the
check or checks.
C.
§ 175-69 AGAWAM CODE § 175-69
172:296
of questionable safety, through which, or because of which, backflow or
back-siphonage may occur into the potable water system.
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL BY CONTAINMENT — The installation of
any approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection
to any customer's premises, or the installation of an approved backflow
prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a portion
of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential crossconnections
which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the
point of cross-connection.
CROSS-CONNECTIONS CONTROLLED — A connection between a potable
water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow
prevention device properly installed that will continuously afford the
protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
HAZARD, DEGREE OF — The term is derived from an evaluation of the
potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the
potable water system:
INDUSTRIAL FLUIDS SYSTEM — Any system containing a fluid or solution
which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted
in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system,
pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply.
POLLUTION — The presence of any foreign substance, (organic, inorganic
or biological) in water which tends to degrade its quality so as to constitute
a hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree
which does not create an actual hazard to the public health but which does
adversely and unreasonably affect such waters for domestic use.
SUPERINTENDENT OF PUBLIC WORKS — The Superintendent or his
designated agent in charge of the Water Division of the Department of
Public Works of the Town of Agawam who is invested with the responsibility
for the implementation of an effective cross-connection control program and
for the enforcement of the provisions of this article.
HAZARD, HEALTH (high hazard) — Any condition, device or practice in
the water supply system and its operation which could create, or, in the
judgment of the Superintendent, may create a danger to the health and
well-being of the water consumer.
A.
HAZARD, PLUMBING (high hazard) — A plumbing-type crossconnection
in a consumer's potable water system that has not been
properly protected by a vacuum breaker, air-gap separation or backflow
prevention device. Unprotected plumbing-type cross-connections are
considered to be a health hazard.
B.
HAZARD, POLLUTIONAL (low hazard) — An actual or potential threat
to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of
the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would
constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause
damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous
to health.
C.
§ 175-69 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-69
172:297
WATER, NONPOTABLE — Water which is not safe for human consumption
or which is of questionable potability.
WATER, POTABLE — Water from a source which has been approved by
the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Environmental Quality
Engineering, Division of Water Supply, for human consumption.
WATER SERVICE CONNECTIONS — The terminal end of a service
connection from the public potable water system; i.e., where the water
purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point
of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the
end of the service connection, then the "service connection" shall mean
the downstream end of the meter. "Service connection" shall also include
water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or
emergency water service connections from the public potable water system.
WATER, USED — Any water supplied by a water purveyor from a public
potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed
through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of
the water purveyor.
§ 175-70. Water system components.
§ 175-71. Inspections; denial or discontinuance of service.
The customer's system should be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the Department of Public Works
to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary
hazards, including violations of this regulation, exist. When such a condition
becomes known, the Superintendent shall deny or immediately discontinue
service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service
line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with
state and Town statutes relating to plumbing and water supplies and the
The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: the
utility system and the customer system.
A.
The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the
distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water
system under the complete control of the utility, up to the point where
the customer's system begins.
B.
The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the
production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution
system.
C.
The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for
the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system.
D.
The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond
the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in
conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use.
E.
§ 175-69 AGAWAM CODE § 175-71
172:298
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. All expenses relating to the
disconnection and reconnection shall be at the customer's expense.
§ 175-72. Installation of backflow prevention devices.
An approved backflow prevention device, where required, shall be
installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near
the property line or immediately inside the building being served, but
in all cases before the first branch line leading off the service line
wherever the following conditions exist:
In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is
not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and
which is not acceptable as an additional source by the water supply
and Pollution Control Commission, the public water system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a
backflow prevention device in the service line appropriate to the
degree of hazard.
(1)
In the case of premises on which any industrial fluids or any
other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to
create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the
public water system shall be protected against backflow from the
premises by installing a backflow prevention device in the service
line appropriate to the degree of hazard.
(2)
In the case of premises having internal cross-connection that
cannot be permanently corrected and controlled or intricate
plumbing and piping arrangements or where entry to all portions
of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes,
making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not
dangerous cross-connections exist, the public water system shall
be protected against backflow from the premises by installing a
backflow prevention device in the service line.
(3)
A.
The type of protective device required under this section shall depend
upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: In the case of any
premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in this
section, or where there is any material dangerous to health which
is handled in a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard
to the public water system, or where there are uncontrolled crossconnections,
either actual or potential, the public water system shall be
protected by an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced
pressure principal backflow prevention device at the service connector.
B.
In the case of any premises where there is water or a substance that
would be objectionable but not hazardous to health, if introduced into
the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by
an approved double check valve assembly.
C.
§ 175-71 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-72
172:299
§ 175-73. Routine testing. [Amended 9-7-1999 by TOR-99-4]
In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements
or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to
make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water
system shall be protected against backflow or back-siphonage from the
premises by the installation of a backflow prevention device in the
service line. In this case, maximum protection will be required; that
is, an approved air-gap separation or an approved reduced pressure
principal backflow prevention device shall be installed in each service
to the premises.
D.
Any backflow prevention device required herein shall be of a model
and size approved by the Superintendent. The term "approved backflow
prevention device" shall mean a device that is on the approved list
of backflow prevention devices as revised by the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Quality Engineering, Division of Water
Supply. Said approval lists have been adopted by the Superintendent.
E.
Cross-connection by containment at the service connection shall be
required only at the types of facilities listed in 310 CMR 22.22 Sec.
9, entitled "Location of Devices." [Added 4-21-1992 by TOR-92-6;
amended 9-7-1999 by TOR-99-4]
F.
Any customer subject to the provisions of this article may acquire
backflow prevention devices from whatever source they desire, and
engage the services of whatever duly licensed plumber they desire to
install such devices. [Added 4-21-1992 by TOR-92-6]
G.
The customer shall be responsible for filing an application and plan with
the Superintendent of Public Works for any cross-connection requiring
the installation of a reduced pressure backflow preventer or testable
double check valve assembly. The customer shall receive approval of
the proposed installation and a permit for the cross-connection from
the Superintendent prior to proceeding with the work. The expense
for the preparation of the application and plans as well as the costs
incurred by the Department of Public Works in the review, approval and
permitting of each device shall be the responsibility of the customer.
[Added 9-7-1999 by TOR-99-4]
H.
The Department of Public Works shall be responsible for the required
testing of backflow prevention devices. Reduced pressure backflow
preventers shall be tested and inspected at least semiannually and
double check valve assemblies shall be tested and inspected annually.
The customer owning the device will be charged for these tests.
A.
Backflow device testing and inspection will be performed by a
Massachusetts DEP certified backflow tester.
B.
The testing shall be conducted during the regular business hours of the
Department of Public Works. Exceptions to this, when at the request
C.
§ 175-72 AGAWAM CODE § 175-73
172:300
§ 175-74. Existing nonconforming devices.
All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the
requirements of this article but were approved devices for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly
maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements
under § 175-71, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as
the Superintendent of Public Works is assured that they will satisfactorily
protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the
present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the
Superintendent finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health,
the unit shall be replaced by a backflow prevention device meeting the
requirements of this article.
§ 175-75. Power of Department of Public Works. [Amended
4-21-1992 by TOR-92-6]
of the customer, may require additional charges to cover the increased
cost to the Department.
Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test must be
repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber at the expense of the
customer. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair,
the device will be retested at the customer's expense to ensure proper
operation. High hazard situations will not be allowed to continue
unprotected if the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot be
repaired immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not
more than 14 days after test date will be established. The Customer
is responsible for having spare parts, repair tools, or a replacement
device on hand. Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means
of the customer ensuring that uninterrupted water service remains
during testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when
the owner desires such continuity.
D.
Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than
specified above in Subsection A in cases where there is a history of
test failures and the Department feels that due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional testing is warranted. The cost of such additional
tests will be borne by the customer.
E.
Any decision relating to the enforcement of this article shall be made
by the Agawam Department of Public Works. Following an inspection
under § 175-71, any decision pertaining to what type of backflow device
is required or whether a particular backflow device is required by state
regulations or Town ordinance may be appealed to a committee made
up of representatives of the Health, Water and Building Departments.
A.
Any appeal must be requested in writing by the customer within 14
days following receipt of written notice by the Agawam Department of
Public Works ordering installation of backflow devices. A hearing shall
be held within 21 days following receipt of the appeal notice by the
B.
§ 175-73 VEHICLES, UNREGISTERED § 175-75
172:301
§ 175-76. Application, permitting, testing and maintenance
charges. [Amended 4-21-1992 by TOR-92-6; 9-7-1999 by TOR-99-4]
§ 175-77. Records and reports. [Added 9-7-1999 by TOR-99-4]
Committee. The Committee shall indicate its decision in writing to all
parties within 10 days of the hearing, unless otherwise agreed upon by
the parties.
The Department of Public Works shall establish fees for the approval,
permitting, testing and/or maintenance of backflow prevention devices,
and may amend said fees from time to time. All fees set by the
Department of Public Works shall be charged to the owner of the device
and shall be subject to the approval of the Agawam Town Council.
A.
The following fees are hereby established by the Department of Public
Works and approved by the Agawam Town Council:
There shall be a fee of $25 per test per device for all backflow
prevention devices required by the regulations promulgated by the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts as amended from time to time.
(1)
There shall be a fee of $45 per device for the application review
and permitting of devices requiring same under § 175-72H above.
(2)
There shall be no fee for the permitting or testing of those backflow
prevention devices installed at the service connection which are
required solely by this article, and not otherwise required by the
regulations promulgated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts
as amended from time to time.
(3)
B.
Records. The Department of Public Works will initiate and maintain the
following:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
(2) Master files on approved cross-connection installations.
(3) Master files on facilities surveyed and violations found.
Master files on correspondence, violations notices and enforcement
actions.
(4)
A.
Reports. The Department of Public Works will submit reports, such
as listing of cross-connection and respective devices and summary of
cross-connection inspections and surveys, to the DEP upon its request.
B.
§ 175-75 AGAWAM CODE § 175-77
172:302
Chapter 177
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
§ 175-77 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 175-77
177:303

ARTICLE I
Noncriminal Disposition
[Adopted 6-6-2005 by TOR-2005-4]
§ 177-1. Alternative proceedings for violations.
Any violation of this chapter, Chapter 177, and any violation of MGL c.
6 § 115A, MGL c. 94 §§ 176, 177, 184E, 295B, 295C, 295CC, 295F, 299,
303F, MGL c. 98 §§ 25; 26, 31, 42, 45, 55, 56A, 56B, 56C, or any other
law which provides for a civil penalty for the violation thereof, may, in
the discretion of the Sealer of Weights and Measures or his designee, be
enforced by the noncriminal complaint method for which provision is made,
and/or as set forth in MGL c. 40, § 21D, as amended from time to time,
that is, noncriminal disposition. Fines issued pursuant to § 177-1 shall be as
follows:
A. First offense: $20.
B. Second offense: $25.
C. Third offense and each subsequent offense: $50.
§ 177-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 177-1
177:305
Chapter 180
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 82.
Fees — See Ch. 103.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 106.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 159.
Water and sewers — See Ch. 175.
§ 177-1 AGAWAM CODE § 177-1
177:306
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 180-1. Purpose.
For the purpose of promoting the health, safety, convenience, morals and
welfare of its inhabitants, the Town, under the authority granted by MGL
c. 40A, §§ 1 to 22 inclusive, does hereby enact this chapter, to be hereafter
known and designated as the "Zoning Ordinance" of the Town. Further
purposes of this chapter are to lessen congestion in the streets, to secure
safety from fire, panic and other danger, to provide adequate light and
air, to prevent the overcrowding of land, to avoid undue concentration of
population, to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, parks and other public requirements and to increase the
amenities of the Town.
§ 180-2. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 3-21-1994 by
TOR-94-1; 2-20-2001 by TOR-2001-1; 5-20-2002 by TOR-2002-15;
2-6-2006 by TOR-2005-12; 11-5-2008 by TOR-2008-2; 11-7-2012 by
TOR-2012-3]
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words shall have the
following meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future;
the plural number includes the singular; the words "used" or "occupied"
include the words "designed," "arranged," "intended" or "offered to be
used or occupied"; the words "building," "structure," "lot," "land" or
"premises" shall be construed as though followed by the words "or any
portion thereof"; and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not
merely directory.
A.
Terms and words not defined herein but defined in the Building Code38
or Subdivision Regulations39 shall have the meanings given therein
unless a contrary intention clearly appears. Words not defined in either
place shall have the meanings given in the most recent edition of
Webster's Unabridged Dictionary.
B.
Definitions. For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
ABANDONMENT — The cessation of a nonconforming use or structure
as indicated by the visible or otherwise indicated intention to
discontinue a nonconforming use of a structure or a lot, or the cessation
of a nonconforming use or structure by its replacement with a
conforming use or structure.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A subordinate building, located on the same
lot as the main, or principal building or principal use, the use of which
C.
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Building Construction.
39.Editor's Note: See Ch. 159, Subdivision of Land.
§ 180-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-2
177:307
is customarily incidental to the main or principal use permitted in the
district.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental to that of the main or
principal building or use of the land.
ADEQUATE CAPACITY — Capacity is considered to be adequate if the
grade of service is p. 05 or better for a worst-case day in a preceding
month, based on the Erllang B Tables, prior to the date of application;
or as measured using direct traffic measurement of the personal
wireless service facility in question for existing facilities requesting
major modification and where the call blocking is due to frequency
contention at the antenna(s).
ADEQUATE COVERAGE — Coverage is considered to be adequate
within that area surrounding a base station where the predicted or
measured median field strength of the transmitted signal for at least
75% of the covered area is greater than -95 dbm. It is acceptable for
there to be holes within the area of adequate coverage where the signal
is less than -95 dbm, as long as the signal regains its strength to greater
than -95 dbm further away from the base station. For the limited
purpose of determining whether the use of a repeater is necessary or
desirable, there shall be deemed not to be adequate coverage within
said holes. The outer boundary of the area of adequate coverage,
however, is that location past which the signal does not regain a
strength of greater than -95 dbm.
ADULT DAY-CARE FACILITY — A building or structure where care,
protection, and supervision are provided, on a regular schedule, to
adults over the age of 18.
AGRICULTURE — The production, keeping or maintenance, for sale or
lease, of plants and animals useful to man, including but not limited to:
forages and sod crops; grains and seed crops; dairy animals and dairy
products; poultry and poultry products; livestock, including beef cattle,
swine, horses, mules, ponies, or goats or any mutations of hybrids
thereof, including the breeding and grazing of any or all such animals,
bees, and apiary products, for animals, trees and forest products; fruits
of all kinds, including grapes, nuts and berries, vegetables, floral,
nursery, ornamental and greenhouse products; or lands devoted to a
soil conservation or forestry management program.
ALTERATION — Any construction, reconstruction or other action
resulting in a change in the structural parts, height, number of stories,
exits, size, use or location of a building or other structure.
AMUSEMENT PARK — A commercially operated park with a
predominance of outdoor games and activities for entertainment,
including shows or riding devices, games of skill or chance, or any
combination of shows, riding devices, water slides, miniature golf,
batting cages or any combination of several enterprises, such as
revolving wheels, merry-go-rounds, giant swings, panoramas, musical
and theatrical entertainments, or riding devices, whether carried on,
§ 180-2 AGAWAM CODE § 180-2
177:308
engaged in or conducted as one enterprise or by several
concessionaries, and whether an admission fee is charged for admission
to all such shows for entertainment, or a separate fee for admission is
charged for each amusement.
ANIMAL CLINIC OR HOSPITAL — A place where animals or pets are
given medical or surgical treatment, and the boarding of animals is
limited to short-term care incidental to the clinic or hospital use.
ANTENNA — A device which is attached to a tower or other structure
for transmitting and receiving electromagnetic waves.
APARTMENT HOUSE — A building or structure arranged, intended and
designed to be occupied by two to eight families, living independently of
each other, and each including its own separate kitchen and bathroom
accommodations. Garden-type apartments shall be considered as an
apartment house.
ATTIC — The unfinished space between the ceiling of the top story of
a building and its roof which is not used for living, sleeping or eating
quarters.
BASE STATION — The primary sending and receiving site in a wireless
telecommunications network.
BUILDING — A structure enclosed within exterior walls or firewalls,
built, erected and framed of a combination of any materials, whether
portable or fixed, having a roof, to form a structure for the shelter
of persons, animals or property. For the purpose of this definition,
"roof" shall include an awning or any similar covering, whether or not
permanent in nature. The word "building" shall be construed, where
the context requires, as though followed by words "or part or parts
thereof." A porch or an attached garage, greenhouse or similar
structure is to be considered as part of a building when considering the
requirements of setback, side or rear yards.
BUSINESS — The transacting or carrying on of a trade or commercial
enterprise with a view to profit or for livelihood.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of the
dead and dedicated for cemetery purposes, including columbariums,
crematoriums, mausoleums, and funeral establishments, when
operated in conjunction with and within the boundary of such cemetery
under the care and supervision of the Town or other public authority.
CHANNEL — The segment of the radiation spectrum from an antenna
which carries one signal. An antenna may radiate on many channels
simultaneously.
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — Facilities that serve children under seven
years of age, or 16 years if the children have special needs, or schoolage
children (under 14 years of age or 16 years if they have special
needs), in programs that are held before or after school hours or during
vacations. A child-care facility defined in MGL c. 28A, § 9.
§ 180-2 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-2
177:309
CLUB OR LODGE, PRIVATE — Buildings, structures and premises used
by a nonprofit social or civic organization or by a nonprofit
organization, catering exclusively to members and their guests for
social, civic, recreation, or athletic purposes which are not conducted
primarily for gain and provided there are no vending stands,
merchandising, or commercial activities except as may be required
generally for the membership and purposes of such organization.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, INDOORS — A structure for
recreational, social or amusement purposes, which may include as
an accessory use the consumption of food and drink, including all
connected rooms or space with a common means of egress and
entrance. Places of assembly shall include theaters, concert halls,
dance halls, skating rinks, bowling alleys, health clubs, dance studios,
or other commercial recreational centers conducted for or not for
profit.
COMMERCIAL RECREATION, OUTDOORS — Driving range, bathing
beach, sports club, horseback-riding stable, boathouse, marina or other
commercial recreation carried on, in whole or in part, outdoors, except
those activities more specifically designated in this chapter.
COMMUNICATION EQUIPMENT SHELTER — A structure located at
a base station designed principally to enclose equipment used in
connection with personal wireless service transmissions.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A retail store that sells groceries and may
also sell gasoline; does not include automotive service stations or
vehicle repair shops.
CREMATORY — A building containing a furnace designed and intended
to be used for cremating the dead and owned and controlled by a
cemetery corporation or crematory corporation duly organized under
the laws of the state.
DBM — Unit of measure of the power level of an electromagnetic signal
expressed in decibels referenced to one milliwatt.
DETACHED — Separate from.
DWELLING — A building designed and occupied as the living quarters
of one or more families. Single- and two-family dwellings shall be
designed for and occupied by not more than one or two families,
respectively. A multifamily dwelling shall be one designed for and
occupied by two or more families. Hotels, lodging houses, hospitals,
membership clubs, or dormitories shall not be considered dwellings.
EARTH REMOVAL — Extraction of sand, gravel, topsoil, or other earth
for sale or for use at a site removed from the place of extraction,
exclusive of the grading of a lot preparatory to the construction of a
building for which a building permit has been issued or the grading of
streets in accordance with an approved definitive plan, and exclusive of
granite operations.
§ 180-2 AGAWAM CODE § 180-2
177:310
EDUCATIONAL USE — Use of land or structures for education
purposes on land owned or leased by the commonwealth or any of
its agencies, subdivisions or bodies politic or by a religious sect or
denomination or by a nonprofit education corporation. Educational
facilities not exempted from regulation by MGL c. 40A, § 3.
EMF — Electromagnetic frequency radiation.
ERECT — To build, construct, reconstruct, move upon, or conduct
any physical development of the premises required for a building; to
excavate, fill, drain, and the like preparation for building shall also be
considered to erect.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Services provided by a public service
corporation or by governmental agencies through erection,
construction, alteration, or maintenance of gas, electrical, steam, or
water transmission or distribution systems and collection,
communication, supply, or disposal systems, whether underground or
overhead, but not including wireless communications facilities.
Facilities necessary for the provision of essential services include poles,
wires, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police
call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and other similar equipment in
connection therewith.
FACILITY SITE — The location within a Wireless Telecommunications
Overlay District leased by one or more personal wireless service
providers and upon which one or more personal wireless service
facility(ies) and required landscaping are located.
FAMILY — A number of individuals related by blood, marriage and/
or adoption or a group of unrelated individuals, not to exceed four,
who are occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit. This definition, however, does not apply to
nonrelated disabled persons as defined by any applicable federal and/
or state law and/or regulations.
FAMILY DAY-CARE FACILITY — Any private residence which on a
regular basis receives for temporary custody and care, during part or
all of the day, children under seven years of age or children under 16
years of age if such children have special needs; provided, however, in
either case, that the total number of children shall not exceed more
than six, excluding participating children living in the residence.
FARMSTAND — A facility for the sale of produce, and wine and dairy
products, provided that during the months of June, July, August, and
September of every year, or during the harvest season of the primary
crop raised on land of the owner or lessee, the majority of such
products for sale, based on either gross sales dollars or volume, have
been produced by the owner or lessee of land containing more than five
acres on which the facility is located, used primarily for agriculture in
conformance with MGL c. 40A, § 3.
FCC — Federal Communications Commission. The government agency
responsible for regulating telecommunications in the United States.
§ 180-2 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-2
177:311
FCC 96-326 — A report and order which sets new national standards
for emissions of radio frequency emissions from FCC-regulated
transmitters.
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of any material or
combination of materials erected to enclose or screen areas of land.
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
FLOODWAY FRINGE — The land in the floodplain within a community
subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in a given year
that is located outside of the floodway.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A building or space used as an accessory to or
a part of a main building permitted in any residential district, and
providing for the storage of one or more motor vehicles and in which no
business, occupation or service for profit is in any way conducted.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — A garage, other than a private or storage garage,
which is used for the short-term parking of vehicles.
GARAGE, REPAIR — A building or portion thereof, other than a private
or storage garage, designed or used for equipping, servicing, repairing,
hiring, selling, and/or storing of motor vehicles. The term "repairing"
shall not include an automobile body repair shop nor the rebuilding,
dismantling, or storage of wrecked or junked vehicles.
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — A gasoline service station shall
include any business selling or offering for sale any motor fuel, such
as gasoline or diesel fuel, to the public, whether or not the public
is permitted or expected to operate the pump to put the fuel into a
motor vehicle's fuel tank or a container, and shall include gasoline
filling stations and gasoline self-service stations. For the purposes of
this chapter, "gasoline service station" shall also include any site used
or operated as a retail refueling site, including the fuels of gasoline,
propane, electricity and hydrogen.
GHZ — Gigahertz: one billion hertz.
GRADE OF SERVICE — A measure of the percentage of calls which are
able to connect to the base station during the busiest hour of the day.
Grade of service is expressed as a number, such as p. 05, which means
that 95% of callers will connect on their first try. A lower number (p. 04)
indicates a better grade of service.
(1) The overflow of inland or tidal waters;
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters
from any source.
(2)
§ 180-2 AGAWAM CODE § 180-2
177:312
HALF STORY — The space between the ceiling of the top story of
a building and the roof where the area and height are sufficient for
sleeping and living quarters.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance which is listed in, but not
limited to, the EPA priority pollutants as described in Section 307(a) of
the Clean Water Act, as amended.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average finished grade of the
adjacent ground to the top of the structure of the highest roof beams of
a flat roof, or the mean level of the highest gable or slope of a hip roof.
HERTZ — One hertz is the frequency of an electric or magnetic field
which reverses polarity once each second or one cycle per second.
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation, business, trade, service or
profession which is incidental to and conducted in a dwelling unit or in
a building or other accessory structure thereto, by a resident thereof.
HOSPITAL — An institution providing primary health services and
medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from
illness, disease, injury, deformity and other abnormal physical or mental
conditions, and including, as an integral part of the institution related
facilities such as laboratories, outpatient facilities or training facilities,
a sanitarium, and clinic. The term "hospital" does not include a rest
home, nursing home and/or convalescent home.
HOUSEKEEPING UNIT — See definition of "family."
JUNK VEHICLE — A wrecked, damaged, destroyed, nonoperational,
abandoned or disassembled trailer, house trailer, boat, tractor,
automobile, aircraft, or other motor vehicle, or any parts thereof. A
junk vehicle includes apparently inoperable, immobile, disassembled or
extensively damaged vehicles. Evidence of nonoperation and damage
includes, but is not limited to, a buildup of debris that obstructs use,
a broken window or windshield, a missing wheel, a flat tire, a
nonfunctional motor or transmission, missing bumpers, or missing
plates and the like.
KENNEL, COMMERCIAL — An establishment licensed to operate a
facility housing dogs, cats, or other household pets and where
grooming, breeding, boarding, training or selling of animals is
conducted as a business.
KENNEL, PRIVATE — Any building or land designated or arranged for
the care of dogs, cats or other household pets belonging to the owner
of the residential, principal use, kept for purposes of show, hunting, or
as pets.
LODGING HOUSE — A building containing more than five lodging units
for semipermanent residence (longer than one week) for compensation
and which meals may also be supplied as part of the fee. This shall
not include bed-and-breakfast home uses, congregate housing, motels,
hotels, multifamily dwellings, or nursing homes.
§ 180-2 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-2
177:313
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — Fabrication, assembly, processing,
finishing work or packaging.
LOADING SPACE, OFF-STREET — Space located on the same lot with
a principal building, or contiguous to a group of buildings, for bulk
pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used,
and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces
are filled. It shall abut a street, alley, or other appropriate means of
ingress or egress.
LOT — A continuous parcel of land with legally definable boundaries.
LOT, AREA — The horizontal area of the lot exclusive of any area in a
street or recorded way open to public use.
LOT, CORNER — A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The mean distance from the street line of the lot to
its opposite rear line measured in the general direction of the side lines
of the lot.
LOT, FRONTAGE OF — A lot line coinciding with the sideline of a street
which provides legal rights of vehicular access and actual physical
vehicular access to the lot. Frontage shall be measured continuously
along a street and shall be the horizontal distance between the side
lot lines measured at the point where the side lot lines intersect with
the front setback line. Lots adjacent to paper streets may not use any
portion of the paper street in calculating frontage or lot area.
LOT LINE — A line dividing one lot from another, or from a street or
any public place.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line opposite the street line, except that, in
the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line shall be the line opposite the
street line on which the building is numbered or would be numbered.
MAJOR MODIFICATION OF AN EXISTING FACILITY — Any change
or proposed change in power input or output, number of antennas,
change in antenna type or model, repositioning of antenna(s), change in
number of channels per antenna above the maximum number approved
under an existing special permit. Also any increase or proposed
increase in dimensions of an existing and permitted tower or other
structure designed to support personal wireless service transmissions,
receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or equipment.
MEDICAL CENTER OR CLINIC — A building designed and used for
the diagnosis and treatment of human patients that does not include
overnight care facilities.
MHZ — Megahertz: one million hertz.
MILE — A mile (5,280 feet) is to be measured from a point on an
imaginary line which is perpendicular to the vertical line at that point.
§ 180-2 AGAWAM CODE § 180-2
177:314
MONITORING — The measurement, by the use of instruments in the
field, of the radiation from a site as a whole or from individual personal
wireless service facilities, towers or antennas.
MONITORING PROTOCOL — The testing protocol, initially the Cobbs
Protocol, which is to be used to monitor the emissions from existing
and new personal wireless service facilities and towers upon adoption
of this chapter. The SPGA may, as the technology changes, require, by
written regulation, the use of other testing protocols. A copy of the
monitoring protocol shall be on file with the Town Clerk.
MONOPOLE — A single self-supporting vertical pole with below-grade
foundations.
MOUNT — The structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted,
including the following four types of mounts:
MOTEL — A building or buildings intended and designed for transient
overnight or extended occupancy, divided into separate units within the
same building, with or without a public dining facility.
MOTOR VEHICLE COMMERCIAL — Any vehicle used or designed to
be used for business or commercial purposes that infringes on the
residential character of residential districts and includes, but is not
necessarily limited to, a bus, cement truck, commercial tree-trimming
equipment, construction equipment, dump truck, garbage truck, panel
truck, semitractor, semitrailer, stake bed truck, step van, tank truck, tar
truck, fire truck, or the like, or other commercial-type vehicle licensed
by the state as a commercial vehicle or truck.
MOTOR VEHICLE GENERAL OR BODY REPAIR — An establishment,
garage or work area enclosed within a building where repairs are made
or caused to be made to motor vehicles and their bodies, including
fenders, bumpers and similar components of motor vehicle bodies, but
does not include the storage of vehicles for the cannibalization of parts
or fuel sales.
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES — Facilities owned or operated by the Town of
Agawam.
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A building or
structure, existing at the effective date of this chapter, or any
subsequent amendment thereto, which does not conform to one or
more provisions of this chapter.
(1) Roof-mounted: mounted on the roof of a building.
(2) Side-mounted: mounted on the side of a building.
(3) Ground-mounted: mounted on the ground.
(4) Structure-mounted: mounted on a structure other than a building.
§ 180-2 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-2
177:315
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot lawfully existing at the effective date
of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which is not in
accordance with all the provisions of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use lawfully existing at the time of
adoption of this chapter, or any subsequent amendment thereto, which
does not conform to one or more provisions of this chapter.
NURSING, REST HOME OR CONVALESCENT HOME — An extended
or intermediate care facility licensed or approved to provide full-time
convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced
age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves.
OFF-SITE MEDICAL MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (OMMD) — A
registered marijuana dispensary that is located off site from the
cultivation/processing facility (and controlled and operated by the same
registered and approved not-for-profit entity which operates an
affiliated RMD) but which serves only to dispense the processed
marijuana, related supplies and educational materials to registered
qualifying patients or their personal caregivers in accordance with the
provisions of 105 CMR 725.00.[Added 5-5-2014 by TOR-2014-1]
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A space of 200 square feet or more
plus access and maneuvering space, whether inside or outside a
structure, for exclusive use as a parking stall for one motor vehicle, and
further being surfaced with durable pavement.
OPEN SPACE — The space on a lot unoccupied by buildings, structures,
driveways, off-street parking or loading spaces or other impervious
surfaces.
ORDINARY HIGH-WATER MARK — The highest point on the bank of a
floodway or floodplain at which the water level has been for a sufficient
period of time to leave a definite mark.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES — Commercial mobile services,
unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange
access services. These services include cellular services, personal
communications services (PCS), specialized mobile radio services and
paging services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE FACILITY — All equipment (excluding
any repeaters) with which a personal wireless service provider
broadcasts and receives the radio frequency waves which carry their
services and all locations of said equipment or any part thereof. This
facility may be sited on one or more towers or structures(s) owned and
permitted by another owner or entity.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE PROVIDER — An entity licensed by
the FCC to provide personal wireless services to individuals or
institutions.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — A building in which is conducted the principal
use of the lot on which it is located.
§ 180-2 AGAWAM CODE § 180-2
177:316
PRINCIPAL USE — The main or primary purpose for which a structure
or lot is designed, arranged or intended, or for which it may be used,
occupied or maintained under this chapter. Any other use within the
main structure or the use of any other structure or land on the same
lot and incidental or supplementary to the principal use and permitted
under this chapter shall be considered an accessory use.
RADIATION PROPAGATION STUDIES OR RADIAL PLOTS — Computergenerated
estimates of the radiation emanating from antennas or
repeaters sited on a specific tower or structure. The height above mean
sea level, power input and output, frequency output, type of antenna,
antenna gain, topography of the site and its surroundings are all taken
into account to create these simulations. They are the primary tool
for determining whether a site will provide adequate coverage for the
personal wireless service facility proposed for that site.
REAR YARD — The required unoccupied space or area within the rear
lot line and the part of the principal building nearest such rear lot line.
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD) — A use operated by
a not-for-profit entity registered and approved by the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health in accordance with 105 CMR 725.000,
and pursuant to all other applicable state laws and regulations, also
to be known as a "medical marijuana treatment center," that acquires,
cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related
products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers,
transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana,
products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational
materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers.
An RMD shall explicitly include facilities which cultivate and process
medical marijuana and which may also dispense and deliver medical
marijuana and related products. The cultivation and processing of
medical marijuana in accordance with these regulations is considered
to be a manufacturing use and is not agriculturally exempt from
zoning.[Added 5-5-2014 by TOR-2014-1]
RESTAURANT — A building, or portion thereof, which is designed,
intended and used for the indoor sales and consumption of food
prepared on the premises, except that food may be consumed outdoors
in landscaped terraces, designed for dining purposes, which are
adjuncts to the main indoor restaurant facility. The term "restaurant"
shall not include "fast-food establishments."
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — An establishment engaged primarily in
the business of preparing food and purveying it on a self-service or
semi-self-service basis. Customer orders and/or service may be by
means of a walk-up counter or window designed to accommodate
automobile traffic. Consumption is either on or off the premises.
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN AND DRIVE-THROUGH — A restaurant
which provides convenient vehicular access and may provide service to
customers while in their vehicles.
§ 180-2 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-2
177:317
SANITARIUM — A hospital used for treating chronic and usually longterm
illness.
SEMIDETACHED DWELLING — A single-family residential unit that is
joined on one side to another single-family residential unit having a
party wall between the units.
SERVICES, PROFESSIONAL — Establishments primarily engaged in
rendering services by professional persons on a fee or contract basis,
including, but not limited to, the following: accounting, auditing, and
bookkeeping; medical, dental or health; planning, engineering and
architectural; education and science; attorneys and notary publics; etc.
SETBACK — The minimum required unoccupied space or area between
the street line of which the building is numbered or would be numbered
and the part of the building nearest such street line, such unoccupied
space or area extending the entire width or distance across the lot.
SIDE LOT LINE — The line dividing one lot from another.
SIDE YARD — The required unoccupied space and area within the lot
between the side lot line and parts of the building nearest such side
lot line. In the case of a corner lot, one of the side yards shall be the
unoccupied space or area between the street line of the side street and
the parts of the building nearest to such street line.
SIGN — Any device, surface or framework on which words, symbols or
other designs are inscribed or displayed and designed to call attention
thereto, including flags, banners and the like.
SIGN, ACCESSORY — Any sign that advertises or indicates the person
occupying the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained or
the business transacted thereon or the products sold thereon.
SIGN, AREA OF —
SIGN, BILLBOARD — Any nonaccessory sign greater in face area than
40 square feet.
Area of the face. The area of the face of a sign shall be considered
to include all lettering, working and accompanying designs and
symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed
and any cutouts or extensions.
(1)
The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols
attached to or painted on a surface, building, wall or window shall
be considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle or triangle
which encompasses all the letters and symbols.
(2)
The area of a sign consisting of a three-dimensional object shall be
considered to be the area of the largest vertical cross section of
that object.
(3)
In computing the area of the signs, both sides of V-shaped signs,
but only one side of the back-to-back signs, shall be counted.
(4)
§ 180-2 AGAWAM CODE § 180-2
177:318
SIGN, COLOR — The color concept of the sign shall be such that it does
not violate the purpose of this chapter.
SIGN, INSTRUCTIONAL — Signs indicating "entrance," "exit" or the
like, erected on premises for the direction of persons or vehicles.
SIGN, OUTDOOR ADVERTISING BOARD — The Outdoor Advertising
Board of the Commonwealth or any board or official which may
hereafter succeed to its powers or functions.
SIGN, OVERHANGING — A sign or other advertising device which
hangs or extends over a sidewalk or a way in which the public has a
right of access. Wall signs and standing signs shall not be included in
this definition.
SIGN, REAL ESTATE — A sign advertising the sale, rental or lease of
the premises on which it is maintained.
SIGN, STANDING — A sign standing or hanging free on its own support;
such support may be attached to a building or fixed in or to the
ground. Standing signs may have two faces or sides showing in opposite
directions.
SIGN, STRUCTURE — The supports, uprights, bracing and framework
of a sign. Any color applied to the "structure" shall meet the purposes
of this chapter.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — Any sign, including its supporting structure,
intended to be maintained for a period less than 180 days for
agricultural purposes and 60 days for any other purposes.
SIGN, WALL — A sign fastened or affixed parallel to and within 12
inches of the wall of a building.
SIGN, WINDOW — A sign painted or placed on the inside or outside of
a window.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A structure designed exclusively for
and occupied exclusively by one family.
SITE PLAN — A plan, to scale, showing uses and structures proposed
for a parcel of land as required by the zoning regulations, including
lot lines, streets, building sites, buildings, landscape features, traffic
circulation, parking, drainage, utilities, signs, topography and lighting
within the parcel.
SPECIAL PERMIT GRANTING AUTHORITY — The Board of Appeals of
the Town of Agawam.
STORAGE CAPACITY OF A FLOODPLAIN — The volume of space above
an area of floodplain that can be occupied by floodwater of a given
stage at a given time, regardless of whether the water is moving.
STORY — The horizontal portion through a building between floor and
ceiling. The word "story" shall not include the portion of the basement
or cellar of a building above grade or an attic as defined in this section.
§ 180-2 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-2
177:319
STREET — An accepted Town way, or a way established by or
maintained under county, state, or federal authority, or a way
established by a subdivision plan approved in accordance with the
Subdivision Control Law,40 actually constructed to specifications or for
which adequate security exists to construct such a way.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a street and a lot and, in the
case of a public way, the street line established by the public authority
laying out such way upon which the lot abuts.
STREET, PAPER — A street shown on a recorded plan but never built
on the ground.
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — A general term denoting land, property or
interest therein, usually a strip acquired for or devoted to a planned
roadway. A street right-of-way should be sufficient to accommodate the
ultimate roadway, including, but not limited to, the street pavement,
shoulder, grass strip, sidewalk, public utility facilities, street trees, and
snow storage.
STRUCTURE — A combination of materials assembled at a fixed
location to give support or shelter, such as a building, framework,
retaining wall, tent, reviewing stand, platform, bin fence, sign, flagpole,
recreational tramway, and mast for radio antenna or the like. The word
"structure" shall be construed, where the context allows, as though
followed by the words "or part or parts thereof."
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT IN THE FLOODPLAIN — Any repair,
reconstruction or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the assessed value of the structure either before the
improvement is started or, if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. Substantial improvement
is started when the first alteration of any structural part of the building
commences.
TOWER — A monopole that is designed to support personal wireless
service transmission, receiving and/or relaying antennas and/or
equipment.
TRAILER — Any so-called automobile trailer, mobile home or trailer
coach, including any portable structure, means of conveyance or
vehicle so designed or constructed, altered or converted in any manner
as to permit occupancy thereof for dwelling or sleeping purposes.
TRUCKING TERMINAL — Terminal facilities for handling freight, with
or without maintenance facilities.
UNREGISTERED MOTOR VEHICLES — Any motor vehicle or trailer not
registered in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 90,
or any motor vehicle which fails to carry or display its license plate as
provided in § 6 of said Chapter 90; or any motor vehicle or trailer owned
40.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 41, § 81K et seq.
§ 180-2 AGAWAM CODE § 180-2
177:320
§ 180-3. Districts enumerated; Building Zone Map.
by a nonresident who has failed to comply with the registration laws of
the nonresident state or country.
USE, SUBSTANTIALLY DIFFERENT — A use which by reason of its
normal operation would cause readily observable differences in
patronage, service, sight, noise, employment or similar characteristics
from the use to which it is being compared.
WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS OVERLAY DISTRICT (WTOD) —
Specific area(s), determined by engineering analysis to contain sites
where adequate service may be provided to the Town of Agawam,
which, at the same time, have the potential of reducing or mitigating
negative impacts in accordance with the overlay district as defined in
this chapter.
YARD — A space open to the sky, located between a building or
structure and a lot line, unoccupied except by fences, walls, poles,
paving, and other customary yard accessories.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending the full width of the lot and situated
between the street line and nearest point of the building.
YARD, REAR — The required unoccupied space or area within the rear
lot line and the part of the principal building nearest such rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — The required unoccupied space or area within the lot
between the side lot line and parts of the building nearest such side
lot line. In the case of a corner lot, one of the side yards shall be the
unoccupied space or area between the street line of the side street and
the parts of the building nearest to such street line.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Town shall be divided into 13
classes of districts as follows: [Amended 4-3-2006 by TR-2006-9;
8-12-2013 by TOR-2013-6; 6-2-2014 by TOR-2014-4]
Residence A-1 Districts
Residence A-2 Districts
Residence A-3 Districts
Residence A-4 Districts
Residence A-5 Age-Restricted Housing District
Residence A-6 Low-Density Multifamily Community District
Residence B Districts
Agriculture Districts
Business A Districts
Business B Districts
Mixed-Use Business C District
Industrial District A
A.
§ 180-2 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-3
177:321
§ 180-4. Filing of plans.
Unless otherwise ordered by the Inspector of Buildings, all applications for
building permits under the provisions of the Building Code42 of the Town
shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate. Such plans shall be drawn to
scale, shall show the actual dimensions, radii and angles of the lot to be
built upon, the exact size and location on the lot of the main building and
accessory buildings to be erected and such other information as may be
amended. One copy of the plans filed by the applicant shall be returned to
him when approved by the Inspector of Buildings.
§ 180-5. Validity of existing building permits.
Any building permit issued prior to a notice of a hearing on the question of
the enactment of this chapter shall be valid, provided that the construction
work thereunder is commenced within six months after its issuance.
§ 180-6. Certificate of occupancy.
Industrial District B
The boundaries of each district area hereby established as shown on
the building zone map entitled: “Town of Agawam, Building Zone Map”
one inch equals 800 feet and dated effective 1960, revised September
7, 2006, which is hereby declared to be a part of this chapter. Such shall
be hereinafter referred to as the “Building Zone Map.”41 [Amended
5-21-2007 by TOR-2007-4]
B.
Hereafter no land shall be occupied or used and no building or
structure which is erected or altered or in which the type of use is
changed shall be occupied or used, in whole or in part, for any purpose
until a certificate of occupancy is issued by the Inspector of Buildings
stating that the building, structure or use complies with the provisions
of this chapter. No such certificate shall be issued unless the building
or structure and its uses, as well as the uses of all the premises, are in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
A.
A certificate of occupancy shall be required for any of the following:
(1) Any occupancy and use of a building hereinafter erected or altered.
Any change in use of an existing building or structure or premises
to a different use.
(2)
(3) Any change in use of a nonconforming use.
B.
Upon completion or alteration of any building or structure and prior
to the use of any such building, structure or premises, a certificate of
occupancy shall be applied for on a form furnished by the Inspector of
C.
41.Editor's Note: The Building Zone Map is included as an attachment to this chapter..
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Building Construction.
§ 180-3 AGAWAM CODE § 180-6
177:322
§ 180-7. Nonconforming uses.
Buildings. Such application shall be acted upon within two days after
the filing thereof.
A nonconforming use and/or building is the lawful use of a structure or
land, or lawful construction of a building at the time of the enactment of
this chapter or of a prior ordinance applicable thereto, but which does
not conform to the requirements after the adoption of this chapter or to
this chapter as amended in the district in which it is located. [Amended
3-7-2016 by TOR-2015-9]
A.
A building, structure, land or use which at the time of the enactment
of this chapter is considered nonconforming: [Amended 3-7-2016 by
TOR-2015-9]
May be continued in that use except as provided in Subsection D of
this section.
(1)
Alteration and/or enlargement of existing nonconforming one- and
two-family residential structures:
The Zoning Administrator has the authority to issue permits,
in writing, for alterations or enlargements thereto, if such
alteration or enlargement, of and by itself, does not create any
new nonconformities.
(a)
In all other circumstances a permit must be applied for and
granted by the ZBA.
(b)
(2)
May be changed to a more restricted use, provided that, when so
changed, it shall not be returned to the less restricted use.
(3)
May be rebuilt or restored and again used as previously, in case of a
building destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion or other casualty,
provided that not more than 75% of the building or structure
exclusive of foundations has been so damaged or destroyed, except
that the Board of Appeals may order a permit issued in any case
of such loss. Rebuilding or restoration, when permitted, shall be
commenced within six months after such catastrophe or disaster
and continuously carried to completion.
(4)
B.
When a nonconforming use is discontinued as evidenced by lack of use
or vacancy for a continuous period of 12 months or by the substitution
of a more restricted use or of a conforming use, such nonconforming
use shall not thereafter be reestablished, and all future uses shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this chapter.
C.
This section shall apply to any change of use and to any alteration of a
building or structure when the same would amount to reconstruction,
extension or structural change and to any alteration of a building
or structure to provide for its use for a purpose or in a manner
D.
§ 180-6 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-7
177:323
§ 180-8. Supplementary regulations.
substantially different from the use to which it was put before alteration
or for its use for the same purpose to a substantially greater extent.
Cornices. Cornices may extend not more than three feet over into any
required front, side or rear yards.
A.
Fences or walls. Fence heights shall not exceed four feet on the setback
portion of any lot perimeter and shall not exceed 6 1/2 feet in height
on the remainder of the lot perimeter. On a lot which is adjacent to a
higher zone classification, the fence heights shall conform to the higher
classification. Notwithstanding the foregoing, fences may be erected by
special permit to a height in excess of four feet, but not to exceed 6 1/2
feet, on the setback portion of any corner lot perimeter only. [Amended
6-15-2009 by TOR-2008-6]
B.
Unsafe buildings. This chapter shall not be considered as preventing
the strengthening or the restoration to a safe condition of any building
or wall declared unsafe by the Inspector of Buildings.
C.
Minimum open spaces. No lot shall be reduced in size or area so
that any required yard, court or open space will be smaller than is
prescribed by this chapter for the district in which it is located.
D.
Location of automobile services. Public garages, automobile repair
shops, greasing stations, storage battery service stations, gasoline
filling stations or any of their appurtenances or accessory uses shall
hereafter be erected or placed at least 25 feet from any residence
or agricultural district. Driveways and parking areas shall not have
entrances or exits for motor vehicles within 100 feet, measured along
the street line, of property on which there is a school, library, church,
playground or institution for the sick, blind or feeble or for children
under 16 years of age. [Amended 11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-14]
E.
Vision clearance. On any corner lot vision clearance shall be provided
in the following manner:
On a corner lot in any Business A and Business B District the side
line shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the side street and the
parking of vehicles in this side area is prohibited.
(1)
A triangular area free from obstruction shall be provided in which
nothing shall be erected or maintained between a point 2 1/2 feet
above the street grade and a point eight feet above the street grade
and measuring at least 10 feet back from the point of intersection
on each of such streets.
(2)
F.
Removal of topsoil, sand and gravel.
Unless otherwise provided in this section, there shall be no removal
from the premises in any district of any sod, loam, clay, sand, gravel
(1)
G.
§ 180-7 AGAWAM CODE § 180-8
177:324
or quarried stone except as surplus material resulting from the
construction of a building on the premises or the installation of a
structure on the premises for which a permit has been issued.
The Board of Appeals may grant a permit in any district for the
removal of sod or loam from any area, provided that no less than
four inches of topsoil or loam remains, and provided further that
the entire area disturbed is seeded with a suitable cover crop or is
put to cultivation.
(2)
The Board of Appeals, after public hearing, may permit the removal
of sand, gravel or clay in any district under the following
conditions:
The applicant shall submit a plan showing existing grades in
the area from which the above material is to be removed,
together with finished grades at the conclusion of the
operation.
(a)
The plan shall provide for proper drainage of the area of
the operation during and after completion, and no bank shall
exceed a slope of one foot of vertical rise in 1 1/2 feet of
horizontal distance except in ledge rock. No removal shall take
place within 20 feet of a property line, except that, where the
grade from a property line rises towards the lot where removal
is to take place, material lying above the grade at the property
line may be removed.
(b)
At the conclusion of the operation or of any substantial portion
thereof, the whole area where removal takes place shall be
covered with not less than four inches of topsoil and seeded
with a suitable cover crop, except where ledge rock is exposed.
(c)
Before a permit is granted under this section, the applicant,
if required by the Board of Appeals, shall post a bond with
the Town Treasurer in an amount approved by the Board of
Appeals as sufficient to guarantee conformity with the
provisions of the permit issued hereunder.
(d)
(3)
Animal hospitals, kennels and runs. Kennel runs or accessory buildings
and the raising of fur-bearing animals on land zoned as agricultural
is allowed only after a hearing by the Board of Appeals. This land
parcel must be five acres or more in area, with the following additional
requirements:
(1) The setback shall be 500 feet from the street line.
(2) The side lot line shall be 200 feet.
(3) The rear yard setback shall be 200 feet.
H.
Measurement of setbacks. To make provision for future fifty-foot roads,
in the case of lots fronting on streets less than 50 feet in width, the
I.
§ 180-8 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-8
177:325
§ 180-9. Repetitive petitions before Board of Appeals.
No appeal or petition under MGL c. 40A, § 15(3), as amended, for a variance
from the terms of this chapter with respect to a particular plot of land and
no application under MGL c. 40A, § 20 for a special exception to the terms of
this chapter which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Board of Appeals
shall be considered on its merits by such Board within two years after the
required front yard setback shall be measured from a point 25 feet from
the existing center of the roadway.
Swimming pools in residential districts. No swimming pool shall be
constructed within any required front yard, nor within 10 feet from
any side or rear lot line. Below-ground swimming pools having a depth
of two feet shall be surrounded by a protective fence not less than
four feet high. Any opening in such fence shall be protected by a gate
equipped with a secure locking device.
J.
Keeping of horses and ponies. Notwithstanding the permitted uses
contained in the individual zoning district and sections of this chapter,
the keeping of horses and ponies shall be permitted only in Agricultural,
Residence A-2, Industrial A and B and Business A and B Districts,
subject to the following requirements and regulations:
Acreage. Three-fourths acre (32,670 square feet) shall be required
for one horse or pony; 1/2 acre (21,780 square feet) shall be
required for each additional equine. Foals under six months shall
not be counted.
(1)
Fences must be adequate to contain the animal within the property
boundary.
(2)
Barn location and setback requirements shall be as specified in the
present Building Code43 for outbuildings.44
(3)
K.
Farm worker housing. Housing for farm workers located on land used
for farming or agricultural purposes shall constitute an accessory use
to farming in accordance with the Agawam Zoning Code § 180-37, and
such housing is a permitted use as of right in an Agricultural District
Zone and/or on parcels of land not in an agricultural zone exceeding
five acres which are used for agricultural purposes. This regulation
shall be applicable to all requests for site plan, building permit and
all other approvals relating to farm worker housing, whether the
request(s) involve the use, expansion, reconstruction of existing
structures, and/or new construction of buildings or structures. [Added
12-18-2006 by TOR-2006-10]
L.
43.Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Building Construction.
44.Editor's Note: TOR-97-10, adopted 10-20-1997, added provisions for a moratorium on
commercial wireless communications facilities to immediately follow this subsection. Said
provisions were subsequently repealed 3-2-1998 by TOR-97-13. For current provisions on
wireless communications facilities, see Article XIV, Personal Wireless Service Facilities
and Towers.
§ 180-8 AGAWAM CODE § 180-9
177:326
date of such unfavorable action except with the consent of all the members
of the Planning Board.
§ 180-10. Repetitive petitions before Town Council.
No proposed ordinance or amendment making a change in this chapter
which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Town Council shall be
considered on its merits by the Town Council within two years after the date
of such unfavorable action unless adoption of such proposed ordinance or
amendment is recommended in the final report of the Planning Board as
required by MGL c. 40A, § 6, as amended.
§ 180-11. Special permits. [Amended 12-5-1988 by TOR-88-19;
1-19-1993 by TOR-92-17; 11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-15]
Authority and rules. The Board of Appeals by virtue of the authority
vested in it by statute may, after public notice and hearing, in
appropriate cases and subject to appropriate conditions and safeguards
grant a special permit in harmony with the general purpose and intent
of this chapter. The special permit granting authority may adopt and
from time to time amend rules and regulations relative to the issuance
of such permits and shall file a copy of said rules and regulations in the
office of the Town Clerk.
A.
Hearing, notice and decision.
The special permit granting authority shall hold a public hearing
within 65 days after the filing of an application with the special
permit granting authority, a copy of which shall forthwith be given
to the Town Clerk by the applicant.
(1)
The special permit granting authority shall require notice be given
by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town
once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not
less than 14 days before the hearing, and by posting such notice
in a conspicuous place in the Town Hall. Notice shall be sent by
mail, postage prepaid, to the petitioner, abutters and owners of
land within 300 feet of the property line as they appear on the
most recent applicable tax list, including those in another city or
Town and the Planning Boards of all abutting cities and towns.
Such notice shall be prepared, published, posted and mailed by the
Board of Appeals.
(2)
The special permit granting authority shall act within 90 days
following the public hearing. Failure to take final action upon an
application for a special permit within said 90 days shall be deemed
a grant of the permit applied for.
(3)
Upon granting of a special permit, a copy shall be issued to the
owner and the applicant, if other than the owner of the property,
certified by the special permit granting authority. No special permit
(4)
B.
§ 180-9 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-11
177:327
shall take effect until a copy of the decision certified by the Town
Clerk that 20 days have elapsed and no appeal has been filed, or if
such appeal has been filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, is
recorded in the Registry of Deeds wherein the land is located.
Duration. A special permit granted by the special permit granting
authority shall lapse if a substantial use thereof has not commenced
within three years, or in the case of construction, if construction has not
begun within said three years. Exception may be made for good cause
by the special permit granting authority.
C.
Special consideration. Special permits shall be issued by the special
permit granting authority for uses, whether or not on the same parcel
as activities permitted as a matter of right, which are necessary in
connection with scientific research or scientific development or related
production where the special permit granting authority finds that the
proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public
good.
D.
Planning Board report. The Planning Board shall transmit a report
to the special permit granting authority on each special permit
application. The Planning Board shall be notified at least 35 days prior
to the public hearing on such a special permit. However, the special
permit granting authority may act in the absence of a report from the
Planning Board after this thirty-five-day period.
E.
Zoning Officer report. The Zoning Officer shall transmit a report to the
special permit granting authority on each special permit application.
The Zoning Officer shall be notified at least 35 days prior to the public
hearing on such a special permit. However, the special permit granting
authority may act in the absence of a report from the Zoning Officer
after this thirty-five-day period.
F.
Standards for review. The Board of Appeals shall not approve any such
application for a special permit unless it finds in its judgment all of the
following conditions are met:
Social, economic, or community needs which are served by the
proposal;
(1)
(2) Traffic flow and safety, including parking and loading;
(3) Adequacy of utilities and other public services;
(4) Neighborhood character and social structures;
(5) Impacts on the natural environment;
Potential fiscal impact, including impact on Town services, tax
base, and employment.
(6)
G.
Conditions attached to special permit approvals. In approving a special
permit, the special permit granting authority may attach such
H.
§ 180-11 AGAWAM CODE § 180-11
177:328
§ 180-12. Special permit for animal hospital.
A special permit may be granted for an animal hospital, but only in Business
A and Business B Districts and with the additional requirements that animal
hospitals shall be separate buildings in themselves and that no animals
shall be kept out of the building in cages, runs, kennels or yards. A special
permit may be granted subject to any other conditions and safeguards as
are prescribed by the Board of Appeals.
§ 180-13. Site plans. [Added 5-7-1990 by TOR-90-26]
conditions and safeguards as are deemed necessary to protect the
neighborhood, such as, but not limited to, the following:
Requirement of front, side or rear yards greater than the minimum
required by this chapter.
(1)
Requirement of screening of parking areas or other parts of the
premises from adjoining premises or from the street by walls,
fences, planting or other devices.
(2)
Modification of the exterior features or appearance of the
structure.
(3)
Limitation of the size, number of occupants, method or time of
operation or extent of facilities.
(4)
Regulation of number, design and location of access drives or other
traffic features.
(5)
Effect of denial. If the special permit granting authority after said
hearing denies the use applied for, no further application for the same
use will be entertained by the Board of Appeals for a period of two years
from the date of said denial.
I.
Site plans prepared and approved in accordance with this section shall
be required to assist the Inspector of Buildings in the review of certain
applications for building permits and to assure compliance with all
applicable requirements of this chapter.
A.
A site plan shall be required and shall be submitted in each of the
following situations:
Any proposed residential, business, industrial, institutional or other
use of a new or renovated structure or of a parcel of land, or
any change in any such use, structure or parcel, except for onefamily
detached dwellings and duplexes on separate lots; provided,
however, that, upon application, the Inspector of Buildings may
waive the site plan review and approval requirement for proposals
involving a) a change in use only, b) construction or alteration
of nonresidential structures not to exceed 2,000 square feet of
additional gross floor area, or c) construction or alteration of
(1)
B.
§ 180-11 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-13
177:329
structures that are accessory to a nonresidential structure. For the
purposes of computing gross floor area, the Inspector of Buildings
must aggregate all alterations or construction completed within the
immediately preceding five years. [Amended 9-5-2018 by TOR
2018-11]
(2) Any nonresidential use of a one-family dwelling.
Any use requiring a special permit from the Board of Appeals. For
this section, residences which are to be used solely for residential
purposes are exempt. [Amended 1-21-2003 by TOR-2002-8]
(3)
Any major change in any condition or feature which is not in
conformance with any feature of a previously approved site plan.
Changes to parking and/or curb cuts will always necessitate site
plan review.
(4)
Procedure.
An applicant for site plan review under this section shall file with
the Building Department 10 copies each of an application and a
site plan. The site plan shall be prepared by an engineer, architect
or landscape architect unless otherwise specified by the Planning
Board.
(1)
The Inspector of Buildings shall, within five days of receipt,
transmit to the Planning Board 10 copies of the application and site
plan.
(2)
All site plans shall be prepared to scale on standard sheets of 24
inches by 36 inches to show with reasonable accuracy the following
information, in addition to that required in § 180-4:
A title block, containing the street address, applicant's name
and address, date, scale and the name of the preparer of the
plan.
(a)
A site layout at a scale of no smaller than one inch equals 50
feet.
(b)
(c) Topography of the site and adjacent lands.
Provision for the handling of vehicular traffic flow. All curb
cuts must be clearly defined with widths and radii noted on
the plan. Radii shall meet Town standards. Parking lot and site
traffic flow must be clearly noted with signs or other methods
if it is to be maintained as one-way.
(d)
(e) Parking areas and loading areas.
Drainage. The plan must be submitted to the Department of
Public Works for input prior to Planning Board review.
(f)
(g) All public utilities (sewer, water, gas, electric).
(3)
C.
§ 180-13 AGAWAM CODE § 180-13
177:330
§ 180-14. Changes in Building Zone Map.
No zone as indicated on the Building Zone Map which is a part of this
chapter shall be changed until after the Planning Board has held a public
hearing thereon after due notice given and has submitted a final report with
the recommendations to the Town.
§ 180-15. Enforcement.
The Inspector of Buildings shall enforce the provision of this chapter or any
amendment thereof. He shall refuse to grant a permit for the construction,
addition, alteration or change of use of any building, structure or premises if
such proposed construction, addition, alteration or change of use would be
in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, as amended. State and
Town officers shall refuse any permit or license for a new use of a building,
structure or land which would be in violation of this chapter or amendment
thereof.
Landscaping. All landscaped areas are to be designated on the
plan. These areas are to specify species type and size.
(h)
(i) Sign location only.
(j) Exterior lighting.
Rendering or elevations, including all mechanical facility
support items originating from or terminating on the building
exterior, or both.
(k)
The location and characteristics of any proposed screening,
fencing or other buffers.
(l)
The location of any wetlands, streams, drainage swales and
areas subject to flooding.
(m)
Within 21 days of receipt, the Planning Board shall hold a public
meeting. The Planning Board shall within 35 days of receipt
approve the site plan, approve it with modifications or return it for
changes or additional information. When changes have been made
or additional information provided, the above-specified time limits
will apply. The Planning Board can in certain cases extend the
review period if done so in writing and for good reason; however,
the review period shall not exceed 90 days. A report containing
the findings of the Board shall be submitted to the Inspector of
Buildings for consideration in issuing a building permit.
(4)
Any application for a building permit requiring site plan approval
shall not be deemed complete until such site plan is submitted.
(5)
Any decision pursuant to a site plan review shall be subject to the
right of appeal to the Board of Appeals.
(6)
§ 180-13 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-16
177:331
§ 180-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-25-1989 by
TOR-89-2]
Any person, partnership, trust, association or corporation violating any
provision of this chapter, any condition under which any permit is issued or
any decision rendered by the Board of Appeals shall be fined not more than
$100 nor less than $25 for each offense. Each day that such violation exists
shall constitute a separate offense under this section.
§ 180-16.1. Noncriminal proceedings for violations. [Added
11-21-2005 by TOR-2005-2]
Any violation of this Chapter 180 may, in the discretion of the Board
of Appeals, be enforced by the Zoning Enforcement Officer, or the
Inspector of Buildings, or their designee, by the noncriminal complaint
method for which provision is made, and/or as set forth in MGL c. 40,
§ 21D, as amended from time to time, that is, non-criminal disposition.
Fines issued pursuant to § 180-16.1 shall be as follows:
(1) First offense: $25.
(2) Second offense: $50.
(3) Third offense and each subsequent offense: $100.
A.
Each day on which a violation exists shall constitute and be deemed a
separate offense.
B.
§ 180-16 AGAWAM CODE § 180-16.1
177:332
ARTICLE II
Residence A-1 Districts
§ 180-17. Permitted uses.
In a Residence A-1 District as indicated by the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for any purpose except one or more of the
following:
A. A one-family dwelling for one housekeeping unit only.
The office of a physician, surgeon, dentist or lawyer residing on the
premises. No display, sign or other advertising device shall be
permitted except an interior illuminated, reflective or nonilluminated
professional nameplate having an area of not more than 144 square
inches.
B.
Town buildings, county, state and federal buildings, playgrounds and
parks and such accessory buildings as may be ordered by the Board of
Public Officers or Town officials having charge of the land upon which
such accessory buildings are or will be erected.
C.
Real estate signs having an area of not more than six square feet
advertising the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which they are
maintained.
D.
Cemeteries adjacent to or in extension of existing cemeteries and
crematories, provided that such crematories are situated within
cemeteries.
E.
Accessory uses customarily incident to any use or building permitted by
this section, provided that such use of buildings shall not be offensive
or dangerous to life by reason of health or fire, and provided further
that such accessory use shall not include any activity conducted for
gain. No advertising device, whether illuminated or otherwise, shall be
permitted in connection with such accessory uses or building.
F.
The keeping and raising of poultry, livestock and pigeons, whether
raised for the table or other purposes, or other like objectionable uses
are prohibited.
G.
Private garages, provided that no business, service or industry is
conducted therefrom or therein. Not more than one motor vehicle for
each 5,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof up to a limit of five
vehicles per lot shall be permitted. Space for motor vehicles shall not be
used, leased or rented for commercial vehicles. No commercial vehicles
shall be parked on a lot in the open. These space regulations shall apply
to vehicles regularly left on the lot, whether housed or in the open. The
presence of more than one unregistered vehicle is prohibited.45
H.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 172, Vehicles, Unregistered.
§ 180-17 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-18
177:333
§ 180-18. Height regulations.
A residence building shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or more than 35 feet
in height. Town buildings shall not exceed 50 feet in height. The height
provisions shall not apply to chimneys or flag or radio poles. An accessory
building shall not exceed 1 1/2 stories or 25 feet in height.
§ 180-19. Setback requirements.
§ 180-20. Yards.
§ 180-21. Lot size.
No lot shall have a frontage of less than 125 feet on a street or an area of
less than 17,000 square feet.
No part of any building shall be placed within 35 feet of any street line,
and on a corner lot, except as otherwise provided in this section, no
part of any building shall be created or altered so as to be less than 35
feet from any street line.
A.
No part of any garage or other accessory building situated within
65 feet of any street line shall extend within 15 feet of any lot line
intersecting such street which serves as a side lot line located in any
residence district or within 15 feet of any street line. An accessory
building shall be placed at least five feet from any side lot line.
B.
On a corner lot, no part of any building shall be erected or altered so as
to be less than 30 feet from any street line.
C.
When a dwelling or its attached garage is to be erected on a lot in a
Residence A-1 District adjoining a business or industrial district, the
setback from the street line on which it faces need not exceed 30 feet.
D.
Existing open porches which are 30 feet or more from the street line
may be enclosed. [Amended 11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-14]
E.
Side yards. There shall be a side yard between a principal building and
each side lot line which shall be 15 feet wide in its least dimension.
Detached garages or accessory buildings shall be placed at least five
feet from a side lot line if located more than 65 feet from a street line.
A.
Rear yards.
There shall be a rear yard on every lot between the principal
building and the rear lot line. It shall be not less than 25 feet deep
in its least dimension.
(1)
A one-story accessory building shall be placed at least five feet
from the rear lot line. A one-and-one-half-story accessory building
shall be placed at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
(2)
B.
§ 180-18 AGAWAM CODE § 180-22
177:334
§ 180-22. Lot coverage.
No principal building shall be erected or altered so as to cover more than
30% of the area of the lot on which it is located.
§ 180-22 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-22
177:335

ARTICLE III
Residence A-2 Districts
§ 180-23. Permitted uses.
In any Residence A-2 District as indicated on the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for any purpose except one or more of the
following:
A. Any use permitted in a Residence A-1 District.
A one-family detached dwelling for one housekeeping unit only;
provided, however, that the Board of Appeals, upon an appeal from an
order or decision made by the Inspector of Buildings and if it deems
such action wise and if it shall appear to the Board that such action
will tend to preserve the standard and character of the neighborhood,
may authorize a variation in the use of a one-family dwelling existing
at the time of the adoption of this Article so that such dwelling may be
altered and improved and facilities added for a second housekeeping
unit. In all such cases the petitioner, as a condition precedent to the
privilege herein granted, shall present adequate plans setting forth the
changes and improvements to be made and shall have secured the
written consent and approval of at least three of the following property
owners:
(1) The owner of the lot on either side of the petitioner's property.
The owner of the lot adjacent in the rear of the petitioner's
property.
(2)
The owner of the lot directly across the street therefrom. Where the
petitioner is the owner of a lot on either side, in the rear or across
from the property for which a variation is requested, such lot shall
be omitted, in which case written consent and approval shall be
secured from the owner of the property next to that owned by the
petitioner. In case there are two or more lots adjacent in the rear or
sides of the petitioner's property, the owner of the lot which abuts
the greater length on the petitioner's property shall be deemed the
owner of the lot adjacent to the petitioner's property, as used in this
section.
(3)
B.
§ 180-23 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-23
177:337
In the case of an appeal for a variation involving a dwelling
situation on a corner lot or so located that the obtaining of the
exact numerical assents of the owner above enumerated is
unreasonable or impossible, the Board of Appeals may grant the
variation, provided that the consents of the property owners are
obtained substantially in accordance with the principals herein set
forth as may be determined by the Board of Appeals. The power
to authorize such variation of the use of existing dwellings shall
be within the sound discretion of the Board of Appeals, and no
variation in use shall be granted unless it shall be clear that the
relief requested will not be detrimental to the best interests of
the vicinity and will be in harmony with the general purpose and
intent of this chapter. Each case shall be considered on its own
merits, and no case shall raise a presumption in favor of any other
case. No decision of the Board of Appeals shall be considered as
changing or affecting the zoning of any Residence A-2 District.
The office or studio of a dentist, artist, architect, professional engineer
or teacher of scholastic subjects residing on the premises or a beauty
parlor wherein one of the residents is the sole operator. The space
occupied by such office, studio or parlor shall not exceed 20% of the
total floor area of the dwelling, exclusive of the basement. No display,
sign or other advertising devise shall be permitted except an interior
illuminated, reflective or nonilluminated professional nameplate having
an area of not more than 144 square inches. The studios or offices
of dancing or music teachers, photographers, masseurs, veterinarians,
riding schools and other similar businesslike pursuits are prohibited.
C.
The renting of rooms and the furnishing of table board to not more than
four resident persons in a dwelling occupied as a private residence. No
display, sign or other advertising device, illuminated or otherwise, shall
be visible from the street except a nonilluminated announcement sign
having an area of not more than 144 square inches.
D.
Schools for academic purposes only and community center buildings,
except dancing or bowling and like activities, provided that there is no
display or advertising visible from the street, other than as permitted in
Subsection C of this section.
E.
Colleges, public libraries or museums, churches or other places of
worship, parish houses and Sunday school buildings.
F.
Private kindergartens and day nurseries conducted in otherwise
permitted buildings in this district, provided that not more than 25%
of the floor area of the building, exclusive of the basement, is used
primarily for this purpose.
G.
Bus passenger stations or shelters, not including repair service or
garaging.
H.
I. Telephone exchange buildings.
§ 180-23 AGAWAM CODE § 180-23
177:338
§ 180-24. Height regulations.
§ 180-25. Setback requirements.
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incident to any use permitted
in this section, provided that such use shall not be offensive or
dangerous to life by reason of health or fire, and provided further
that such accessory use shall not include any activity conducted for
gain. No advertising device, whether illuminated or otherwise, shall
be permitted, except that an interior illuminated, reflective or
nonilluminated announcement sign having an area of not more than 144
square inches may be displayed.
J.
The keeping and raising of poultry, livestock and pigeons, whether
for the table or other purposes, or other like objectionable uses are
prohibited.
K.
Private garages, provided that no business, service or industry is
conducted therefrom or therein. Not more than one motor vehicle for
each 5,000 square feet of lot area or fraction thereof, nor more than
five motor vehicles, not more than one of which may be unregistered,
shall in any case be kept on the premises. Only one such vehicle may be
a commercial vehicle and of not more than 3/4 ton's weight of capacity.
Space for motor vehicles shall not be leased or rented for commercial
vehicles. No commercial vehicles shall be parked on a lot in the open.
These space regulations shall apply to vehicles regularly left on the lot,
whether housed or in the open.
L.
Not more than one house trailer may be kept on the premises. The
trailer shall not be used for living quarters while so located except
when the residence has been damaged or destroyed to the point of
being deemed uninhabitable by Town officials and for no longer than
12 months. Space shall not be leased or rented for trailers. [Amended
11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-16]
M.
Uses outlined in § 180-37B and C, when the line separating a Residence
A-2 District from an Agricultural District runs through a property not
being used for agricultural purposes so that the future use of the whole
property for agricultural purposes would be prohibited.
N.
A residence building shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or more than 35 feet
in height. Other buildings such as schools, telephone exchanges and
community center buildings and other uses permitted in § 180-23E shall
not exceed 50 feet in height. Chimneys, steeples and flag or radio poles
are exempt from the height provision of this section.
A.
Accessory buildings or structures, including private garages, shall not
exceed 17 feet in height for a one-story building. A one-and-one-halfstory
accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
B.
A. No part of any building shall be placed within 30 feet of any street line.
§ 180-23 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-25
177:339
§ 180-26. Yards.
§ 180-27. Lot size.
No lot shall have a frontage of less than 110 feet nor an area of less than
15,000 square feet.
§ 180-28. Lot coverage.
No principal building shall be erected or altered so as to cover more than
40% of the area of the lot on which it is located.
No part of any garage or other accessory building situated within
65 feet of any street line shall extend within 15 feet of any lot line
intersecting such street which serves as a side lot line located in any
residence district or within 15 feet of any street line.
B.
On a corner lot, no part of any building shall be erected or altered so as
to be less than 25 feet from any street line.
C.
Open porches which are 20 feet or more from the street line may be
enclosed on one or more sides with glass enclosures.
D.
Side yards.
There shall be a side yard between a principal building and any side
lot line which shall be 15 feet wide in its least dimension.
(1)
Detached garages or accessory buildings shall be placed at least
five feet from the side lot line if located more than 65 feet from a
street line.
(2)
A.
Rear yards.
There shall be a rear yard on every lot between the principal
building and the rear lot line. It shall be 20 feet deep in its least
dimension.
(1)
One-story accessory buildings shall be placed at least five feet from
the rear lot line, and one-and-one-half-story accessory buildings
shall be placed at least 10 feet from the rear lot line.
(2)
B.
§ 180-25 AGAWAM CODE § 180-28
177:340
ARTICLE IV
Residence A-3 Districts
§ 180-29. Use restrictions.
In a Residence A-3 District as indicated by the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for any purpose except for apartment houses or
garden-type apartments and accessory uses incident thereto and subject to
the following restrictions:
Subdivision control will not apply except insofar as it applies to road
construction, surface drainage and utilities.
A.
The project shall be located on a lot containing not less than two acres
and contain not more than eight family dwelling units per acre of lot
area. The building coverage shall not exceed 40% of the lot area. The
minimum lot frontage on a street shall be 150 feet.
B.
No building shall be located nearer than 40 feet to a street line or other
property line.
C.
There shall be a landscaped strip of not less than 15 feet in width
appropriately planted with lawn, trees and shrubs adjacent and parallel
to all property lines of the site.
D.
There shall be a landscaped foundation strip of not less than 10 feet
in width between each building and any roadway, drive or street. Such
strip shall contain a six-foot-wide grassed and planted area and fourfoot-
wide sidewalk adjacent to any roadway, drive or street within the
project.
E.
No building shall be more than two stories in height, exclusive of the
basement. The basement shall not contain any living quarters.
F.
The minimum distance between any two buildings on the same lot shall
in no case be less than 40 feet.
G.
Floor area.
No building shall contain more than eight family dwelling units,
and no dwelling unit shall contain less than the following minimum
floor areas:
(a) One-bedroom units: 400 square feet.
(b) Two-bedroom units: 600 square feet.
(c) Each additional room: 120 square feet.
(1)
In computing floor area, only the space within the dwelling unit
used exclusively for living purposes shall be considered. Halls,
closets, stairways, bathrooms and lavatories are expressly
excluded from this computation.
(2)
H.
§ 180-29 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-29
177:341
I. All stairways are to be contained within the building structure proper.
Each dwelling unit shall have access to not fewer than two egresses
remote from each other and so arranged that to reach one egress it will
not be necessary to pass through a common corridor or hallway which
serves the other egress. The term "egress" is as defined in § 101.0 of
the Department of Public Safety, Board of Standards, Building Code.
J.
Parking space shall be provided at the rate of two spaces for each
family dwelling unit. Each space shall contain a minimum of 200 square
feet and shall be located at least 25 feet from any principal building,
except that if garage parking is to be located within the building, it
must comply with the rules and regulations governing construction of
garages contained in Form FPR-4 of the Massachusetts Department of
Public Safety, Board of Fire Prevention Regulations.
K.
L. There shall be no provision for parking on roadways, drives or streets.
The balance of the lot not used for buildings, roadways, streets or
parking areas shall be suitably planted and landscaped and maintained.
M.
Space contained in apartment units or garden-type apartment units
shall not be used, rented or leased for any commercial or business uses.
N.
The plans for any such apartment or garden-type apartment shall be
submitted to the Planning Board for its approval as to site layout,
provisions for handling vehicular traffic flow, parking area and
landscaping before a building permit is issued.
O.
§ 180-29 AGAWAM CODE § 180-29
177:342
ARTICLE V
Residence A-4 Districts
§ 180-30. Use restrictions.
In a Residence A-4 District as indicated by the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used, and no land
shall be used or occupied for any purpose except for an elderly housing
development, constructed by and under the jurisdiction of the Agawam
Housing Authority, and the accessory uses incident thereto, including an
administration and recreational building, and subject to the following
restrictions:
The development shall be located on a lot containing not less than seven
acres and containing not more than 16 family dwelling units per acre of
lot area. Not more than 12 dwelling units may be constructed in each
building.
A.
Subdivision control will not apply except insofar as it applies to road
construction, surface drainage and utilities.
B.
No building shall be located nearer than 40 feet to the property line.
There shall be a landscaped strip of not less than 15 feet in width
appropriately planted with lawn, trees and shrubs adjacent and parallel
to all property lines of the site.
C.
No building shall be more than two stories in height, exclusive of the
basement. The basement shall not contain any living quarters.
D.
E. All stairways are to be contained within the building structure proper.
Each dwelling unit shall have access to not fewer than two egresses
remote from each other and so arranged that to reach one egress it will
not be necessary to pass through a common corridor or hallway which
serves other egresses. The term "egress" is as defined in § 101.0 of the
Department of Public Safety, Board of Standards, Building Code.
F.
Parking space shall be provided at the rate of one space for each family
dwelling unit. Each space shall contain a minimum of 200 square feet. If
garage parking is to be located within the building, it must comply with
the rules and regulations concerning construction of garages contained
in Form FPR-4 of the Massachusetts Department of Public Safety, Board
of Fire Prevention Regulations.
G.
The balance of the lot not used for buildings, roadways, drives, streets
or parking area shall be suitably planted and landscaped and
maintained.
H.
The plans for any such development shall be submitted to the Planning
Board for its approval as to site layout, provisions for handling
vehicular traffic flow, parking area and landscaping before a building
permit is issued.
I.
§ 180-30 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-30
177:343

ARTICLE VI
Residence B Districts
§ 180-31. Permitted uses.
In any Residence B District as indicated on the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for any other purpose except one or more of the
following:
A. Any use permitted in a Residence A-1 or A-2 District.
A two-family dwelling for two housekeeping units. A semidetached
dwelling for two families, provided that there shall not be more than
one family in each half of such dwelling.
B.
Notwithstanding any other provision in the above paragraph, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used for
residential purposes which shall accommodate or house more than
four families. All four-family buildings or structures used for residential
purposes shall be erected on a parcel of land containing not less than
one acre in area and having not less than 150 feet of frontage on a
street.
C.
Lodging houses, provided that there is no display, sign or other
advertising device visible from the street, whether illuminated or
otherwise, other than a sign having an area of not more than 144
square inches. A public restaurant or dining room shall be permitted as
an accessory use in any part of such building, provided that the dining
room and kitchen facilities do not occupy more than 75% of the firstfloor
area of such building.
D.
Clubs, lodges and social center buildings, except those whose chief
activity is a gainful service or activity usually conducted as a business,
including in such excepted uses dancing or bowling and like activities,
provided that there is no display or advertising visible from the street
other than that permitted in Subsection D of this section.
E.
Hospitals, sanitariums or charitable institutions, except those for
contagious diseases, for the care of epileptics or drug or liquor patients,
for correctional purposes or for the care of the insane or feebleminded.
F.
Private garages, provided that no business, service or industry is
conducted therefrom or therein. Not more than one motor vehicle
shall be kept for each 2,500 square feet of lot area, except that three
vehicles may be kept, in any case, not more than one of which may be
unregistered. Only one such vehicle may be a commercial vehicle of not
more than 1 1/2 tons' weight of capacity. Space shall not be leased or
rented for a commercial vehicle. No commercial vehicle shall be parked
on a lot in the open. These space regulations shall apply to vehicles
regularly left on the lot, whether housed or in the open.
G.
§ 180-31 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-31
177:345
§ 180-32. Height regulations.
§ 180-33. Setback requirements.
§ 180-34. Yards.
Not more than one house trailer for each resident family may be kept
on the premises. The trailer shall not be used for living quarters while
so located. Space shall not be rented or leased for trailers.
H.
A dwelling or lodging house shall not exceed 2 1/2 stories or 35 feet.
Churches, schools, colleges, libraries, Town buildings, clubs, lodges,
social center buildings, hospitals and such institutional buildings shall
not exceed 50 feet in height. Chimneys, steeples and flag or radio poles
are exempt from the height provisions.
A.
Accessory buildings or structures, including private garages, shall not
exceed 17 feet in height for a one- or one-and-one-half-story building. A
two-story accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
B.
No part of any building or other structure shall be erected or altered
so as to be nearer to the street line of any street on which it faces than
the nearest building on either side thereof facing on the same street
and within the same block and zoning district, but in no case need the
required setback be greater than 30 feet.
A.
Where the alignment of a building is not controlled by the preceding
subsection, no part of any building shall be placed within 20 feet of the
street line.
B.
No part of any garage, stable or other accessory building situated
within 65 feet of any street line shall extend within 15 feet of any lot
line intersecting such street which serves as a side lot line located in
any residence district or within 15 feet of any street line.
C.
On a corner lot, except as otherwise provided in this section, no part
of any building shall be erected or altered so as to be less than 20 feet
from any street line.
D.
Existing open porches which are 15 feet or more from the street line
may be enclosed. [Amended 11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-14]
E.
Side yards. There shall be a side yard between a building and each side
lot line. For a building of four stories or over 45 feet in height, it shall
be not less than 25 feet in width in its least dimension; for a building
of three stories or over 35 feet in height, it shall be not less than 20
feet wide in its least dimension; for one-, one-and-one-half-, two- or twoand-
one-half-story buildings, the side yard shall be not less than 15 feet
wide in its least dimension.
A.
Rear yards. There shall be a rear yard on every lot between the
principal building and the rear lot line. It shall be 20 feet deep in
B.
§ 180-31 AGAWAM CODE § 180-34
177:346
§ 180-35. Lot size.
No lot shall have a frontage of less than 100 feet on a street or an area less
than 12,000 square feet.
§ 180-36. Lot coverage.
No principal building shall be erected or altered so as to cover more than
40% of the area of the lot on which it is located.
its least dimension. One-story accessory buildings shall be placed at
least five feet from the rear lot line, and one-and-one-half- or two-story
accessory buildings shall be placed not less than 10 feet from the rear
lot line.
§ 180-34 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-36
177:347

ARTICLE VII
Agricultural Districts
§ 180-37. Permitted uses.
In any Agricultural District as indicated on the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for a purpose except one or more of the following:
§ 180-38. Height regulations.
Buildings or structures permitted in this zone under § 180-37A shall not
exceed the heights permitted in § 180-24 of this chapter. For other buildings
permitted by this Article, the height limitation shall be 50 feet.
§ 180-39. Setback requirements.
§ 180-40. Yards.
A. Any use permitted in a Residence A-1 or A-2 District.
Farms, dairies, nurseries, truck gardens, greenhouses and natural iceharvesting
activities and buildings or structures accessory thereto.
B.
Buildings or shelters for the sale of farm products, provided that a
major portion of the products offered for sale at all times are raised on
the premises and no advertising of products other than those raised on
the premises shall be displayed.
C.
The processing of forests and wood lots by portable woodworking mills
and machinery for processing wood cut on the premises, if approved by
the Board of Appeals.
D.
Airports and landing strips and buildings or structures necessary
thereto, if located west of Suffield Street.
E.
Off-street parking for 24 hours or less for motor vehicles when the use
is an accessory to an existing conforming amusement park containing
at least three acres of land adjacent to agriculturally zoned land and by
special permit. [Added 2-20-2001 by TOR-2001-1]
F.
Buildings and shelters for the sale of farm products shall be at least 35
feet from the street line.
A.
Dwellings with or without attached garages shall be at least 35 feet
from the street line. All other buildings of whatever description shall be
at least 100 feet from the street line.
B.
Side yards. There shall be a side yard between any building and any
side lot line. It shall comply with the side yard requirements of the
nearest residence district measured in a direct or air line.
A.
§ 180-37 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-40
177:349
§ 180-41. Lot size.
No lot shall be used for residence purposes with a frontage of less than 120
feet on a street or an area of less than 20,000 square feet.
§ 180-42. Lot coverage.
There shall be no lot coverage regulations in this district.
§ 180-43. Special use requirements.
Rear yards. For a residence, accessory building or other structure, the
rear yard shall comply with the rear yard requirement of the nearest
residence district measured in a direct or air line.
B.
Landscaped administrative offices, laboratories devoted to research,
design or experimentation and processing and fabrication incidental
thereto and appurtenant buildings consistent with and designed to
promote and benefit the value and use of property in residential
districts or in areas which are predominantly residential although
partly lying in less restricted districts, provided that no materials or
finished products shall be manufactured, processed or fabricated on
such premises for sale except such as are incidental to such laboratory
research, design or experimentation conducted on such premises.
A.
The special use established must be on plots having a minimum of 20
acres, must have a two-hundred-foot front yard and 100 yards along all
other lot lines and must provide off-street parking for employees and
visitors. If the front yard is on an interior lot line, 200 feet of setback
shall apply to this lot line. The only sign permitted must be in front of
the building and subject to Planning Board approval. Traffic directional
and parking signs must be not more than four feet high from the ground
level. Not over 25% of the land shall be used for building purposes.
[Amended 11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-14]
B.
Landscaped rest homes or convalescent homes, except those for
contagious diseases, for the care of drug or liquor patients, for
correctional purposes or for the care of the insane or feebleminded.
Rest homes or convalescent homes must be on plots having a minimum
of 10 acres, must have a one-hundred-foot front yard and fifty-foot
yards along all other lot lines and must provide off-street parking for
employees and visitors. Not over 25% of the land shall be used for
building purposes.
C.
Nonprofit golf courses shall be permitted. Golf courses operated for
profit shall be permitted with that portion of land covered by a
clubhouse to be zoned Business A. All golf courses must be on plots
having a minimum of 75 acres.
D.
To assure that special use structures shall be reasonably attractive
in appearance, the builder or his representative shall submit to the
E.
§ 180-40 AGAWAM CODE § 180-43
177:350
Planning Board, in addition to other requirements, an architect's
rendering or comparable illustration of the planned construction,
including landscaping, prior to applying for a building permit. Unless
such a drawing approved by the Planning Board is submitted to the
Inspector of Buildings, no permit for a building shall be issued, nor shall
an occupancy permit be granted, unless and until the finished structure
conforms to the drawing submitted.
Not more than one motor vehicle per 5,000 square feet of lot up to a
limit of five motor vehicles shall be kept in accordance with Chapter 91
of the General Laws, only one of which can be an unregistered vehicle,
exclusive of farm equipment.
F.
§ 180-43 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-43
177:351

ARTICLE VIII
Business A Districts
§ 180-44. Permitted uses.
In any Business A District as indicated on the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for any purpose except one or more of the
following:
A. Any use permitted in a residence district or an Agricultural District.
The major use of a building or structure in this district shall be to store
and display goods for sale at retail on the premises or to furnish a
service intended for residents of the immediate vicinity. Banks, hotels,
dining establishments, halls and office buildings shall be considered as
complying with such requirements.
B.
No building, structure or land shall be used in whole or in part for
any fabricating, manufacturing, converting, altering, finishing or
assembling.
C.
One-story public garages for storage or repair of not more than 50
cars. Body and fender work and the painting or selling of cars in or
out of doors is prohibited. The storage of dismantled vehicles or vehicle
parts out of doors is prohibited. The storage of complete units such as
truck bodies, tailgates, road sanders, farm machinery, school buses and
ambulances is permitted. An underground tank of not more than 1,000
gallons' capacity for drain oil is permitted. [Amended 11-15-2004 by
TOR-2004-17]
D.
A gasoline filling station, which shall include self-service gasoline filling
or service stations, provided that not more than 30,000 gallons of
gasoline shall be stored on the premises. An enclosed lubritorium for
not more than three motor vehicles shall be permitted. Only minor
repairing of motor vehicles is permitted. [Amended 12-2-2002 by
TR-2002-53]
For the public purpose to promote and protect the health, safety,
and welfare of the residents of the Town of Agawam, to prevent and
control fires, and to control traffic, it is deemed to be in the best
interests of the Town of Agawam to regulate the number of gasoline
filling stations within the Town of Agawam.
(1)
For the purpose of licensing gasoline service stations under the
provisions of Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 148, § 13, there
shall be no more than 20 issued at any one time, and no license
shall be issued for a gasoline filling station located within 200 feet
of a residence, school or church.
(2)
E.
F. (Reserved)46
§ 180-44 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-44
177:353
§ 180-45. Height regulations.
§ 180-46. Setbacks; yards; loading areas.
G. Cabins, if licensed under MGL c. 140, § 32A to 32E, inclusive.
Drive-in restaurants and drive-through restaurants, after a special
permit by the Board of Appeals in conformance with § 180-11. At no
time shall fewer than 50 parking spaces be provided on site. [Added
3-21-1994 by TOR-94-1; amended 3-8-2000 by TOR-2000-1]
The parking or loading requirements set forth in this subsection
may be reduced as part of the special permit by the Board of
Appeals if the Board of Appeals finds that the reduction is not
inconsistent with the requirements of the Zoning Bylaws of the
Town of Agawam.
(1)
If a reduction is allowed, a reserve area, to be maintained
indefinitely as landscaped open space, must be required sufficient
to adequately accommodate the difference between the parking
spaces required (i.e., the sum of the parking spaces required for
the separate used individually) and the parking spaces provided.
The parking/site plan shall show (in dotted outline) the reserve
area laid out in full compliance with any parking or loading
requirements as set forth in said Chapter 180, including the
required number of spaces. In no event shall the Board of Appeals
reduce the parking or loading requirement below 30 spaces.
(2)
H.
Drive-through service windows utilized by any business shall require a
special permit from the Board of Appeals in conformance with § 180-11.
[Added 9-20-1997 by TOR-97-8]
I.
No more than four automatic amusement devices duly licensed in
accordance with § 75-1 of the Code of the Town of Agawam. [Added
9-7-2004 by TOR-2004-5]
J.
A business building shall not exceed three stories or 45 feet in height.
These provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flag or radio poles, water
tanks or hose towers or required bulkheads or elevator penthouses.
A residence building shall comply with the height requirements for
Residence B Districts.
A.
Heights of other buildings and structures permitted in this zone under
§ 180-44A shall not exceed the height permitted in Residence B
Districts.
B.
A. Setbacks shall be at least 35 feet.
B. Side yards are not required for business buildings.
46.Editor's Note: Former Subsection F, which provided for open-air transient parking as a
permitted use, was repealed 6-18-2007 by TOR-2007-6.
§ 180-44 AGAWAM CODE § 180-46
177:354
§ 180-47. Lot coverage.
C. Rear yards shall have a minimum of 25 feet.
Space shall be provided for vehicle parking and for the loading and
unloading of all materials, equipment and merchandise on the premises
and entirely off the traveled way, with such additional space as may
be necessary to provide free and easy access to that portion of the
buildings so as not to interfere with traffic on the public way. Loading
and unloading platforms and doorways especially designed for loading
and unloading goods are prohibited on the front of any building.
D.
A building devoted in whole or in part to residence or other purposes
permitted in § 180-44A shall comply with the requirements prescribed
for Residence B Districts. [Amended 4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
E.
No business building shall be erected or altered so as to cover more
than 50% of the area of the lot upon which it is located. [Amended
4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
A.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, no building or
other structure shall be erected, altered or used for residential
purposes which shall accommodate or house more than four families.
All four-family buildings or structures used for residential purposes
shall be erected on a parcel of land containing not less than one acre in
area and having not less than 150 feet of frontage on a street.
B.
Not more than one unregistered motor vehicle shall be allowed on any
parcel of land used as a gasoline filling station; provided, however, that
any such gasoline filling station having an automobile dealer's permit
shall be governed by the provisions of such permit.
C.
§ 180-46 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-47
177:355

ARTICLE IX
Business B Districts
§ 180-48. Permitted uses.
In any Business B District as indicated on the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for any purpose except one or more of the
following:
Except as otherwise provided in this article, any use permitted in a
Residence, Agricultural or Business A District.
A.
Residential buildings and appurtenant buildings such as garages,
sheds, barns, etc., presently existing in Business B Districts may be
added thereto, altered or rebuilt.
B.
In any Business B Districts as indicated on the Building Zone Map,
no new building or other structure shall be erected for residential
purposes unless the land so located in the Business B District is part of
a subdivision plan duly recorded prior to the enactment of this section
or unless individual building lots have been similarly recorded.
C.
Body and fender work and the painting of cars out of doors is
prohibited. The storage of dismantled vehicles or vehicle parts out of
doors is prohibited. The storage of complete units such as truck bodies,
tailgates, road sanders, farm machinery, school buses and ambulances
is permitted. The selling of motor vehicles in or out of doors is
prohibited. [Amended 11-15-2004 by TOR-2004-17]
D.
Amusement parks, bowling alleys and roller skating rinks, or arcades
containing six or more pinball or electronic games and/or automatic
amusement devices with a special permit issued by the Board of
Appeals. No more than five automatic amusement devices duly licensed
in accordance with § 75-1 of the Code of the Town of Agawam.
[Amended 12-7-1981; 9-7-2004 by TOR-2004-7]
E.
F. Wholesale sales and warehousing.
Converting, fabricating, manufacturing, altering, finishing or
assembling, provided that in no case is a total of more than 20,000
square feet of floor space devoted to such use.
G.
Trucking terminals may be allowed only after a public hearing by the
Board of Appeals.
H.
Retail shopping centers comprised of only one building, planned as
a total entity with on-site common parking areas for customer and
employee parking provided so as to comprise an efficient and
architecturally integrated shopping area. [Added 2-6-2006 by
TOR-2005-12]
(1) Allowed uses.
I.
§ 180-48 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-48
177:357
Retail shopping centers may include department stores,
variety stores, supermarkets, furniture stores, household
appliance stores, home improvement stores, lawn equipment
stores, gift shops, restaurants, including drive-in and drivethrough
restaurants, drugstores, barbershops, beauty shops,
office supply stores, food stores, optical stores, clothing stores,
financial institutions and banks (with or without drive-through
windows), health clubs, movie theaters, doctors’ offices,
dentist offices and other professional offices open to the public,
children's day-care and activity centers. Only one principal
building per lot is allowed.
(a)
These uses will not include, as a principal or accessory use,
motor vehicle services, such as new or used motor vehicle
sales, freestanding tire, brake and muffler shops, automobile
repair shops, and gasoline stations. No accessory use or
building is permitted under this zoning.
(b)
Unless by special permit of the Agawam Town Council,
temporary outside uses upon the parcel are prohibited,
including but not limited to, circuses, festivals, tent sales,
sidewalk sales, retail displays, vehicle displays.
(c)
Retail shopping center requirements.
Application procedures.
Site plan. Site plans for any such retail shopping center
shall be submitted to the Planning Board for its approval
as to site layout, provisions for handling traffic flow,
parking area, landscaping, traffic, and architectural
characteristics before a building permit is issued. To
assure that retail shopping centers shall be reasonably
attractive in appearance, the developer or its
representative shall submit to the Planning Board, in
addition to the requirements set forth in § 180-13, an
architect's rendering or comparable illustration of the
planned construction, including landscaping, prior to
applying for a building permit. The architectural concept
will be required to fit the character of the community
and be at the approval of the Planning Board prior to
issuing a building permit. Unless such a drawing approved
by the Planning Board is submitted to the Inspector of
Buildings, no building permit shall be issued, nor shall an
occupancy permit be granted unless and until the finished
construction reasonably conforms to the drawing
submitted.
[1]
Special permit.
No building permit shall be issued for, and no person
shall undertake, any use or improvement for a retail
[a]
[2]
(a)
(2)
§ 180-48 AGAWAM CODE § 180-48
177:358
shopping center unless an application for a special
permit has been prepared for the proposed
development in accordance with the requirements and
§ 180-11. For the purpose of this section, the special
permit granting authority shall be the Agawam Town
Council.
No building permit shall be granted by the Inspector
of Buildings until the Agawam Town Council has given
its final approval that the development or any phase
thereof and any associated off-site improvements
conform to the approved application for a special
permit under this section, including any conditions
imposed by the Agawam Town Council. No temporary
occupancy permits shall be granted.
[b]
Parking. No space within the required front setback area may
be used for parking unless approved by the Planning Board.
An overall shared parking scheme is preferred and developed
in such a way that conforms to parking space requirements
for retail shopping centers as specified herein. In the overall
shared parking scheme, the applicant shall specify how shared
parking areas are to be owned, constructed, operated and
maintained and provide the Planning Board with the proposed
deeds, deed restrictions, association bylaws or other legal
documents or mechanisms for ensuring the same. All parking
lots shall be designed according to the following standards:
Minimum 4.5/1,000 overall parking ratio inclusive of all
buildings (no unheated garden shop or seasonal retail or
wholesale sales);
[1]
Minimum size for parking spaces shall be nine feet by 18
feet unless when using angled parking as specified in the
Institute of Transportation Engineers, Traffic Engineering
Handbook, Parking Class A.
[2]
Minimum width for drive aisles shall be:
Twenty-four feet for two-way lanes with ninety-degree
angle parking.
[a]
Eighteen feet for one-way lanes with sixty-degree
angle parking.
[b]
Eighteen feet for one-way lanes with forty-five-degree
angle parking.
[c]
[3]
With the exception of parking for the disabled, all other
parking spaces shall be located at least 50 feet or greater
from any building.
[4]
(b)
§ 180-48 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-48
177:359
Pavement markings, signage and any other required traffic
control devices within the site shall be specified according
to the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices (M.U.T.C.D.) standards. All roadway, stop
line and traffic markings shall be of thermoplastic.
[5]
Pedestrian and handicapped access from the parking areas
to the site sidewalks and entrances to all buildings shall
be specified to provide safe access and internal circulation
within the site.
[6]
No overnight parking of vehicles not related to the
ongoing operation of the shopping center.
[7]
Traffic impact report. A traffic impact report, indicating
projected traffic flows to and from the project at its buildout,
projected traffic flows and levels of service on nearby
roadways in five years and at build-out of the development,
current traffic flows, levels of service and accident records
for said roadways, projected capacity, service level and safety
problems anticipated in five years and at project build-out,
proposed mitigation measures and other relevant information
shall be submitted as part of the site plan application and
presented to the Planning Board at a public meeting by a
professional traffic engineer or transportation planner. The
area to be included in the traffic impact study shall be
determined by the Planning Board. The Planning Board may
require traffic signals, traffic or turn lanes, sidewalks,
bikeways or any other mitigation measures that it believes
necessary to protect public safety and maintain proper traffic
flow on roadways within or impacted by the development.
(c)
Streets and drives. Streets and drives within the development
shall be constructed in accordance with the Planning Board's
subdivision regulations, except that the Planning Board may
require additional sidewalks, traffic lanes, turn lanes, traffic
signals, additional lane width based on truck traffic, additional
pavement depth based on truck traffic or other items or
increases in existing standards as needed or required. A
minimum of two means of egress from a public way must be
provided.
(d)
Buffers and greenspace. Retail shopping centers shall contain
a minimum of 25% greenspace not including parking and/or
interior roadways. A space of not less than 100 feet shall be
maintained as an open space buffer with natural vegetation
or landscaping along and adjacent to agriculturally and
residentially zoned property lines. The buffer shall not be built
on, have no structures to include barrier fencing, be paved
or used for parking, dumpsters and/or storage, but may be
utilized for stormwater management and greenspace only. All
(e)
§ 180-48 AGAWAM CODE § 180-48
177:360
buffer areas shall be maintained and kept free of litter.
Additional area, plantings, decorative fencing or other items
may also be required by the Planning Board to protect adjacent
property owners from adverse impacts or to protect the
character of the neighborhood, including landscaped berms
and/or fences along and adjacent to residentially zoned
property lines.
Parking lot interior landscaping. Fifteen percent of the interior
space of all parking lots shall be landscaped areas. All parking
lot islands, connecting walkways through parking lots and
driveways through or to parking lots shall be landscaped
according to the following standards:
Visibility. To avoid landscape material blocking driver sight
distance at driveway-street intersections, no plant
material greater than 24 inches in height shall be located
within 15 feet of a curb cut.
[1]
Landscape islands. In addition to any pedestrian refuge
areas, each landscaped island shall include two, minimum
two-and-five-tenths-inch caliper canopy deciduous trees,
be of length greater than eight feet in its smallest
dimension, include at least 80 square feet of ground area
per tree to allow for root aeration, and have raised
concrete curbs.
[2]
Walkways and driveways. Connecting walkways through
parking lots shall have two, minimum two-and-five-tenthsinch
caliper canopy deciduous trees per 60 linear feet of
such walkway planted in landscape areas within five feet
of such walkway. Driveways through or to parking lots
shall have two minimum two-and-five-tenths-inch caliper
canopy deciduous trees per 60 linear feet of and along
each side of such driveway, in landscape areas within five
feet of such driveway.
[3]
Parking bays shall extend no more than 20 parking spaces
without an intervening tree, landscape island or landscape
peninsula where landscaped end islands are provided.
Where landscaped end islands for parking bays are not
provided, an equivalent landscaped area must be provided
internally within the parking lot.
[4]
Adhere to all existing engineering regulations and
requirements.
[5]
(f)
Lighting. Parking lot lighting shall be as unobtrusive as
possible to provide safe circulation and protect people and
property. Light sources shall be concealed and fully shielded
and shall feature sharp cutoff capability so as to minimize uplight,
spill-light, glare and unnecessary diffusion on adjacent
(g)
§ 180-48 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-48
177:361
property. Unique areas or neighborhoods within the Town may
have additional design guidelines for lighting as required by
the Planning Board. Maximum on-site lighting levels shall not
exceed 10 footcandles, except for loading and unloading
platforms where the maximum lighting level shall be 20
footcandles. Lighting levels measured 20 feet beyond the
property line of the development site (adjacent to residential
uses or public rights-of-way) shall not exceed 0.1 footcandle
as a direct result of the on-site lighting. Parking lots shall
remain fully lit for one hour following the closing of the store or
establishment for which the parking lot serves, and shall be lit
by security lighting thereafter. All lighting level measurements
shall be determined by mean footcandles over the designated
lighted area. Maximum height on lot poles shall be 20 feet and
the fixture shall be shielded to prevent excess spillage of light
onto adjoining properties.
Outdoor storage areas/mechanical equipment.
No areas for outdoor storage, trash collection or
compaction, loading or other such uses shall be located
within 100 feet of any public street, public sidewalk or
internal pedestrian way, and in no event shall be visible
from roadways (such areas will be screened from view,
including the use of live plantings such as arborvitae).
These enclosed areas for only the above purposes must
be shielded by an opaque fence, or site-obscuring
landscaping, either of which shall be not less than six feet.
[1]
Loading docks, truck parking, outdoor storage, utility
meters, HVAC and other mechanical equipment, trash
collection, trash compaction and other service functions
shall be incorporated into the overall design theme of the
building and the landscape so that the architectural design
is continuous and uninterrupted by ladders, towers and
equipment.
[2]
[3] All rooftop mechanical equipment shall be screened.
No outside sales areas/yards are permitted at any time,
which include any type of stationary or mobile vendor
carts (i.e., food stands).
[4]
No temporary or fabric structures shall be used for
outdoor storage.
[5]
(h)
Building facade. All exterior building elevations that face
public streets and/or customer parking areas shall be designed
so that there are no large expanses of blank walls. This
requirement can be met by employing the use of architectural
features, including but not limited to the following, doors,
windows, pilasters, columns, horizontal and vertical offsets,
(i)
§ 180-48 AGAWAM CODE § 180-48
177:362
material and color variations, decorative cornices, awnings,
dormers, pediments and canopies. Buildings are to have
reasonably consistent architectural elements to provide
continuity, while allowing individuality in architectural
features to distinguish individual businesses. In order to assure
conformance with this requirement, exterior building
elevations must be reviewed and approved as a part of the
overall final site plan process by the Planning Board.
[Amended 11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-14]
Noise. No outside loudspeaker or audio sound systems shall be
installed or used other than for drive-through uses.
(j)
Maintenance. All properties developed for commercial
purposes, whether they are occupied or not, shall be regularly
maintained by the owner of the property to the reasonable
satisfaction of the Zoning Enforcement Officer, so that they
are not allowed to fall into a state of disrepair or neglect; and
they shall consistently present a neat and orderly appearance
to the general public as well as adjacent and nearby tenants
and property owners. Regular maintenance shall include at
a minimum, mowing of lawns, general maintenance of
landscaping beds, landscaping irrigation, trash and litter
removal, removal of signs, painting/maintenance of facades
and signs, and proper snow removal.
(k)
Other requirements.
[1] Minimum size: five acres.
Maximum facility 100,000 square feet, overall single
building size. The square footage of a mezzanine shall be
included in the calculation of the total square footage.
[2]
[3] Minimum frontage: 100 feet.
[4] Front yard setback: 100 feet.
[5] Rear yard setback: 100 feet.
[6] Side yard setback: 100 feet.
[7] Highway setback: 100 feet.
Maximum building coverage shall not exceed 35% of the
lot area.
[8]
No building within the retail shopping center shall be
greater than one story in height. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, internal mezzanines (i.e., a low-ceilinged
intermediate floor above the ground floor) shall be
allowed.
[9]
(l)
§ 180-48 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-48
177:363
§ 180-49. Height regulations. [Amended 6-6-2005 by TOR-2005-8;
11-5-2008 by TOR-2008-2]
A business building or structure shall not be erected or altered to a height
in excess of three stories or more than 45 feet except as expressly provided
herein and in § 180-49.1. These provisions shall not apply to chimneys, flag
or radio poles, water tanks, hose towers or required bulkheads or elevator
penthouses. A residence building shall comply with the height provisions for
Residence B Districts. Heights of other buildings or structures permitted in
§ 180-48A shall not exceed the heights permitted in Residence B Districts.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, § 180-49.1 shall govern the height of
amusement devices which constitute part of an amusement park.
§ 180-49.1. Amusement park height regulations. [Added 11-5-2008
by TOR-2008-2]
Signage for individual businesses within retail shopping
centers shall be allowed as provided by § 180-80. In
addition to the signs permitted for the individual
businesses, retail shopping centers are allowed one
multifaced ground sign at each major street providing
access to the property identifying the retail shopping
center and any specific uses or occupancies within the
shopping center. The maximum signage area for each
individual business depicted on the retail shopping center
ground sign shall not exceed 100 square feet per face for
each individual business. The total maximum signage area
for each face of the retail shopping center ground sign
shall be limited as follows: a) If the sum of the building
area for all individual businesses within the retail
shopping center is less than 100,000 square feet, each
face of the retail shopping center ground signage shall
not exceed 200 square feet plus 20 square feet per each
individual business listed; b) If the sum of the building
area for all individual businesses within the retail
shopping center exceeds 100,000 square feet, each face of
the retail shopping center ground signage shall not exceed
350 square feet plus 35 square feet per each individual
business listed. Ground signs shall not exceed 20 feet in
height as measured from the top of the sign. Signage
design shall fit the character of the community and be in
communion with the architecture of the proposed retail
complex as well the surrounding environment. Signage
for this type of development requires the approval of the
Planning Board. No scrolling, tethered or temporary signs
are permitted. Signage per individual establishment shall
not exceed 15% of the establishment's facade.
[10]
An amusement device which constitutes part of an amusement park
and which is situated more than 250 feet from the street line and any
A.
§ 180-48 AGAWAM CODE § 180-49.1
177:364
§ 180-50. Setbacks; yards; loading areas.
§ 180-51. Lot coverage. [Amended 4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
No business building shall be erected or altered so as to cover more than
50% of the area of the lot on which it is located. A building devoted in
whole or in part to residence or other permitted purposes in § 180-48A shall
comply with the requirements of lot coverage in Residence B Districts.
side lot line shall not be erected or altered to a height in excess of
200 feet, except as expressly provided herein. An amusement device
which constitutes part of an amusement park and which is situated
within 250 feet from the street line or any side lot line shall not be
erected or altered to a height in excess of 45 feet, except as expressly
provided herein. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an amusement device
which constitutes part of an amusement park may exceed the height
limitations contained herein only after issuance of a special permit by
the Board of Appeals.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, any applicant seeking to erect or alter
an amusement device to a height in excess of 45 feet shall be required
to send notice by certified mail, postage prepaid, to the abutters and
owners of land within 300 feet of the property lines as they appear
on the most recent applicable tax list, including those in another city
or town. Such notice shall inform such abutters and owners of land of
the date, time and location of the Planning Board’s public meeting as
required under § 180-13C(4) hereof for the applicant’s site plan for the
proposed amusement device. Such notice shall be sent at least 10 days
prior to the Planning Board’s public meeting and such notice shall be
prepared and mailed by the applicant.
B.
Setbacks and rear yards shall be at least 35 feet in their least
dimension.
A.
Side yards requirements shall be a minimum of 10 feet, except adjacent
to residential or agricultural zones, at which time it would be 15 feet.
[Amended 4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
B.
Space shall be provided for vehicle parking and for the loading and
unloading of all materials, equipment and merchandise on the premises
and entirely off the traveled way, with such additional space as may
be necessary to provide free and easy access to that portion of the
building so as not to interfere with traffic on the public way. Loading
and unloading are prohibited on the front of any building.
C.
A building devoted in whole or in part to residence uses shall comply
with the requirements for setbacks, side yards and rear yards of the
Resident B District.
D.
§ 180-49.1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-52
177:365
§ 180-52. Lot frontage. [Amended 4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
No lot shall have a frontage of less than 100 feet on a street or an area less
than 10,000 square feet.
§ 180-53. Landscaping.
To assure that structures in Business B Districts shall be reasonably
attractive in appearances, the builder or his representative shall submit
to the Planning Board, in addition to other requirements, an architect's
rendering or comparable illustration of the planned construction, including
landscaping, prior to applying for a building permit. Unless such a drawing
approved by the Planning Board is submitted to the Inspector of Buildings,
no permit for a business building shall be issued, nor shall an occupancy
permit be granted, unless and until the finished structure conforms in
appearance to the drawing submitted.
§ 180-54. Lumberyards; residences; gasoline stations.
Secondhand lumberyards and secondhand buildings material yards are
prohibited.
A.
No building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used for
residential purposes which shall accommodate or house more than
four families. All four-family buildings or structures used for residential
purposes shall be erected on a parcel of land containing not less than
one acre in area and having not less than 150 feet of frontage on a
street.
B.
Not more than one unregistered motor vehicle shall be allowed on any
parcel of land used as a gasoline filling station; provided, however, that
any such gasoline filling station having an automobile dealer's permit
shall be governed by the provisions of such permit.
C.
§ 180-52 AGAWAM CODE § 180-54
177:366
ARTICLE X
Industrial District A
§ 180-55. Permitted uses. [Amended 11-9-1994 by TOR-94-7 47]
In any Industrial District A as indicated on the Building Zone Map, no
building or other structure shall be erected, altered or used and no land
shall be used or occupied for any purpose except one of the following:
Any business or agricultural use permitted in an Agricultural, Business
A or Business B District.
A.
Any industrial purpose, except those contained in the following list,
which may be allowed, by special permit, only after a public hearing
before the Board of Appeals: [Amended 5-5-2014 by TOR-2014-1]
(1) Acetylene gas, cyanide compound or oxygen manufacture.
(2) Asphalt manufacture or refining.
(3) Chlorine or bleaching powder manufacture.
(4) Creosote manufacture.
(5) Distillation of coal or wood.
(6) Drop forge shop.
(7) Explosives, fireworks or ammunition manufacture.
(8) Fertilizer manufacture.
(9) Fumigation plants.
(10)Glue or size manufacture from fish or animal offal.
(11)Gypsum, cement, plaster or plaster of paris manufacture.
Incineration or reduction of or dumping of offal, garbage or refuse
on a commercial basis, except where controlled by the Town.
(12)
Junkyards, storage, scrapping of autos and parts and the salvage
thereof.
(13)
(14)Linoleum manufacture.
(15)Match manufacture.
(16)Paint and lacquer manufacture.
(17)Petroleum refining and the bulk storage of petroleum products.
(18)Plastic manufacture.
B.
47.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for the repeal of former Subsection A and the
renumbering of former Subsections B and C to A and B, respectively.
§ 180-55 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-55
177:367
§ 180-56. Height regulations.
Industrial buildings shall not exceed two stories or 40 feet in height, except
with approval of the Board of Appeals after a public hearing. These
provisions shall not apply to required equipment appurtenant to industrial
buildings, except that smokestacks, water tanks, grain elevators and the
like are not permissible except after approval of the Board of Appeals after
a public hearing.
§ 180-57. Setbacks; yards. [Amended 4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
(19)Rest homes.
Rubber, natural or synthetic or gutta-percha manufactured from
crude or scrap material.
(20)
(21)Secondhand lumberyards and secondhand material yards.
(22)Sewage disposal plant, except where controlled by the Town.
(23)Soap, tallow, grease or lard manufacture.
(24)Slaughterhouse.
(25)Sulfurous, sulfuric, nitric or hydrochloric acid manufacture.
(26)Tannery.
(27)Tar or asphalt roofing manufacture.
(28)Tar products manufacture.
(29)Tire recapping or retreading.
(30)Trucking terminals.
All other enterprises or uses commonly regarded as hazardous or
offensive.
(31)
Assisted living facilities as defined in MGL c. 19D. [Added
3-20-2006 by TOR-2006-1]
(32)
(33)Registered marijuana dispensary.
(34)Off-site medical marijuana dispensary.
A. Setbacks shall be at least 40 feet wide in their least dimension.
Side yard and rear yard requirement shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
However, there shall be a side yard and a rear yard between a street
and the parts of a building nearest to such street to be no less than
40 feet, but facilities shall be provided for loading and unloading all
materials, equipment and merchandise on the premises and entirely off
the traveled way.
B.
§ 180-55 AGAWAM CODE § 180-58
177:368
§ 180-58. Lot coverage. [Amended 4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
No business or industrial building shall be erected or altered so as to cover
more than 50% of the area of the lot on which it is located.
§ 180-59. Lot size. [Added 4-7-1986 by TOR-86-6]
No lot shall have a frontage of less than 100 feet on a street or an area of
less than 40,000 square feet.
§ 180-60. Landscaping; residences; gasoline stations.
To assure that structures in industrial districts shall be reasonably
attractive in appearance, the builder or his representative shall submit
to the Planning Board, in addition to other requirements, an architect's
rendering or comparable illustration of the planned constructions,
including landscaping, prior to applying for a building permit. Unless
such a drawing approved by the Planning Board is submitted to the
Inspector of Buildings, no permit for an industrial building shall be
issued, nor shall an occupancy permit be granted unless and until the
finished structure conforms in appearance to the drawing submitted.
A.
All residential development is prohibited, except that alteration,
reconstruction, extension or structural change to any existing
residential structure is permitted. [Amended 11-9-1994 by
TOR-94-7]
B.
Not more than one unregistered motor vehicle shall be allowed on any
parcel of land used as a gasoline filling station; provided, however, that
any such gasoline filling station having an automobile dealer's permit
shall be governed by the provisions of such permit.
C.
§ 180-58 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-60
177:369

ARTICLE XI
Industrial District B
§ 180-61. Boundaries.
Industrial B Districts shall be that area bounded by Suffield Street, Silver
Street and Shoemaker Lane zoned Industrial at the Town Meeting of
December 10, 1957, and those areas zoned Industrial B on or after the Town
Meeting of December 10, 1957.
§ 180-62. Permitted uses.
Permitted uses shall be all uses permitted in Industrial District A.
§ 180-63. Height regulations.
Industrial buildings shall not exceed two stories, 40 feet in height, except
with approval of the Board of Appeals after a public hearing. These
provisions shall not apply to required equipment appurtenant to industrial
buildings, except that smokestacks, water tanks, grain elevators and the
like are not permissible except after approval of the Board of Appeals after
a public hearing.
§ 180-64. Yards; setbacks; loading areas.
§ 180-65. Lot size; lot coverage.
A. Back and side yards shall be a minimum of 25 feet.
B. Front setback shall be a minimum of 75 feet.
Loading platforms and employee parking areas shall be at the rear and
side of all buildings.
C.
No lot shall have an area less than 43,560 square feet, one acre, on
which a building may be constructed for industrial use, except with
approval of the Board of Appeals relative only to previously filed lots
whose area is less than one acre; provided that the file lot does not abut
an additional parcel owned by the same owner which if combined would
meet with the one-acre requirement of this section.
A.
Except for office, professional or administrative buildings, no building
shall be less than 5,000 square feet in area.
B.
No lot shall have frontage of less than 100 feet on a street line; however,
this frontage requirement shall not apply to lots established by a deed
or plan recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds prior to the
first notice of the public hearing on this subsection amendment (March
3, 1994) if, and only if, said parcel of land was not held in common
ownership with sufficient adjoining parcels of land on the date of the
first notice of public hearing on this subsection amendment (March 3,
C.
§ 180-61 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-65
177:371
§ 180-66. Landscaping; residences; gasoline stations.
1994) to satisfy, in combination, the required 100 feet of frontage on a
street line. [Added 5-2-1994 by TOR-94-5]
To assure that structures in industrial districts shall be reasonably
attractive in appearance, the builder or his representative shall submit
to the Planning Board, in addition to other requirements, an architect's
rendering or comparable illustration of the planned construction,
including landscaping, prior to applying for a building permit. Unless
such a drawing approved by the Planning Board is submitted to the
Inspector of Buildings, no permit for an industrial building shall be
issued, nor shall an occupancy permit be granted unless and until the
finished structure conforms in appearance to the drawing submitted.
A.
B. (Reserved)48
All buildings in an industrial zone shall be appropriately landscaped
with lawns, shrubs and trees.
C.
All residential development is prohibited, except that alteration,
reconstruction, extension or structural change to any existing
residential structure is permitted. [Amended 11-9-1994 by
TOR-94-7]
D.
Not more than one unregistered motor vehicle shall be allowed on any
parcel of land used as a gasoline filling station; provided, however, that
any such gasoline filling station having an automobile dealer's permit
shall be governed by the provisions of such permit.
E.
48.Editor’s Note: Former Subsection B, which provided that the front of the building must be
faced with either brick masonry exterior walls, curtain walls of decorated colored
aluminum, enameled colored steel, stainless steel walls or glass wall construction and
have an attractive appearance, was repealed 11-19-2018 by TOR-2018-14.
§ 180-65 AGAWAM CODE § 180-66
177:372
ARTICLE XII
Floodplain Zone
[Added 1-30-1978; amended 6-18-2013 by TOR-2013-5]
§ 180-67. Purpose.
The Floodplain Zone and the regulations herein have been established for
the following purposes: to protect and preserve the watercourses and their
adjoining floodplain; to reduce the hazards of floods upon the public health,
safety and general welfare; to protect floodplain occupants from a flood that
is or may be caused by their own land use and that is or may be undertaken
without full realization of the dangers therein; to protect the public from the
burden of extraordinary financial expenditures for flood control and relief;
and to protect the capacity of the floodplain to absorb, transmit and store
runoff to assure retention of sufficient floodway area to convey flows which
can reasonably be expected to occur.
§ 180-68. Maps; use of other base flood elevation data.
§ 180-69. Permitted uses.
In those portions of the Town so designated in § 180-68, the following uses
of land shall be permitted, provided that all necessary state or federal
permits are obtained:
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district.
The District includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of
Agawam designated as Zone A or AE on the Hampden County Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National
Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Hampden County
FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Agawam are Panel
Nos. 25013C0377E, 25013C0379E, 25013C0381E, 25013C0382E,
25013C0383E, 25013C0384E, 25013C0387E, 25013C0391E,
25013C0392E, 25013C0401E, 25013C0403E, 25013C0404E,
25013C0411E, and 25013C0413E, dated July 16, 2013. The exact
boundaries of the district may be defined by the one-hundred-year
base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the
Hampden County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated July 16,
2013. The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference
and are on file in the Building Department.
A.
In Zone A areas where base flood elevation data is not provided by the
Flood Insurance Study, other available data from federal, state or other
sources shall be utilized as a basis of determining the base flood level
for purposes of enforcing the provisions of this article.
B.
A. Conservation of water, plants and wildlife.
Legally permitted outdoor recreation not requiring development or
landscape alteration in conflict with the purpose of this zone.
B.
§ 180-67 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-69
177:373
Grazing, forestry and other farms or agriculture consistent with the
purposes of the zone.
C.
Dwellings lawfully existing prior to the adoption of these provisions;
however, no building permits for substantial improvements or
extensions shall be granted unless a special permit is granted by the
Board of Appeals.
D.
Proper operation and maintenance of dams and other water control
devices.
E.
Construction and maintenance of highways, streets, sidewalks, sewers,
water mains, storm drains, utilities and related facilities by
governmental agencies, provided that the water and sewer systems and
utilities be designed and constructed to minimize flood damage and to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwater into the systems and
discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
F.
The following uses by special permit as provided by § 180-71, if
determined to be consistent with the purpose of this zone, said
determination to be made by the Board of Appeals following application
for a special permit by the landowner or owner:
(1) Developed recreation facilities, except buildings.
(2) Utility lines and facilities.
Dams and other water control facilities, if in an authorized plan
by a public agency or if built to create ponds for recreational or
agricultural use.
(3)
Minor buildings incidental to permitted flood control, recreation,
agricultural, etc., uses, and not exceeding 200 square feet in
ground coverage, if constructed so as to not obstruct natural
hydrological features.
(4)
In the floodway fringe, the Zone AE, Zone A, that portion of the
Floodplain Zone outside the floodway, the development of
structures for residential use only if the lowest floor (including
the basement) is elevated to or above the level of the base flood
(one-hundred-year flood) and the development of structures for
nonresidential use only if the lowest floor (including the basement)
is elevated to be above the level of the base flood (one-hundredyear
flood) or, together with the attending utility and sanitary
facilities, is floodproofed to or above the level of the base flood
(one-hundred-year flood), provided that a special permit is issued
by the Board of Appeals. The term "floodproofed" shall mean
watertight, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage
of water and with structural components having the capacity of
resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy.
(5)
G.
§ 180-69 AGAWAM CODE § 180-70
177:374
§ 180-70. Prohibited uses.
§ 180-71. Special permit.
In those portions of the Town so specified in § 180-68 as "floodplain,"
the following uses of land shall be prohibited:
The bulk storage of buoyant, flammable, explosive or toxic
materials.
(1)
The addition, removal or transfer of such quantities of material,
including trees, shrubs, and ground cover, that would reduce the
water storage capacity of the floodplain, obstruct the flow of
floodwaters in a floodway or otherwise adversely affect the natural
hydrology of the area to the extent that the base flood elevation
would be raised cumulatively more than one foot.
(2)
The digging or drilling of a well intended as a source of domestic
water.
(3)
The installation of septic tank or leaching fields or on-site waste
disposal systems.
(4)
The placement or location of a mobile home or the creation of
mobile home parks or subdivisions.
(5)
A.
In land within the floodway the following uses of land shall be
prohibited, in addition to those listed above:
Any development within the portions of the Town so specified as
"floodway" on the Flood Insurance Rate Map.
(1)
Erection, construction or other creation or installation of any
building, dam or other structure.
(2)
Any use or structure which would result in any increase in flood
levels during the base flood discharge. Encroachments, including
structures, are prohibited in the regulatory floodway which would
result in any increase in flood levels within the community during
the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(3)
B.
The application for a special permit shall include a plan prepared and
certified by a professional engineer or land surveyor registered in the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts. This plan will show all proposed
and existing buildings, structures, roads, ways, drainage facilities and
landscape features, including wetlands, trees and the like, and other
engineering and hydrological data the Board finds necessary. The plan
will show all existing and proposed finished ground contours at one-foot
intervals.
A.
The application for a special permit shall also include an environmental
impact statement prepared by an environmentally qualified registered
B.
§ 180-70 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-71
177:375
professional engineer. This statement will describe the impact upon the
physical environment of the proposed use.
The Board of Appeals may waive the requirements of Subsection B if
it determines that the probable impact upon the physical environment
of the proposed use is to be minimal and that an environmental impact
statement is not necessary to its consideration of the application and
provided there is no direct conflict with the Laws of the United States
and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
C.
The applicant shall provide the Board with an original and seven copies
of the request and of any plan and/or environmental impact statement
required under Subsections A and B above. The Board of Appeals
shall within seven days forward one copy of each to the Inspector
of Buildings, Planning Board, Board of Health and Conservation
Commission. These agencies may file written recommendations with
the Board of Appeals within 30 days of receipt of notification. The Board
of Appeals shall not grant approval of an application for a special permit
until these recommendations have been received or until expiration of
said thirty-day period.
D.
In passing upon such request, the Board of Appeals shall consider all
technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of this article and:
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others.
(1)
(2) The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage.
The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood
damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner.
(3)
The importance of the services provided by the proposed facilities
to the community.
(4)
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable.
(5)
The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or
erosion damage, for the proposed use.
(6)
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development.
(7)
The relationship of the proposed use to the Comprehensive Plan
and Floodplain Management Program for that area.
(8)
The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
(9)
E.
§ 180-71 AGAWAM CODE § 180-71
177:376
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment
transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site.
(10)
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood
conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems and
streets and bridges.
(11)
The Board of Appeals may issue a permit under this section if it finds
that the proposed use of the premises will not endanger the health and
safety of the occupants of land within the floodplain or the public, or
it may issue a permit with such conditions as it deems necessary to
protect the health and safety of the occupants and the public or provide
proper flood control or protection, or it may deny the application. The
burden of showing that the proposed development will not endanger
health and safety and that it will be an appropriate use of the land shall
rest upon the developer, who shall provide such additional engineering
and hydrological data as the Board of Appeals deems necessary. The
Board shall, as a condition of approval, require that effective notice
be given to prospective purchasers or existing landowners, by signs,
notation on plans and permits or otherwise, of past flooding of said
premises and the steps undertaken by the petitioner or his successor in
title to alleviate the effects of the same.
F.
Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, the Board shall ensure
that:
New construction or substantial improvements of residential
structures within the Floodplain Zone will have the lowest floor
(including the basement) elevated to or above the level of the onehundred-
year flood.
(1)
No use or structure shall be located in the designated floodway
which would result in any increase in flood levels during the base
flood discharge.
(2)
No fill or encroachment within the designated floodway shall be
permitted that would impair its ability to carry and discharge the
waters resulting from the one-hundred-year flood, unless it has
been demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that
the proposed encroachments would not result in any increase in
flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(3)
All other necessary permits for the proposed development, as
defined in § 180-2, have been received from those federal, state or
local governmental agencies from which price approval is required.
(4)
Adjacent communities and the Massachusetts Department of
Conservation and Recreation, at 251 Causeway Street, Suite
600-700, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, are notified prior to any
(5)
G.
§ 180-71 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-71
177:377
§ 180-72. General stipulations.
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and that evidence of such
notification is submitted to FEMA, at 99 High Street, 6th Floor,
Boston, MA 02110, and that the flood-carrying capacity within the
altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
New or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary
sewerage systems to be located in the Floodplain Zone shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into
the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
(6)
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
(a) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(b)
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(c)
(7)
In a riverine situation, the Building Inspector shall notify the
following of any alteration or relocation of a watercourse:
(a) Adjacent communities and bordering states;
NFIP State Coordinator, Massachusetts Department of
Conservation and Recreation, at 251 Causeway Street, Suite
600-700, Boston, MA 02114-2104;
(b)
NFIP Program Specialist, Federal Emergency Management
Agency, Region I, at 99 High Street, 6th Floor, Boston, MA
02110.
(c)
(8)
Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or
other developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is
the lesser, within unnumbered A Zones.
(9)
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a
regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(10)
A subdivision filed with the Planning Board under Chapter 41 of the
General Laws of Massachusetts shall meet the rules and regulations
of the Planning Board as they apply to floodplain management.49 The
subdivision as approved by the Planning Board may be considered a
single application when submitted to the Board of Appeals under this
A.
49.Editor's Note: See Art. VII, Floodplains, of Ch. 159, Subdivision of Land.
§ 180-71 AGAWAM CODE § 180-72
177:378
§ 180-73. Securities or bond required.
The completion of all earth work not bonded or covenanted under Chapter
41 of the General Laws of Massachusetts shall be guaranteed with the
article. The action of the Planning Board shall in no way limit the Board
of Appeals in its decision and setting of conditions.
Nothing contained in this article shall limit the authority of the Board
of Health with respect to premises in the Floodplain Zone or affect the
applicability of the Building Code50 to any building in the Floodplain
Zone.
B.
A building permit issued by the Inspector of Buildings before the
effective date of this article shall be deemed to be a permit hereunder.
C.
Any plans or applications submitted to any board, agent or authority
of the Town which concerns land within the floodplain shall be noted:
"This proposal is for land which lies in the floodplain and meets the
requirements of the Floodplain Ordinance."
D.
Any existing nonconforming uses or structures in the designated
floodway shall not be substantially improved but may be modified,
altered, repaired or reconstructed, subject to regulations pertaining to
nonconforming uses, to incorporate floodproofing measures, provided
that such measures or such modification, alteration, repair or
reconstruction do not raise the level of the one-hundred-year flood at
any point.
E.
No new construction, alteration or extension of a structure for human
occupancy as permitted under § 180-71 shall be allowed beyond the
foundation stage until the elevation of the lowest floor (including the
basement) has been checked and certified, in writing, to the Inspector
of Buildings or as being the elevation as stated on the approved plans
or higher. All final grades or any change in topography shall be checked
and certified, in writing, as being according to the approved plans.
Inspection and certification shall be made by a registered professional
engineer or land surveyor. All costs incurred under this section shall be
borne by the applicant. Records of these elevations and certifications
shall be maintained in the office of the Inspector of Buildings and shall
be open to public inspection.
F.
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the
boundaries the Floodplain Zone (for example, where there appears to
be conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions), the
Building Inspector shall consult the NFIP Program Specialist, FEMA
and/or the NFIP State Coordinator at the Massachusetts Department of
Conservation and Recreation for the necessary interpretation.
G.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 82, Building Construction.
§ 180-72 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-73
177:379
Town of Agawam by securities or bond as required by the Town prior to
commencement by any earth work.
§ 180-74. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article for regulation of the
floodplain shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof.
§ 180-73 AGAWAM CODE § 180-74
177:380
ARTICLE XIII
Signs
[Added 9-12-1977; amended 4-1-1991 by TOR-91-1; 12-18-2006 by
TOR-2006-11; 11-17-2008 by TOR-2008-4]
§ 180-75. Purpose. [Amended 11-7-2012 by TOR-2012-3]
The purpose of this section is to provide for the reasonable regulation and
control of the erection and maintenance of signs and advertising devices
within the Town, to the end that the appearance and amenities of the Town
may be preserved and enhanced without unduly restricting the conduct of
lawful enterprise.
§ 180-76. Administration and enforcement; violations and penalties.
Enforcement. The Inspector of Buildings or his designee is hereby
authorized to enforce this article. The Inspector of Buildings or his
designee shall keep a current list of permitted signs as a public record.
Annually, prior to April 15, the Inspector of Buildings or his designee
shall submit to the Outdoor Advertising Board a list of any billboards
which do not meet the specifications of this authority, together with
a notation as to wherein each sign does not comply. The Inspector of
Buildings or his designee is authorized to order the repair or removal
of any sign and its supporting structure which in his judgment is
dangerous or in disrepair or which is erected or maintained contrary to
this article. Whenever there is a change in the position of Inspector of
Buildings, the new person shall send his or her name and address to the
Outdoor Advertising Board.
A.
Permits and fees.
Except as provided in § 180-78, no sign shall be erected, altered
or affixed to any building or placed on any premises until a permit
has been issued by the Inspector of Buildings or his designee. Such
permit shall be issued only if the sign complies or will comply
with all applicable provisions of this article. An application for a
sign permit under this article shall include an accurate sketch or a
photograph showing the true dimensions of the face and frame of
the sign, the lettering, wording, designs and symbols on the face
and as attached to any part of the frame, the location of the sign
and such plans, drawings and specifications as the Inspector of
Buildings or his designee may require for the structure.
(1)
A schedule of fees for such permits shall be determined from time
to time by the Town Council.
(2)
B.
Whoever violates any provisions of this article or any lawful order of the
Inspector of Buildings or his designee shall be subject to enforcement
and fines as set forth in §§ 180-15, 180-16 and 180-16.1. Each day that
such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition,
the Inspector of Buildings or his designee shall have the authority
C.
§ 180-75 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-76
177:381
§ 180-77. General specifications.
§ 180-78. Residence districts.
In any area zoned as a residence district, the following are authorized by
right without a permit:
to remove any sign from municipal or public property with 24 hours'
advance verbal notice to the owner of the sign. If the owner of the
sign cannot be reasonably determined, the Inspector of Buildings or his
designee may consider the sign abandoned and may remove the sign
forthwith.
Energy shortages. In the event of any energy shortage, the Council
is authorized in its discretion to order that all signs in the Town
consuming electric, gas, oil or other forms of energy cease such
consumption in whole or in part during such hours and for such period
as the Council designates. Nonconformance with the Council's order
would be sufficient evidence for the Inspector of Buildings or his
designee to revoke the permit for said sign. Forty-eigh hours' notice
shall be given to the owner of such sign prior to any action taken by the
Inspector of Buildings or his designee.
A.
Illumination. Except as otherwise prohibited herein, signs may be
illuminated by any fixed light source, of such nature and in such manner
that the brightness of the sign face does not exceed 100 lumens per
square foot. Except for neon-type signs, where permitted, such
illumination shall be so arranged that its source is not directly visible
from any way or occupied building, and no illumination shall be of any
color that might be confusing to traffic. Christmas lights shall not be
deemed as coming within the provisions of this subsection, but this
subsection shall apply to window signs.
B.
Placement of signs. The Inspector of Buildings or his designee may
impose reasonable stipulations concerning placement based upon the
speed of travel and sight distance of the adjacent ways, the number and
location of signs already existing in the area and the concept of the sign
in relation to the purpose of this article.
C.
One sign displaying the street number and/or name of the occupant
of the premises, not exceeding two square feet in area. Such signs
may include identification of any accessory professional office or other
accessory use permitted in a residence district. Of the signs allowed
under Subsections A, D, E and H, the total number of signs per lot shall
not exceed two.
A.
Real estate signs pertaining to the lease, sale or use of a lot or building,
provided that such signs do not exceed a total of six square feet of
area. Such signs shall be removed forthwith upon sale or rental of the
premises advertised.
B.
§ 180-76 AGAWAM CODE § 180-78
177:382
§ 180-79. Business and industrial districts.
In an area zoned as a business or industrial district, each place of business
may be issued a permit for a sign or signs as follows:
One bulletin or announcement board, identification sign or entrance
marker for each public entrance to the premises upon which a church,
synagogue or educational institution or a governmental authority is
located. Such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet in area, provided
that there shall be no more than three signs for each church, synagogue
or institutional building complex.
C.
Attached signs. A sign otherwise permitted in this section may be
attached to a building if it complies with all requirements of § 180-77
and this section.
D.
Signs offering accommodations for guests, not to exceed two square
feet in area.
E.
Signs prohibiting trespass, hunting and the like, not to exceed two
square feet in area.
F.
Street name signs and signs erected by the Town, county or state for
the direction and control of traffic.
G.
Window signs. For residential zones and their accessory use, window
signs, as defined herein, provided that the aggregate area of such signs
shall not exceed two square feet in area. The total of all such signs shall
not exceed two square feet for each occupancy or establishment.
H.
A sign on or adjacent to the entry of a multiple-occupancy building
listing the names and/or occupations of the occupants or
establishments therein, provided that the size of such sign shall not
exceed two square feet in area for each occupancy or establishment.
I.
Signs designating historical places or points of interest, erected by a
governmental authority or by a duly chartered historical association or
the like, not to exceed six square feet in area.
J.
Wall signs not to exceed 25% of the area of the front and rear walls and
10% of each secondary side of a building are permitted.
A.
Standing signs are permitted, subject to the following conditions:
Standing signs are not to exceed 25% of the front wall of the
principal structure fronting on a street.
(1)
Standing signs and V-shaped signs on roofs, marquees, cornices,
awnings and projections are permitted. Signs mounted upon or
part of ventilating equipment, shafts or towers projecting above the
roofline of the building are prohibited.
(2)
B.
§ 180-78 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-79
177:383
§ 180-80. Agricultural districts.
In agricultural districts, a permit for two signs, not to exceed 32 square feet
per sign in area, may be granted to identify an accessory use permitted.
When the agricultural zone does not abut a street, the signs allowed under
this section may be located on streetfront property contiguous to the
agriculturally zoned land, provided that the land is under the same
ownership. The sign shall conform to § 180-77 of this article. V-shaped signs
or back signs are allowed. Freestanding signs shall be a minimum of 100
feet apart.
§ 180-81. Existing signs.
Any signs, except billboards, in existence at the time of the initial adoption
of this article on September 12, 1977, shall not be subject to the provisions
hereof except as to any provisions dealing with the structural integrity of
the sign and § 180-85.
§ 180-82. Nonaccessory signs.
Signs located within the setback area shall not be located within 10
feet of grade, without advance written permission of the Inspector
of Buildings or his designee, not including instructional signs.
(3)
Window signs for permitted retail establishments in all districts.
Window signs shall not exceed 50% of the area of the window glass.
(4)
The erection or continued maintenance of private nonaccessory signs is
not permitted.
A.
The Town Council may authorize the erection of nonaccessory signs,
kiosks or directories on public property for direction purposes.
Following a public hearing, the Council shall stipulate specifications,
conditions, locations and fees for the erection, use and maintenance
of each nonaccessory sign, kiosk or directory. The Council may set the
number of signs, kiosks or directories and the location thereof, but in
no event shall the number of signs, kiosks or directories exceed six in
number for any one entity, business, corporation or address.
B.
Indemnification and liability.
The applicant-owner authorized by the Town Council to erect and/
or retain a nonaccessory sign, kiosk or directory on public property
of the Town of Agawam as authorized under Subsections A and B
of this section shall agree to save and hold harmless and indemnify
the Town of Agawam, its officers, directors, employees, board
members, elected and appointed officials and agents from and
against all liability, claims, demands, damages, costs, expenses,
attorney's fees, judgments, losses and all causes of action on
account of personal injuries, property damage or loss, nuisance
or damage of any kind and nature whatsoever, which arise out of
(1)
C.
§ 180-79 AGAWAM CODE § 180-82
177:384
§ 180-83. Prohibitions.
or are in any manner connected with by reason of, pertaining to
or relative to the authorization, erection, placement, construction,
design, location, color, maintenance, repair, removal, destruction,
vandalism, theft and accuracy of the signs, kiosks or directories
under this section. The applicant-owner shall further agree to save
and hold harmless and indemnify the Town of Agawam as aforesaid
for any and all causes of action claimed to arise out of or which
are in any manner connected with said signs, kiosks or directories,
regardless of whether said injury, loss, damage, claim, costs,
expenses, attorney's fees, judgments or losses shall have been
caused by, or claimed to have been caused by, the negligence or
fault of the Town of Agawam as aforesaid or the applicant-owner
or by agents or employees of the foregoing or by accident or
otherwise.
In the event any action is brought against the Town of Agawam
as aforesaid, the applicant-owner authorized under this section
shall assume full responsibility and liability for the defense thereof,
the costs, expenses, attorney's fees, settlements and judgments
therefrom, and, upon the failure to do so on notice from the Town
of Agawam, the Town of Agawam reserves the right to defend such
action or actions and to charge all costs, expenses, attorney's fees,
settlements and judgments thereto to the applicant-owner, and the
applicant-owner shall immediately pay and reimburse the Town.
The applicant-owner shall take all precautions necessary to protect
the public against injury and damage.
(2)
The applicant-owner shall be required to lawfully execute a holdharmless
indemnification agreement in compliance with this
section prior to final authorization by the Town Council.
(3)
Overhanging signs. No overhanging signs shall be permitted unless
part of a cantilever of a principal building; however, this provision shall
not apply to street name signs or to signs or devices erected by the
Town, county or commonwealth for the direction and control of traffic.
A.
B. Billboards as defined herein are prohibited.
Private signs on Town property are prohibited unless a permit for such
a sign is authorized by the Town Council. No such authorization shall
be given until after a duly advertised public hearing in accordance
with § 180-82; any such signs shall conform in all respects to all other
provisions of this article. Permits for such signs may be revoked at any
time by the Town Council.
C.
No signs shall contain, in the opinion of the Inspector of Buildings or
his designee, a color or movement which is a violation of the purpose of
this article.
D.
§ 180-82 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-84
177:385
§ 180-84. Temporary signs and political signs.
§ 180-85. Maintenance.
All signs, whether a permit is required or not, shall be maintained in a safe
and legible condition to the satisfaction of the Inspector of Buildings or his
designee. Failure to correct violation of this provision within 30 days after
notice thereof shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit, or for
removal of the sign if it was erected without the need for a permit. It shall be
a duty of the owner and/or the lessee of any sign to maintain the immediate
premises occupied by the sign in a clean, sanitary and healthful condition.
§ 180-86. Special cases.
Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this article, certain special
types of activities or situations are recognized for which such provisions
may be modified and permits issued as follows:
Temporary signs which do not comply with this article may be allowed
only after issuance of a permit in accordance with § 180-76. Temporary
signs which do not comply with this article may be authorized by the
Inspector of Buildings or his designee for public or nonprofit purposes
without fee. Temporary signs shall not exceed 12 square feet in area,
and may be maintained for a period not exceeding 180 days for
agricultural purposes and 60 days for any other purpose. The Inspector
of Buildings or his designee shall have the sole discretion in the
issuance or denial of permits for temporary signs. A property owner
or business may receive only one permit for a temporary sign in any
calendar year.
A.
Political signs may be erected only on private property and with the
landowner's permission. Political signs shall not exceed six square
feet in area, may be erected 15 days prior to a primary election and
maintained, in good condition, continuously until 48 hours after the
close of the polls of the final election. Candidates eliminated in the
primary election shall have their signs removed within 48 hours after
the close of the polls of the primary election. All such signs shall
be removed within the forty-eight-hour limit as a responsibility of the
property owner. A challenge to the official count shall not negate this
provision.
B.
Theaters. The marquee of a theater as defined in MGL c. 143 shall be
considered as comprising part of the wall area in determining the total
sign area to be permitted.
A.
Subdivisions. One permanent subdivision name sign, not to exceed 32
square feet in area, may be permitted for each entry to a subdivision
from a public way. Such a sign may be erected only upon receiving
approval of the definitive plan for the project.
B.
§ 180-84 AGAWAM CODE § 180-86
177:386
§ 180-87. Special permits.
The Board of Appeals is authorized to grant special permits for signs which
would not otherwise comply with this article. In granting any such permit,
the Board shall comply with all procedural requirements of law pertaining
to the issuance of special permits in general.
§ 180-88. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article for the regulation of
signs shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof.
§ 180-89. (Reserved)
Contractors, developers. For each construction or development project,
there may be issued a temporary permit for one standing sign, not to
exceed 32 square feet in area, setting forth facts and names pertinent
to the project. Such signs shall be erected only upon receiving approval
by the Town for the project. Such signs shall be removed forthwith
when the project is completed. Any project which is funded in whole
or in part by federal, state or municipal funds may have such signs as
the funding authority may require, regardless of the provisions of this
article.
C.
Gasoline stations. Standard pump head signs of gasoline filling stations
shall not be included in the total area of signs permitted, and no permit
shall be required therefor, but they shall conform to the provisions of
§ 180-77B of this article.
D.
Where a building (or buildings in a common group such as a shopping
center) contains three or more separate businesses (or professional
offices) and it is desired to identify the building or group of buildings
as such, in addition to the signs permitted for the individual businesses,
there shall be permitted one standing sign displaying the name of the
building or group of buildings and not to exceed 64 square feet plus 16
square feet for the listing of each occupant or business.
E.
§ 180-86 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-89
177:387

ARTICLE XIV
Personal Wireless Service Facilities and Towers
[Added 3-2-1998 by TOR-97-13]
§ 180-90. Purposes.
The purposes of this article are to:
§ 180-91. Consistency with federal law.
This article is intended to be consistent with the Telecommunications Act of
1996, in that:
Preserve the character and appearance of the community while
simultaneously allowing adequate personal wireless services to be
developed;
A.
Protect the scenic, historic, environmental and natural or man-made
resources of the community;
B.
Provide standards and requirements for the regulation, placement,
construction,, monitoring, design, modification and removal of personal
wireless service facilities and towers;
C.
Provide a procedural basis for action within a reasonable period of time
for requests for authorization to place, construct, operate or modify
personal wireless service facilities and towers;
D.
E. Preserve property values;
Locate towers so that they do not have negative impacts, such as,
but not limited to, visual blight, attractive nuisance, noise and falling
objects, on the general safety, welfare and quality of life of the
community;
F.
Require owners of personal wireless service facilities and towers to
configure them so as to minimize and mitigate the adverse visual
impact of the facilities and towers; and
G.
Require the clustering and camouflaging of personal wireless service
facilities and towers.
H.
It does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of
personal wireless services;
A.
It is not intended to be used to unreasonably discriminate among
providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services; and
B.
It does not regulate personal wireless services on the basis of the
environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that
the regulated services and facilities comply with the FCC's regulations
concerning such emissions.
C.
§ 180-90 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-92
177:389
§ 180-92. Definitions. [Amended 11-7-2012 by TOR-2012-3]
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
ACT — The Telecommunications Act of 1996.
§ 180-93. Exempted wireless telecommunications uses.
§ 180-94. Wireless Telecommunications Overlay District (WTOD).
This article specifically exempts the following wireless
telecommunications facilities:
(1) Police;
(2) Fire;
(3) Ambulance and other emergency dispatch;
(4) Citizens band radio; and
Amateur radio equipment and towers used in accordance with the
terms of any amateur radio service license issued by the FCC,
provided that the tower is not used or licensed for any commercial
purpose and the tower shall be removed upon loss or termination
of said FCC license.
(5)
A.
No personal wireless service facility shall be considered exempt from
this article for any reason whether or not said facility is proposed to
share a tower or other structure with such exempt uses.
B.
Purpose. The Wireless Telecommunications Overlay District (WTOD) is
intended to protect the scenic, historic, natural and other resources
of the Town of Agawam while allowing adequate personal wireless
telecommunications to be developed. Towers shall be located only
within Wireless Telecommunications Overlay District(s) within the
Town of Agawam by special permit. Wireless telecommunications
facilities mounted on top of an existing building (roof-mounted),
mounted adjacent to the side or rear of an existing building (sidemounted)
or mounted to the facade of an existing building (facademounted)
may be located within these district(s), but are also allowed
in the rest of the Town by special permit.
A.
Description. This district includes the properties listed below. These
properties are included by reason of their potential to provide
technically feasible and accessible locations for the siting of facilities
which can provide adequate personal wireless telecommunications
services to the Town of Agawam. The Overlay District is defined,
delineated and mapped on the map entitled "Wireless
Telecommunications Overlay District Map, Town of Agawam MA,"
which is incorporated herein by reference.51 [Amended 10-6-2014 by
TOR-2014-6]
B.
§ 180-92 AGAWAM CODE § 180-94
177:390
Property Name Assessor's Map, Block and Lot
Bondi's Island N15-1-1
N14-1-1
Riverside Park K3-3-1
Crestview Country Club H3-1-21
H3-1-24
H3-1-19
H3-1-22
G2-1-1
Oak Ridge Country Club E2-1-6
St. Anne Golf Course F6-1-1
Agawam Municipal Golf Course D10-1-6
Adams TV of Springfield B14-1-4
B14-1-3
B14-1-5
Agawam Regional Industrial Park G7-1-3
G7-1-4
G7-2-6
G6-1-1
F6-2-2
G7-3-1
G6-3-6
G7-1-8
H7-2-4
G6-1-7
H7-2-3
G6-1-3
G7-2-2
G6-1-8
G6-1-4
G5-6-1
H7-2-2
F7-2-2
G5-6-2
G5-6-3
51.Editor's Note: A copy of said map is on file in the office of the Town Clerk and may be
examined there during regular business hours.
§ 180-94 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-94
177:391
§ 180-95. Provision of independent consultants to review granting
of special permit.
Property Name Assessor's Map, Block and Lot
G6-3-4
H8-1-1
G7-2-3
G6-3-5
H8-1-1
G8-1-14
G7-1-1
G7-1-2
G7-2-1
Western Massachusetts Electric H5-1-5
H5-1-6
H5-1-1
H6-1-1
H6-1-17
H6-1-18
I4-1-9
I5-1-11
I5-1-12
Agawam Methodist Church H10-2-17
Relation to other districts. The WTOD is an overlay district mapped
over other districts. It modifies and, where there is inconsistency,
supersedes the regulations of such other districts. Except as so
modified or superseded, the regulations of the underlying districts
remain in effect.
C.
Applicability. Any use of lands within the WTOD for purposes of
placement, construction, modification or removal of personal wireless
service facilities and/or towers shall be subject to the requirements of
this article.
D.
Upon submission of an application for any special permit under this
article, the applicant shall pay a review fee determined by the SPGA,
consisting of reasonable costs to be incurred by the SPGA for the
employment of independent consultants. These consultants shall each
be qualified professionals with a record of service to municipalities in
one or more of the following:
(1) Telecommunications engineering;
A.
§ 180-94 AGAWAM CODE § 180-95
177:392
§ 180-95.1. Provision of independent consultants to evaluate zone
change requests. [Added 11-5-2014 by TOR-2014-9; amended
3-16-2015 by TOR-2015-1]
§ 180-96. Application requirements.
No personal wireless service facility or tower shall be erected, constructed
or installed or undergo Major Modification without first obtaining a special
permit from the SPGA in accordance with the requirements set forth herein.
(2) Structural engineering;
(3) Monitoring of electromagnetic fields; and
(If determined necessary by the SPGA) other relevant fields of
experience as determined by the SPGA.
(4)
The SPGA shall select the independent consultant(s) after consultation
with the Board of Health and the Conservation Commission and the
Department of Public Works, each of which shall propose a list of
qualified candidates.
B.
Upon submission of an application for a zone change to add a parcel
to the Wireless Telecommunications Overlay District under this article,
the applicant shall pay a review fee determined by the City Council,
consisting of reasonable costs to be incurred by the City Council for the
employment of independent consultants. These consultants shall each
be qualified professionals with a record of service to municipalities in
one or more of the following:
(1) Telecommunications engineering;
(2) Structural engineering;
(3) Monitoring of electromagnetic fields; and
(If determined necessary by the City Council) other relevant fields
of experience as determined by the City Council.
(4)
A.
The independent consultant(s) shall assist the City Council in
determining whether the subject parcel needs to be added to the
Wireless Telecommunications Overlay District. Said analysis shall
include, but not be limited to, determining whether adequate personal
wireless services can be provided utilizing existing parcels in the
Wireless Telecommunications Overlay District and/or existing
structures, including but not limited to buildings, water towers, existing
telecommunication facilities, utility poles and towers and related
facilities, provided that such installation preserves the character and
integrity of those structures.
B.
Adequate coverage, adequate capacity and justification of need for
personal wireless service facility and/or tower.
A.
§ 180-95 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-96
177:393
Sites in which applicant has legal or equitable interest.
The applicant shall provide written documentation of any
facility site(s) in Agawam and any sites in abutting towns
located within eight miles of any boundary of the Town of
Agawam in which it has any legal or equitable interest,
whether by ownership, leasehold or otherwise. For each such
facility site, it shall demonstrate with written documentation
that this facility site is not already providing or does not have
the potential by adjusting the site to provide adequate
coverage and/or adequate capacity to the Town of Agawam.
The documentation shall include, for each facility site listed:
The exact tower location (in longitude and latitude, to
degrees, minutes, seconds);
[1]
Ground elevation above mean sea level at the tower
location;
[2]
[3] Height of tower or structure;
[4] Type, manufacturer and model number of antennas;
[5] Antenna gain;
[6] Height of antennas on tower or structure;
[7] Output frequency;
[8] Number of channels;
[9] Power input; and
[10]Maximum power output per channel.
(a)
Potential adjustments to these existing facility sites, including
changes in antenna type, orientation, gain, height or power
output shall be specified. Radial plots from each of these
facility sites, as they exist, and with adjustments as above, shall
be provided as part of the application.
(b)
(1)
Sites in which applicant has no legal or equitable interest.
The applicant shall demonstrate with written documentation
that it has examined all existing facility sites located in
Agawam and any sites in abutting towns located within eight
miles of any boundary of the Town of Agawam in which the
applicant has no legal or equitable interest, whether by
ownership, leasehold or otherwise, to determine whether the
existing facility sites can be used to provide adequate coverage
and/or adequate capacity to the Town of Agawam. The
documentation shall include, for each existing facility site
examined:
(a)
(2)
§ 180-96 AGAWAM CODE § 180-96
177:394
The exact tower location (in longitude and latitude, to
degrees, minutes, seconds);
[1]
Ground elevation above mean sea level at the tower
location;
[2]
[3] Height of tower or structure;
Type, manufacturer and model number of proposed
antennas;
[4]
[5] Proposed antenna gain;
[6] Height of proposed antennas on tower or structure;
[7] Proposed output frequency;
[8] Proposed number of channels;
[9] Proposed power input; and
[10]Proposed maximum power output per channel.
Radial plots from each of these existing facility sites,
configured as documented above, shall be provided as part of
the application.
(b)
The applicant shall demonstrate with written documentation that
it has analyzed the feasibility of repeaters in conjunction with all
existing facility sites listed in compliance with the sections above to
provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity to the Town
of Agawam. Radial plots of all repeaters considered for use in
conjunction with these facility sites shall be provided as part of the
application.
(3)
Required documentation for personal wireless service facility and/or
tower. The applicant shall include reports prepared by one or more
professional engineers, which shall demonstrate that the personal
wireless service facility and tower comply with all applicable standards
of the federal and state governments, more specifically:
Copies of ail submittals and showings pertaining to: FCC licensing,
environmental impact statements, FAA notice of construction or
alteration, aeronautical studies and all data, assumptions and
calculations relating to service coverage and power levels
regardless of whether categorical exemption from routine
environmental evaluation under the FCC rules is claimed.
(1)
Copies of all information submitted in compliance with
requirements of Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 105
CMR 122 Fixed Facilities Which Generate Electromagnetic Fields
in the Frequency Range of 300 khz to 100 ghz and Microwave
Ovens, or any revisions thereof as the Department of Public Health
may, by written notice, create.
(2)
B.
§ 180-96 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-96
177:395
The exact legal name, address or principal place of business and
phone number of the applicant. If any applicant is not a natural
person, it shall also give the state under which it was created or
organized.
(3)
The name, title, address and phone number of the person to whom
correspondence or communications in regard to the application are
to be sent. Notice, orders and other papers may be served upon the
person so named, and such service shall be deemed to be service
upon the applicant.
(4)
Name, address, phone number and written consent to apply for
this permit of the owner of the property on which the proposed
personal wireless service facility and/or tower shall be located or
of the owner(s) of the tower or structure on which the proposed
personal wireless service facility shall be located.
(5)
Required plans and engineering plans, prepared, stamped and
signed by a professional engineer licensed to practice in
Massachusetts. (Note: Survey plans shall also be stamped and
signed by a professional land surveyor registered in
Massachusetts.) Plans shall be on sheets 24 inches x 36 inches, on
as many sheets as necessary and at scales which are no smaller
(i.e., no less precise) than listed below. Each plan sheet shall have
a title block indicating the project title, sheet title, sheet number,
date, revision dates, scale(s) and original seal and signature of the
professional engineer and other professionals who prepared the
plan.
(6)
The applicant shall, as part of its application, provide the SPGA
with the following plans and maps:
Proposed site plans.
Proposed facility site layout, grading and utilities at a
scale no smaller than one inch = 40 feet (1:480 or metric
equivalent 1:500) showing the entire vicinity within a
radius of 400 feet of the tower site, with topography drawn
with minimum of contour intervals of two feet (0.6 meter).
[1]
Proposed tower location and any appurtenances and
accessory buildings (communication equipment shelter or
other). Indicate property boundaries of the Overlay
District and setback distances to the base(s) of the tower
and to the nearest comers of each of the appurtenant
structures to those boundaries and dimensions of all
proposed improvements.
[2]
Limits of areas where vegetation is to be cleared or altered
and justification for any such clearing or alteration.
[3]
(a)
(7)
§ 180-96 AGAWAM CODE § 180-96
177:396
Plans of proposed access driveway or roadway and parking
area at the facility site. Include grading, drainage, traveled
width. Include a cross section of the access drive
indicating the width, depth of gravel, paving or surface
materials.
[4]
Proposed tower and appurtenances.
Plans, elevations, sections and details at appropriate
scales but no smaller than one inch = 10 feet.
[1]
Two cross-sections through proposed tower drawn at right
angles to each other and showing the ground profile to
at least 100 feet beyond the limit of clearing. Indicate
proposed spot elevations at the base of the proposed
tower. Dimension the proposed height of the tower above
average grade at tower base. Indicate the maximum
allowable structural height of the tower after addition of
any modular sections. Show all proposed antennas,
including their location on the tower.
[2]
Details of typical tower foundation, including cross
sections and details. Show all ground attachments,
specifications for anchor bolts and other anchoring
hardware.
[3]
Detail proposed exterior finish and camouflage of the
tower.
[4]
Indicate relative height of the tower to the tops of
surrounding trees as they presently exist.
[5]
(b)
Proposed communications equipment shelters.
Floor plans, elevations and cross sections at a scale of no
smaller than 1/4 inch = one foot (1:48) of any proposed
appurtenant structure.
[1]
Representative elevation views, indicating the roof,
facades, doors and other exterior appearance and
materials.
[2]
(c)
Proposed equipment plan.
Plans, elevations, sections and details at appropriate
scales, but no smaller than one inch = ten feet.
[1]
Number of antennas and repeaters (if any), as well as the
exact locations of all repeaters (if any) located on a map,
as well as by degrees, minutes and seconds of latitude and
longitude.
[2]
(d)
§ 180-96 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-96
177:397
Mounting locations on tower or structure, including height
above ground.
[3]
[4] Antenna type(s), manufacturer(s), model and number(s).
For each antenna, the antenna gain and antenna radiation
pattern.
[5]
[6] Number of channels per antenna, projected and maximum.
[7] Power input to the antenna(s).
Power output, in normal use and at maximum output for
each antenna and all antennas as an aggregate.
[8]
[9] Output frequency of the transmitter(s).
Application requirements for roof-mounted, side-mounted and facademounted
personal wireless service facilities. The use of repeaters to
assure adequate coverage or to fill holes within areas of otherwise
adequate coverage, while minimizing the number of required towers is
permitted and encouraged.
Applicants shall provide the following information:
The exact location (in longitude and latitude, to degrees,
minutes and seconds), as well as by street address or pole
number (if applicable);
(a)
(b) Ground elevation;
(c) Proposed output frequency;
(d) Proposed number of channels;
(e) Proposed power input; and
(f) Proposed maximum power output per channel.
(1)
Name, address, phone number and written consent to apply for this
permit of the owner of the property on which the proposed facility
shall be located.
(2)
Proposed site layout, grading and utilities at a scale no smaller
than one inch = 40 feet (1:480 or metric equivalent 1:500) showing
the entire vicinity within a radius of 300 feet of the site with
topography drawn with minimum contour intervals of two feet (0.6
meter).
Proposed facility location and any appurtenances, if any, and
any accessory building (communication equipment shelter or
other). Indicate property boundaries of abutters within 300
feet of the facility, and dimensions of all proposed
improvements;
(a)
(3)
C.
§ 180-96 AGAWAM CODE § 180-96
177:398
§ 180-97. General requirements.
Limits of areas where vegetation is to be cleared or altered and
justification for any such clearing or alteration; and
(b)
Plans of any proposed access driveway or roadway and parking
area at the site. Include grading, drainage, traveled width.
Include a cross section of the access drive indicating the width,
depth of gravel, paving or surface materials.
(c)
If feasible, personal wireless service facilities shall be located on
existing structures, including, but not limited to, buildings, water
towers, existing telecommunication facilities, utility poles and towers
and related facilities, provided that such installation preserves the
character and integrity of those structures.
A.
Only freestanding monopoles, with associated antenna and/or panels,
shall be allowed as specified in this section. Lattice-style towers and
facilities requiring guy wires and/or three or more legs for support are
prohibited.
B.
If the applicant demonstrates that it is not feasible to locate on an
existing structure, personal wireless services facility shall be designed
so as to be camouflaged to the greatest extent possible, including,
but not limited to: use of compatible building materials and colors,
screening, landscaping and placement within trees. One week prior to
and one week following the public hearing, a balloon shall be put in
place at the height of the proposed tower. The balloon shall be of a size
and color that can be seen from every direction for a distance of one
mile.
C.
A special permit shall not be granted for a tower to be built on
speculation. If the applicant is not simultaneously installing a personal
wireless service facility on the tower, it shall provide a copy of its
existing lease/contract with a personal wireless service provider. Said
provider shall provide all necessary data to comply with the terms of
this article, as part of the applicant's application for a personal wireless
service facility and/or tower or the special permit shall not be granted.
D.
Tower(s) shall minimize, to the extent feasible, adverse visual impacts
on the environment. The SPGA may impose reasonable conditions to
ensure this result, including, but not limited to, requiring the use of
camouflage, painting, lighting standards and screening.
E.
When a personal wireless service facility extends above the roof height
of a building on which it is mounted, every effort shall be made to
conceal the facility within or behind existing architectural features to
limit its visibility from public ways. Facilities mounted on a roof shall
be stepped back from the front facade in order to limit their impact on
the buildings silhouette. Personal wireless service facilities which are
side mounted shall blend with the existing building's architecture and,
F.
§ 180-96 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-97
177:399
if over five square feet, shall be painted or shielded with material which
is consistent with the design features and materials of the building.
A vegetated buffer strip of undisturbed trees of an adequate depth to
screen the facility and no less than 20 feet shall be retained as close to
the tower as possible.
G.
The tower and communication equipment shelter(s) shall be completely
fenced for security within a gated area no greater than 10,000 square
feet, with fence height limited to six feet. Use of razor wire is not
permitted. [Amended 3-18-2002 by TOR-2001-7]
H.
There shall be no signs, except the following: a sign no greater than
two square feet indicating the name of the personal wireless service
facility's owner(s), and a twenty-four-hour emergency telephone
number shall be posted adjacent to the entry gate. In addition, No
Trespassing or other warning signs may be posted on the fence. All
signs shall conform to the sign requirements of this chapter.
I.
New towers shall be the lesser of 190 feet; or the minimum height
determined by the independent consultant(s) to provide the applicant
adequate coverage from the personal wireless service facility(s)
proposed for use on the tower. Side- and roof-mounted personal
wireless service facilities shall not project more than 10 feet above the
height of an existing building nor project more than 10 feet above the
height limit of the zoning district within which the facility is located.
Personal wireless service facilities may be located on a building that
is legally nonconforming with respect to height, provided that the
facilities do not project above the existing building height. New
antennas located on any of the following structures existing on the
effective date of this article shall be exempt from the height restrictions
of this article, provided that there is no increase in height of the
existing structure as a result of the installation of a personal wireless
service facility: water towers, guyed towers, lattice towers, fire towers
and monopoles. New antennas located on any of the following existing
structures shall be exempt from the height restriction of the article,
provided that there is no more than a twenty-foot increase in the height
of the existing structure as a result of the installation of a personal
wireless service facility: electric transmission and distribution towers,
telephone poles and similar existing utility structures.
J.
In order to ensure public safety, the minimum distance from the base of
a telecommunications tower to any property line and/or street, and all
buildings on the subject property occupied on a regular basis, shall be
a minimum of 260 feet; or 1 1/2 times the height of the facility/mount,
including any antennas or appurtenances, whichever is greater. Such
minimum distance to all publicly owned parks and playgrounds shall
be at least 375 feet. As used herein, "publicly owned parks" shall not
include any golf courses. [Amended 3-18-2002 by TOR-2001-7]
K.
§ 180-97 AGAWAM CODE § 180-97
177:400
§ 180-98. Evaluation by independent consultants.
§ 180-99. Approval criteria.
To the extent feasible, all network interconnections to and from the
telecommunications site and all power to the site shall be installed
underground. At the initial construction of the access road to the site,
sufficient conduit shall be laid to accommodate the maximum possible
number of personal wireless service providers licensed to provide
services to the Town of Agawam and surrounding areas.
L.
Unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration, no night
lighting of towers, or the personal wireless service facility is permitted,
except for manually operated emergency lights for use only when
operating personnel are on site.
M.
No tower or personal wireless service facility, with the exception of
roof-mounted, side-mounted, facade-mounted or structure-mounted
telecommunications facilities or repeaters, shall be located outside
of the Wireless Telecommunications Overlay District(s). No tower or
personal wireless service facility shall be located within any of the
following prohibited areas:
(1) Massachusetts or federally-regulated wetland.
(2) Massachusetts certified vernal pool.
N.
A different existing structure or use on the same lot shall not preclude
the construction and installation of a wireless telecommunications
facility on such lot. If a tower and its equipment buildings are the
sole use of the lot, the tower shall be deemed to be the principal use;
otherwise, the use shall be considered accessory. [Added 3-18-2002
by TOR-2001-7]
O.
Upon submission of a complete application for any special permit(s)
under this article, the SPGA shall provide its independent consultant(s)
with the full application(s) for their analysis and review.
A.
Applicants for any special permit(s) under this article shall grant
permission for the town's independent consultant(s) to conduct any
necessary site visit(s).
B.
In acting on any special permit application, the SPGA shall proceed in
accordance with the procedures and timelines established for special
permits in this chapter. The special permit granting authority may
adopt and from time to time amend rules and regulations relative to
the issuance of such permits and shall file a copy of said rules and
regulations in the office of the Town Clerk.
A.
In addition to the findings required in this article, the SPGA shall,
in consultation with the independent consultant(s), make all of the
applicable findings before granting the special permit, as follows:
B.
§ 180-97 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-99
177:401
§ 180-100. Removal requirements.
That the applicant is proposing to locate its personal wireless
service facility or tower within a Wireless Telecommunications
Overlay District or other districts as provided by this article;
(1)
That the applicant is not able to use existing towers/facility sites in
or around the Town of Agawam, either with or without the use of
repeaters, to provide adequate coverage and/or adequate capacity
to the Town of Agawam;
(2)
That the proposed personal wireless service facility/tower will not
have an undue adverse impact on historic resources, scenic views,
residential property values, natural or man-made resources;
(3)
That the applicant has agreed to implement all reasonable
measures to mitigate the potential adverse impacts of the towers
and facilities; and
(4)
That the proposal shall comply with FCC 96-326 and any and
all other applicable FCC regulations regarding emissions of
electromagnetic radiation and that the required monitoring
program is in place and shall be paid for by the applicant.
(5)
Any decision by the SPGA to deny an application for a special
permit under this article shall be in conformance with SEC. 332(47
U.S.C. § 332) J(7)(B)(ii), (iii) of the Act, in that it shall be in writing
and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written
record.
(6)
Any personal wireless service facility (ground-mounted or otherwise)
which ceases to operate for a period of one year shall be removed.
"Cease to operate" is defined as not performing the normal functions
associated with the personal wireless service facility and its equipment
on a continuous and ongoing basis for a period of one year. At the time
of removal, the facility site shall be remediated such that all personal
wireless service facility improvements which have ceased to operate
are removed. If all facilities on a tower have ceased to operate, the
tower shall also be removed, and the facility or repeater site, including
any access road(s) which lead to that facility site from the main access
road, shag be revegetated. If all facility sites have ceased to operate,
the owner of the last personal wireless service facility to leave the site
shall revegetate the access road in its entirety. Existing trees shall only
be removed with the written permission of the SPGA and only if the
SPGA determines such removal of trees to be necessary to complete the
required removal of personal wireless service facility(s).
A.
Removal performance guaranty. The applicant shall, as a condition of
the special permit, post an initial cash bond in a reasonable amount
determined and approved by the SPGA. This bond shall be in force
to cover the costs of the remediation of any damage to the landscape
B.
§ 180-99 AGAWAM CODE § 180-100
177:402
§ 180-101. Fees and insurance.
Towers and personal wireless service facilities shall be insured by the
owner(s) against damage to persons or property. The owner(s) shall provide
a certificate of insurance to the Planning Board on an annual basis. For
towers and facilities located on property owned by the Town of Agawam, the
Town of Agawam shall be an additional named insured.
§ 180-102. Noncompliance; violations; enforcement; attorney's fees.
Upon determination that the applicant and/or owner has failed to comply
with this article or is in violation of this article, and the Town of Agawam
takes any action to enforce this article, bring the applicant and/or owner
into compliance with this article, or to abate any violations under this
article, the applicant and/or owner shall be liable and responsible to pay
to the Town of Agawam all costs, expenses and reasonable attorney's fees
for such action taken by the Town of Agawam. Failure to pay said costs,
expenses and reasonable attorney's fees within 30 days of receipt of notice
to pay the same shall be grounds for the revocation of any special permit
issued in accordance with this article.
§ 180-103. Severability.
The invalidity of any section or provision of this article shall not invalidate
any other section or provision hereof or to take any other action with
respect thereto.
which occurs during the clearing of the site and to cover the cost of
the removal of the tower or facility from the site and remediation of the
landscape, should the facility cease to operate.
§ 180-100 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-103
177:403

ARTICLE XV
Adult Entertainment Businesses
[Added 8-3-1998 by TOR-98-4]
§ 180-104. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to MGL c. 40A, and pursuant to the Town of
Agawam's authority under the Home Rule Amendment to the Massachusetts
Constitution to serve the compelling Town interests of limiting the location
of and preventing the clustering and concentration of certain adult
entertainment uses, as defined and designated herein, in response to
studies demonstrating their deleterious effects.
§ 180-105. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this adult entertainment article to address and mitigate
the secondary effects of the adult entertainment establishments and
sexually oriented businesses that are referenced and defined herein.
Secondary effects have been shown to include increased crime, adverse
impacts on public health, adverse impacts on the business climate of the
Town of Agawam, adverse impacts on the property values of residential
and commercial properties and adverse impacts on the quality of life in the
town. All of said secondary impacts are adverse to the health, safety and
general welfare of the Town of Agawam and its inhabitants. The provisions
of this article have neither the purpose nor intent of imposing a limitation
on the content of any communicative matter or materials, including sexually
oriented matter or materials. Similarly, it is not the purpose or intent of
this article to restrict or deny access by adults to adult entertainment
establishments or to sexually oriented matter or materials that are
protected by the Constitutions of the United States or of the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts, nor to restrict or deny rights that distributors or
exhibitors of such matter or materials may have to sell, rent, distribute or
exhibit such matter or materials. Neither is it the purpose or intent of this
article to legalize the sale, rental, distribution or exhibition of obscene or
other illegal matter or materials.
§ 180-106. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT USES — Include the following uses:
A. Adult bookstores, as defined in MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
B. Adult motion-picture theaters, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
C. Adult paraphernalia store, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
D. Adult video store, as defined by MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
§ 180-104 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-106
177:405
§ 180-107. Special permit required; criteria.
Adult entertainment uses shall be prohibited in all zoning districts except
as otherwise permitted in this article and may be permitted only upon the
grant of a special permit by the Board of Appeals. An adult entertainment
use special permit shall not be granted unless each of the following
standards has been met.
Establishment which displays live nudity for its patrons, as defined by
MGL c. 40A, § 9A.
E.
The application for a special permit for an adult entertainment use shall
provide the name and address of the legal owner of the establishment,
the legal owner of the property and the manager of the proposed
establishment. The owners and managers shall be considered
coapplicants.
A.
No adult use special permit shall be issued to any person convicted of
violating the provisions of MGL c. 119, § 63, or MGL c. 272, § 28.
B.
Location.
Adult entertainment uses shall not be located within:
One thousand five hundred feet from any district designated by
the Agawam Zoning Ordinance for residential use; or
(a)
One thousand five hundred feet from the nearest church,
school, park, playground, play field, youth center; or
(b)
One thousand five hundred feet from the nearest adult
entertainment use as defined herein; or
(c)
One thousand five hundred feet from the nearest establishment
licensed under MGL c. 138, § 12.
(d)
(1)
The distances specified above shall be measured by a straight
line from the nearest property line of the premises on which the
proposed adult entertainment use is to be located to the nearest
boundary line of a residential zoning district or to the nearest
property line of any of the other designated uses set forth above.
(2)
C.
All building openings, entries and windows shall be screened in such a
manner as to prevent visual access to the interior of the establishment
by the public. In no way shall such screening prevent public safety
personnel from entering the premises at any time without the use of
special tools or equipment.
D.
No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to display for
advertisement or other purpose any signs, placards or other like
materials to the general public on the exterior of the building or on
the interior where the same may be seen through glass or other like
E.
§ 180-106 AGAWAM CODE § 180-107
177:406
§ 180-108. Conditions.
The special permit granting authority may impose reasonable conditions,
safeguards and limitations on time or use of any special permit granted and
shall require that any such special permit granted shall be personal to the
applicant, shall not run with land and shall expire upon expiration of the
applicant's lease or upon sale or transfer of the subject property.
§ 180-109. Suspension and revocation of special permit.
The special permit granting authority may suspend or revoke a special
permit granted hereunder for any violation of the special permit, for any
violation of the Town of Agawam ordinances and/or for any violation of state
or federal law.
§ 180-110. Expiration of special permit.
A special permit to conduct an adult entertainment use shall expire after a
period of one calendar year from its date of issuance and shall automatically
transparent material any sexually explicit figures or words as defined in
MGL c. 272, § 31.
No adult entertainment use shall be allowed to disseminate or offer to
disseminate adult matter or paraphernalia to minors or suffer minors to
view displays or linger on the premises or enter into the premises.
F.
Off-street parking shall be provided in compliance with Town
regulations and shall be designated so as not to obstruct police patrol
views of the premises.
G.
No adult entertainment use shall have any flashing lights or neon or
other fluorescent lights visible from outside the establishment.
H.
I. No adult entertainment use shall have a freestanding accessory sign.
No adult entertainment use shall be established prior to submission
and approval of a site plan by the Board of Appeals. The site plan shall
depict all existing and proposed buildings, parking spaces, driveways,
service areas and other open uses. The site plan shall show the
distances between the proposed adult entertainment use and the
boundary of the nearest residential zoning district and the property line
of each use of the use set forth in Subsection C above.
J.
The owners and managers of an establishment granted an adult
entertainment use special permit shall not permit any obscene matter,
material or conduct, as defined in MGL c. 272, § 31, on the premises.
K.
Special permits issued by the special permit granting authority shall
require the unanimous vote of the three members of the special permit
granting authority. If the special permit granting authority has more
than three members, the vote shall be as provided for in MGL c. 40A.
L.
§ 180-107 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-110
177:407
be renewable for a successive one-year period thereafter, provided that a
written request for such renewal is made to the special permit granting
authority prior to said expiration and that no objection to said renewal is
made and sustained by the special permit granting authority based upon the
public safety factors applied at the time that the original special permit was
granted.
§ 180-111. Severability.
The provisions of this article are severable, and, in the event that any
provision of this article is determined to be invalid for any reason, the
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 180-110 AGAWAM CODE § 180-111
177:408
ARTICLE XVI
Open Space Residential Development; Age-Restricted Housing; Low-
Density Multifamily Community District
[Added 12-4-2006 by TOR-2006-9]
§ 180-112. Open space residential development.
Intent. Open space residential development (OSRD) in accordance with
this article shall be allowed by right in the Residence A-1, Residence
A-2, and Agricultural Districts. "Open space residential development"
shall mean a residential development adjacent to permanently
preserved open space. Open space residential development shall be
encouraged within the Town, and shall be the preferred method of
subdivision development wherever the following purposes would be
served.
A.
Purposes. The purposes of open space residential development are:
To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of
residential developments, provided that the overall density of the
development is no greater than what is normally allowed in the
district.
(1)
To encourage the permanent preservation of open space,
agricultural lands, forest lands and other natural resources,
including aquifers, water bodies and wetlands, and historical and
archaeological resources.
(2)
To encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of
development that consumes less open land and conforms to
existing topography and natural features.
(3)
To maintain the traditional New England rural character and land
use pattern in which small villages contrast with open space and
farmlands.
(4)
To facilitate the construction of streets, utilities and public services
in a more economical and efficient manner.
(5)
To ensure that residential developments respect the natural
features of the land, including wetlands, watercourses, forests,
prime agricultural land, steep slopes, plants, wildlife, historic sites,
scenic views, and rural character.
(6)
To promote alternatives to strip residential development lining
roadsides in the Town.
(7)
To provide wildlife corridors connecting open spaces needed by
wildlife to ensure their survival.
(8)
B.
C. Applicability.
§ 180-112 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-112
177:409
Five-acre minimum. In any residential development consisting of
five contiguous acres or more and 100 feet of frontage in single or
consolidated ownership, an applicant may apply for an OSRD under
this article.
(1)
Uses permitted. The permitted uses of the underlying district(s)
shall continue to be in full force and effect.
(2)
Special land features. The Planning Board may recommend that an
applicant use an OSRD subdivision design if the property possesses
one or more of the following special features:
Unfragmented open land as identified as a priority for
protection in the Town's Open Space and Recreation Plan,
Master Plan or the Community Development Plan.
(a)
Agricultural land with soils designated as prime or of statewide
significance by the U.S. Natural Resource Conservation
Service soil surveys.
(b)
Rare, threatened, or endangered species or exemplary natural
communities according to the Massachusetts BioMap Project
developed by the Massachusetts Natural Heritage and
Endangered Species Program.
(c)
Unique natural, cultural and/or historical features as identified
in the Master Plan or Community Development Plan.
(d)
(3)
Application requirements. Applicants for open space residential
development projects shall follow all procedures specified in the Town
of Agawam Subdivision Rules and Regulations.52
D.
Design standards. No approval for an OSRD shall be given unless the
application complies with the following standards:
The compatibility of the proposal with respect to the objectives and
policy recommendations of the Open Space and Recreation Plan
and Community Development Plan or Master Plan.
(1)
(2) Consistency with the Town of Agawam's Zoning Ordinance.
The portion of a parcel placed in open space shall, to the greatest
extent possible, be that which is most valuable or productive as a
natural resource, wildlife habitat, farmland, or forestry land.
(3)
Streets shall be designed and located in such a manner as to
maintain and preserve natural topography, significant landmarks
and trees; to minimize cut and fill; and to preserve and enhance
views and vistas on or off the subject parcel.
(4)
E.
F. Dimensional standards.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 159, Subdivision of Land.
§ 180-112 AGAWAM CODE § 180-112
177:410
Allowed density.
The maximum number of dwelling units for an OSRD shall be
determined by use of a yield plan, which is a conceptual plan
showing how the parcel could be subdivided in a conventional
manner. Determination of the possible number of conventional
lots shall be determined by Title V regulations, 310 CMR
15.000, as well as the Agawam Board of Health regulations.
For purposes of determining the number of OSRD dwelling
units, each conceptual conventional lot must meet the
requirements of a buildable lot for a single-family dwelling
unit on one acre of land. In no case shall the number of
OSRD dwelling units exceed the number of units that would be
allowed under a conventional subdivision.
(a)
(b) There shall be no further subdivision of an approved OSRD.
(1)
Flexible dimensional controls.
Frontage.
The minimum frontage for a tract on which an OSRD is
proposed shall be a contiguous 100 feet and provide safe
access for a right-of-way of at least 46 feet.
[1]
In the interest of flexibility and creative site designs, there
shall be a minimum frontage requirement of 60 contiguous
feet for individual lots on new subdivision streets within
an OSRD, with the exception described in Subsection
F(2)(a)[3] below.
[2]
For each lot developed along a public street existing at the
time of the application, the minimum frontage, minimum
lot size and all other dimensional controls shall be those
which are-required in the underlying zoning district in
which the OSRD is located.
[3]
(a)
Lot size. The minimum lot size for all lots in the open space
residential development is one acre.
(b)
Setbacks.
There shall be a minimum setback of 50 feet along all
property boundaries of the overall tract for all structures,
including accessory structures, parking areas, driveways
and internal streets. Entrance streets connecting the
OSRD to the external street system may cross the setback
area.
[1]
Minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be the
same as normally required in the district.
[2]
(c)
(2)
§ 180-112 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-112
177:411
Required open space. The minimum open space requirement
for an OSRD within the Residence A-1 and Agricultural
Districts shall be 50% of the total tract area. The minimum
open space requirement for an OSRD within the Residence A-2
District shall be 35% of the total tract area.
(d)
Landscaped buffers.
A landscaped buffer no less than 30 feet deep shall be
provided. Entrance streets connecting the OSRD to the
external street system may cross the buffer area. The natural
vegetation shall be retained within the buffer area. If the
natural vegetation is not sufficient to serve as an effective
visual screen, landscaping shall be required to provide such
a screen. Landscaping may include berms and/or decorative
fencing of an appropriate height. The Planning Board may
waive this requirement in instances that it deems appropriate.
(a)
This buffer area shall be part of the open space and shall be
subject to the same restrictions that apply to that area.
(b)
(3)
Common open space.
Common open space requirements.
Within the Residence A-1 and Agricultural Districts, a
minimum of 50% of the total development parcel must be
permanently protected as common open space. Within the
Residence A-2 District, a minimum of 35% of the total
development parcel must be permanently protected as
common open space. At least 70% of the common open space
shall be retained in contiguous areas, unless approved by the
Planning Board.
(a)
Watercourses, lakes, ponds, wetlands and steep slopes over
25% may be included in common open space calculations, but
shall not exceed 50% of the required open space.
(b)
The Planning Board may permit up to 3% of the open space
area to be paved or built upon for structures accessory to the
dedicated use of open space (i.e., pedestrian walks, bicycle
paths, playgrounds, farm-related structures).
(c)
All recreational facilities, common areas, and common open
space shall be reasonably accessible to all residents of the
development.
(d)
(1)
Land protection methods for common open space.
All land not devoted to buildings, lots, roads and other
development shall be permanently protected as common open
space for recreation, conservation, forestry or agricultural
uses which preserve the land in its natural condition.
(a)
(2)
G.
§ 180-112 AGAWAM CODE § 180-112
177:412
The land shall be owned by a nonprofit land trust or
conservation organization, homeowners' association, or
individual, and a permanent deed restriction must be conveyed
to the Town, with Town approval, or to a nonprofit trust or
conservation organization whose principal purpose is to
conserve farmland or open space. The Town shall review and
approve all language contained in the deed restriction prior to
final approval of the open space residential development. The
deed restriction shall run with the land in perpetuity.
(b)
Further subdivision of common open land or its use other
than recreation, conservation, forest or agriculture, except for
easements for underground utilities or drinking water supply
wells, shall be prohibited.
(c)
Additional requirements.
Trails. Where there is an existing local or regional trail network
on land adjacent to a proposed OSRD, the developer of the OSRD
may be required to connect to the existing trail network with
trail corridors through the site, and shall grant the general public
access to these trails in perpetuity. The trails shall be restricted to
pedestrian access.
(1)
Open space. Where there is an existing network of open space
or large tracts of unfragmented open space on land adjacent to a
proposed OSRD, the developer of the OSRD may be required to
connect to the existing open space where feasible with the required
open space set-aside, and shall grant the general public access to
this open space in perpetuity. Public access shall be restricted to
pedestrian traffic.
(2)
Forest management. On sites where the open space to be
preserved is mostly mature forest (70% or greater), the developer
of an OSRD may be required to submit a forest management plan
developed by a Massachusetts licensed forester and approved by
the Planning Board.
(3)
Viewshed and viewpoints. The development may protect in
perpetuity viewsheds and associated viewpoints, which are lands
or corridors of land that contribute to the visual landscape of the
Town, including items such as open fields containing stone walls.
The Planning Board may make use of a site visit to determine
potential viewsheds and viewpoints to be preserved.
(4)
Historic features. The development may protect in perpetuity
historically significant buildings and landscapes, identified as such
in the Community Development Plan, that include buildings and
associated uses that are maintained and visually separated from
the developed portion of the OSRD. Structures or landscapes not
identified may be determined by sufficient evidence presented to
the Planning Board during review of the development. Such
(5)
H.
§ 180-112 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-112
177:413
§ 180-113. Residence A-6 Low-Density Multifamily Community
District. [Added 8-12-2013 by TOR-2013-6]
evidence may include listing or eligibility for listing on the National
Register of Historic Landmarks, or the Massachusetts Register of
Historic Landmarks.
Homeowners' association.
In the event that ownership of the land will remain with the
homeowners in the open space residential development, a
nonprofit homeowners' association shall be established, requiring
membership of each lot owner in the open space residential
development.
(1)
The association shall be responsible for the permanent
maintenance of all common lands, common open space,
recreational and thoroughfare facilities, except where such
responsibility is assumed by another owner of the common land
(land trust or conservation organization).
(2)
A homeowners' association agreement or covenant that will
guarantee continuing maintenance of such common utilities, land
and facilities, and assessing each lot a share of maintenance
expenses shall be submitted with the final subdivision application.
Where no homeowners' association is proposed, an alternative plan
shall be submitted with the final subdivision application.
(3)
Such agreement must be reviewed and approved by Agawam's
legal counsel and the Planning Board, and shall be recorded in
the Hampden County Registry of Deeds. Such agreements or
covenants shall provide that in the event that the association fails
to maintain the common open land in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the agreement, the Town may, after
notice to the association and public hearing, enter upon such land
and maintain it in order to preserve taxable values of the properties
within the development and to prevent the common land from
becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also provide that
the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be assessed equally
against each of the properties within the development.
(4)
I.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to allow for greater variety
and flexibility in the development of housing types and to facilitate the
construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services
in a more economical and efficient manner while at the same time
conserving important natural site features and permanently preserving
open space.
A.
B. Application.
§ 180-112 AGAWAM CODE § 180-113
177:414
A site plan for a low-density multifamily community in conformance
with § 180-13 shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The
following additional information shall be required:
A development statement listing the development team, setting
forth the development concept, including in tabular form the
number of units, type, size (number of bedrooms, amount of
living space, gross floor area), ground coverage and summary
showing the area of residential development and common open
space as a percentage of the total area.
(a)
A development site plan of the entire tract in accordance with
the requirements of this section and meeting, to the extent
applicable, the requirements set forth for a definitive plan in
the Agawam Subdivision Rules and Regulations.53
(b)
Architectural rendering of the site plans and typical structures,
including floor plans and elevations.
(c)
A traffic study will be required. This study shall be performed
by a professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts. It may include, at the discretion of the
Planning Board, analysis of existing and proposed traffic
conditions, driveway design, traffic signal warrant analysis,
parking lot size and layout recommendations, a description of
impacts on local and regional traffic due to the development,
including an area and for a build-out time period as prescribed
by the Planning Board. Depending on the location of the
proposed curb cut, existing traffic characteristics and the
volume of traffic generated by the proposal, a traffic signal
may be warranted at one or all points of access. Any traffic
control devices to serve the development would be designed,
funded, and constructed by the project proponent at the time
of the initial development or by the homeowners' association
in the future. If, as a result of the traffic study, off-site traffic
remediation is determined to be warranted, it shall be the
responsibility of the project proponent. If the number of
parking stalls required in the parking analysis exceeds the
number required in the Town Code, the larger number shall be
required.
(d)
An engineering report regarding the adequacy of sewage
disposal, water supply and stormwater drainage, including the
impact of the proposed design on the existing municipal utility
infrastructure of the Town.
(e)
Marketing and management information, including unit selling
prices, construction schedule, and phasing schedule.
(f)
(1)
53.Editor's Note: See 159, Subdivision of Land.
§ 180-113 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-113
177:415
Said application shall contain sufficient information so that the
Planning Board can determine the applicability of said application
for the following items:
(a) Is consistent with the Master Plan of the Town of Agawam;
Preserves and protects the character of the Town and
especially the immediate neighborhood, giving due
consideration to such features as public safety, including traffic
control and traffic impact upon surrounding roads;
development of adequate facilities for the use of the residents
of said proposal; adequate fire protection, public health,
including sewage disposal, drainage and water supply; and
the compatibility of the size, location, architecture and
landscaping of said project with the adjacent neighborhood
and the Town;
(b)
Minimizes potential adverse environmental impacts upon the
Town;
(c)
Is likely to result in a financially stable, soundly and
attractively constructed and well managed and maintained
project; and
(d)
Conforms to the specific provisions of this chapter, including
the design guidelines of this section.
(e)
(2)
Said site plan approval shall not be issued unless the Planning
Board affirmatively determines that each of the above-listed
criteria is met by said applicant.
(3)
Use regulations. The following uses shall be permitted in a low-density
multifamily community:
(1) One-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family detached dwellings.
Recreational uses and community facilities, such as parks, gardens,
swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and community
buildings.
(3)
Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal uses listed above, but expressly excluding any
commercial or retail enterprises.
(4)
C.
Dimensional requirements. A low-density multifamily community shall
comply with the following dimensional requirements:
Minimum parcel size. The total parcel shall have a minimum area
of not less than 10 acres.
(1)
Minimum parcel frontage. The total parcel shall have a minimum
frontage on a public way of at least 150 feet.
(2)
D.
§ 180-113 AGAWAM CODE § 180-113
177:416
Front, side and rear yards. The minimum front yard (setback) shall
be 25 feet from the interior paved way. The minimum front yard
(setback) shall be 50 feet where it abuts a public way only. The
side yard and rear yard requirements shall be 50 feet, inclusive of
a landscaped buffer strip of not less than 15 feet, and shall pertain
only to the periphery of the development. Additional buffering may
be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Planning
Board. The Planning Board may modify or waive the buffering
requirement where variations in topography, natural features and
vegetation, or compatible land uses, obviate the need for such a
buffer.
(3)
Density regulations. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted
within a low-density multifamily community shall be determined by the
Planning Board to assure compliance with the purpose and intent of
these regulations, and in any event shall not exceed an average of four
units per acre of usable land area.
E.
Building requirements.
Building character. The low-density multifamily community shall be
an architecturally integrated development. An architectural theme
shall be carried out by the use of common building materials, color,
exterior detailing, bulk and/or rooflines. Design characteristics
shall be stated in the development application and shall include,
but not be limited to, building materials, architectural design, and
street furniture, which shall require Planning Board approval.
(1)
Building location. Building location and orientation shall reflect:
The relationship to street line and to other buildings in the
development if in close proximity, in order to protect privacy
and create visual coherence.
(a)
Views, solar access and access to common open space in order
to enhance an occupant's interest.
(b)
Organization of large developments into recognizable subareas
in order to provide scale and identity.
(c)
Avoidance of major topography changes and destruction of
significant natural site features, including removal of native
trees or vegetation, in order to preserve and protect the
environment.
(d)
Reduction of visual intrusion into abutting properties in order
to protect existing character to the extent practicable.
(e)
(2)
Community facility. Unless waived by the Planning Board, the
development shall establish a community room or facility for use
by the residents. Such facility may provide community space for
(3)
F.
§ 180-113 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-113
177:417
mail, indoor recreation, meetings, and other functions held by the
residents.
Maximum building height. The maximum height of structures shall be
two stories or 35 feet above the ground.
G.
Minimum setback distance between buildings. The minimum setback
distance between buildings shall be 30 feet.
H.
Stairways. All egress stairways are to be contained within the building
structure proper.
I.
Utilities.
Each dwelling in a low-density multifamily community shall be
provided with access drainage and utilities that are functionally
equivalent to that provided under the Planning Board's Subdivision
Regulations.54 All utilities shall be placed underground.
(1)
All dwelling units shall be serviced by a public water supply
deemed adequate for fire protection and domestic use.
(2)
All dwelling units shall be connected to public sewers if available. If
public sewers are not available, all dwelling units shall be serviced
with on-site sewage disposal systems which shall be designed to
meet the requirements of approval from the Agawam Board of
Health and/or the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection as necessary.
(3)
All outdoor lighting in the development shall be designed to
improve visibility, safety and a sense of security while minimizing
energy use, operating costs, glare and light pollution. Outdoor
lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive
artificial light. Building areas shall not be floodlit. Roadways,
parking areas, walkways and other public areas shall be
illuminated only by properly positioned, high-efficiency, full-cutoffshielded
lighting fixtures not higher than 15 feet in height.
(4)
J.
Parking and circulation requirements.
There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation, roadways, driveways and parking.
(1)
Vehicular access to the low-density multifamily community shall be
provided from an existing public way which, in the opinion of the
Planning Board, is adequate to service the proposed development.
As a matter of public safety, an additional access may be required.
(2)
All roads within the low-density multifamily community shall be
privately owned and maintained and shall be designed with
sufficient width, suitable grade and adequate construction to safely
(3)
K.
54.Editor's Note: See 159, Subdivision of Land.
§ 180-113 AGAWAM CODE § 180-113
177:418
provide for the needs of vehicular traffic generated by the
development. Access roads shall be designed and constructed
according to the requirements of the Agawam Subdivision Rules
and Regulations55 or as otherwise modified by the Planning Board.
Garages or off-street parking spaces, or a combination thereof,
shall be provided for all occupants, employees, and visitors, and
shall be not less than two garage spaces per dwelling unit. Road
widths and other factors will be evaluated when considering onstreet
parking.
(4)
The development shall be served by sidewalks in accordance with
the Planning Board Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The use
of exterior stairs and raised curbing in areas where there will be
pedestrian activity shall be minimized.
(5)
Landscaping requirements.
A coordinated landscape design for the entire project area,
including landscaping of structures, parking areas, driveways and
walkways, and buffer strips shall be submitted for approval by the
Planning Board.
(1)
Wherever possible, existing trees and vegetative cover shall be
conserved and integrated into the landscape design.
(2)
Proper maintenance of the landscaping, including the buffer strip,
shall be the responsibility of the owner and shall be a condition of
conformance with the Zoning Bylaws.
(3)
L.
Common open space requirements.
All land within the low-density multifamily community which is
not covered by buildings, roads, driveways, parking areas or other
development, or which is not set aside as private yards, patios or
gardens for the residents, shall be common open space. The area
of the common open space shall equal at least 30% of the total
area of the active adult community tract. Such land shall have a
shape, dimension, character and location suitable to assure its use
for park, recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes by all
the residents of the development.
(1)
Suitable and usable outdoor recreational area or areas shall be
provided for the use of tenants. At least 1,000 square feet per
dwelling unit must be usable open space for active and passive
recreation. [This amount may be included in the 30% common open
space requirement set forth in Subsection M(1) above.] Such space
shall not include wetlands as determined by the Conservation
Commission. Usable open space may be defined to include land for
(2)
M.
55.Editor's Note: See 159, Subdivision of Land.
§ 180-113 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-113
177:419
community gardens, hiking/jogging paths, tennis courts, swimming
pools or similar facilities.
Further subdivision of common open land or its use for other than
recreation, conservation, or agriculture, except for easements for
underground utilities, shall be prohibited.
(3)
Provision shall be made so that the common open space shall
be owned in common and readily accessible to the owners and
residents of all units in the development or by a membership
corporation, trust or association whose members are the owners
and residents of the units. In all cases the common open space shall
be subject to a perpetual restriction running to or enforceable by
the Town which shall be recorded in respect to such land. Such
restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Planning
Board shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions
on development as the Planning Board may deem appropriate.
(4)
Community association.
An owners' association shall be established requiring membership
of each unit owner in the low-density multifamily community. The
association shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance
of communal water, sewage, and recreational and thoroughfare
facilities. An association agreement or covenant shall be submitted
with the application guaranteeing the continuing maintenance of
such common utilities, land and facilities, assessing each unit a
share of maintenance expenses. Such agreement shall be subject to
the review and approval of Agawam legal counsel and the Planning
Board and shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of
Deeds.
(1)
Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that
the association fails to maintain the common facilities in reasonable
order and condition in accordance with the agreement, the Town
may, after notice to the association and public hearing, enter upon
such land and maintain it in order to preserve the taxable value of
the properties within the development and to prevent the common
land from becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also
provide that the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the development.
(2)
N.
Project identification.
As a condition of its approval, the Planning Board may permit
a sign showing the project name to be permanently affixed at
each entrance to the development, which shall be designed to
be compatible with the character of the development and the
surrounding neighborhood. Each sign shall be of a size and design
to be approved by the Planning Board, provided that no such sign
shall exceed 32 square feet in size.
(1)
O.
§ 180-113 AGAWAM CODE § 180-113
177:420
§ 180-114. (Reserved)
§ 180-115. Residence A-5 Age-Restricted Housing District. [Added
4-3-2006 by TR-2006-956]
All streets shall be posted with standard street signs, and all street
names shall be approved by the Planning Board. Dwelling units
shall be assigned street numbers as assigned by the Assessor's
office.
(2)
Enforcement.
As a condition of its approval, the Planning Board may establish
time limits for any development or phases thereof.
(1)
Before any building permits are issued for buildings in a given
phase, the developer may be required to provide the Town with
performance security in a form and amount satisfactory to the
Planning Board to guarantee the construction of required site
improvements.
(2)
P.
Waivers. The Planning Board may waive or modify any requirement of
this section for compelling reasons of safety, aesthetics or site design.
Q.
Purpose. It is the purpose of this district to allow for greater variety
and flexibility in the development of housing types and to facilitate the
construction and maintenance of streets, utilities and public services
in a more economical and efficient manner while at the same time
conserving important natural site features and permanently preserving
open space.
A.
Age-restricted occupancy. The active adult community shall provide
age-restricted housing comprised of dwelling units limited to use and
occupancy primarily by persons at least 55 years of age or older, who
are able to maintain an active, independent lifestyle without the help of
additional on-site support services.
(1) Not more than three residents shall occupy any dwelling unit.
All occupants of a dwelling unit shall be age 55 or older except as
follows:
A spouse or cohabitating partner of an occupant age 55 or
older;
(a)
(b) An occupant who survives his or her spouse or partner;
Not more than one child residing with his or her parent(s),
provided that said child is 18 years of age or older.
(c)
(2)
B.
56.This resolution inadvertently placed § 180-115 into Art. XV. The section was reassigned to
Art. XVI 12-4-2006 by TOR-2006-12.
§ 180-113 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-115
177:421
The owner of the development shall publish and follow policies and
procedures that demonstrate the intent to be housing for persons
55 and older, including federal Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) rules for verification of occupancy.
(3)
Application.
A site plan for an active adult community in conformance with
§ 180-13 shall be submitted to the Planning Board. The following
additional information shall be required:
A development statement listing the development team, setting
forth the development concept, including in tabular form the
number of units, type, size (number of bedrooms, amount of
living space, gross floor area), ground coverage and summary
showing the area of residential development and common open
space as a percentage of the total area.
(a)
A development site plan of the entire tract in accordance with
the requirements of this section and meeting, to the extent
applicable, the requirements set forth for a definitive plan in
the Agawam Subdivision Rules and Regulations.
(b)
Architectural rendering of the site plans and typical structures,
including floor plans and elevations.
(c)
A traffic study will be required. This study shall be performed
by a professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts. It may include, at the discretion of the
Planning Board, analysis of existing and proposed traffic
conditions, driveway design, traffic signal warrant analysis,
parking lot size and layout recommendations, a description of
impacts on local and regional traffic due to the development,
including an area and for a build-out time period as prescribed
by the Planning Board. Depending on the location of the
proposed curb cut, existing traffic characteristics and the
volume of traffic generated by the proposal, a traffic signal
may be warranted at one or all points of access. Any traffic
control devices to serve the development would be designed,
funded, and constructed by the project proponent at the time
of the initial development or by the homeowners's association
in the future. If, as a result of the traffic study, off-site traffic
remediation is determined to be warranted, it shall be the
responsibility of the project proponent. If the number of
parking stalls required in the parking analysis exceed the
number required in the Town Code, the larger number shall be
required.
(d)
An engineering report regarding the adequacy of sewage
disposal, water supply and stormwater drainage, including the
impact of the proposed design on the existing municipal utility
infrastructure of the Town.
(e)
(1)
C.
§ 180-115 AGAWAM CODE § 180-115
177:422
Marketing and management information, including unit selling
prices, construction schedule, phasing schedule, and drafts
of policies and procedures that demonstrate the intent to be
housing for persons 55 and older.
(f)
Said application shall contain sufficient information so that the
Planning Board can determine the applicability of said application
for the following items:
(a) Is consistent with the Master Plan of the Town of Agawam;
Preserves and protects the character of the Town and
especially the immediate neighborhood, giving due
consideration to such features as public safety, including traffic
control and traffic impact upon surrounding roads;
development of adequate facilities for the use of the residents
of said proposal; adequate fire protection, public health
including sewage disposal, drainage and water supply; and
the compatibility of the size, location, architecture and
landscaping of said project with the adjacent neighborhood
and the Town;
(b)
Minimizes potential adverse environmental impacts upon the
Town;
(c)
Is likely to result in a financially stable, soundly and
attractively constructed and well managed and maintained
project; and
(d)
Conforms to the specific provisions of this chapter, including
the design guidelines of this section.
(e)
(2)
Said site plan approval shall not be issued unless the Planning
Board affirmatively determines that each of the above-listed
criteria is met by said applicant.
(3)
Use regulations. The following uses shall be permitted in an active adult
community:
(1) One-family detached dwellings.
(2) Two-family detached dwellings.
Recreational uses and community facilities, such as parks, gardens,
swimming pools, tennis courts, clubhouses and community
buildings.
(3)
Accessory uses customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal uses listed above, but expressly excluding any
commercial or retail enterprises.
(4)
D.
Dimensional requirements. An active adult community shall comply
with the following dimensional requirements:
E.
§ 180-115 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-115
177:423
Minimum parcel size. The total parcel shall have a minimum area
of not less than 10 acres.
(1)
Minimum parcel frontage. The total parcel shall have a minimum
frontage on a public way of at least 150 feet.
(2)
Front, side and rear yards. The minimum front yard (setback) shall
be 25 feet from the interior paved way. The minimum front yard
(setback) shall be 50 feet where it abuts a public way only. The
side yard and rear yard requirements shall be 50 feet inclusive of
a landscaped buffer strip of not less than 15 feet and shall pertain
only to the periphery of the development. Additional buffering may
be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Planning
Board. The Planning Board may modify or waive the buffering
requirement where variations in topography, natural features and
vegetation, or compatible land uses obviate the need for such a
buffer. [Amended 12-4-2006 by TOR-2006-12]
(3)
Density regulations. The maximum number of dwelling units permitted
within an active adult community shall be determined by the Planning
Board to assure compliance with the purpose and intent of these
regulations, and in any event shall not exceed an average of four units
per acre of usable land area.
F.
Building requirements.
Building character. The active adult community shall be an
architecturally integrated development. An architectural theme
shall be carried out by the use of common building materials, color,
exterior detailing, bulk and/or rooflines. Design characteristics
shall be stated in the development application and shall include,
but not be limited to, building materials, architectural design, and
street furniture, which shall require Planning Board approval.
(1)
Building location. Building location and orientation shall reflect:
The relationship to street line and to other buildings in the
development if in close proximity, in order to protect privacy
and create visual coherence.
(a)
Views, solar access and access to common open space in order
to enhance an occupant's interest.
(b)
Organization of large developments into recognizable subareas
in order to provide scale and identity.
(c)
Avoidance of major topography changes and destruction of
significant natural site features, including removal of native
trees or vegetation, in order to preserve and protect the
environment.
(d)
Reduction of visual intrusion into abutting properties in order
to protect existing character to the extent practicable.
(e)
(2)
G.
§ 180-115 AGAWAM CODE § 180-115
177:424
Community facility. Unless waived by the Planning Board, the
development shall establish a community room or facility for use
by the residents. Such facility may provide community space for
mail, indoor recreation, meetings, and other functions held by the
residents.
(3)
Maximum building height. The maximum height of structures shall be
two stories or 35 feet above the ground.
H.
Minimum setback distance between buildings. The minimum setback
distance between buildings shall be 30 feet.
I.
Stairways. All egress stairways are to be contained within the building
structure proper.
J.
Utilities.
Each dwelling in an active adult community shall be provided with
access drainage and utilities that are functionally equivalent to that
provided under the Planning Board's Subdivision Regulations. All
utilities shall be placed underground.
(1)
All dwelling units shall be serviced by a public water supply
deemed adequate for fire protection and domestic use.
(2)
All dwelling units shall be connected to public sewers if available. If
public sewers are not available, all dwelling units shall be serviced
with on-site sewage disposal systems which shall be designed to
meet the requirements of approval from the Agawam Board of
Health and/or the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection as necessary.
(3)
All outdoor lighting in the development shall be designed to
improve visibility, safety and a sense of security while minimizing
energy use, operating costs, glare and light pollution. Outdoor
lighting shall be designed to prevent misdirected or excessive
artificial light. Building areas shall not be floodlit. Roadways,
parking areas, walkways and other public areas shall be
illuminated only by properly positioned, high-efficiency, full-cutoffshielded
lighting fixtures not higher than 15 feet in height.
(4)
K.
Parking and circulation requirements.
There shall be an adequate, safe and convenient arrangement of
pedestrian circulation, roadways, driveways and parking.
(1)
Vehicular access to the active adult community shall be provided
from an existing public way which, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, is adequate to service the proposed development. As a
matter of public safety, an additional access may be required.
(2)
All roads within the active adult community shall be privately
owned and maintained and shall be designed with sufficient width,
(3)
L.
§ 180-115 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-115
177:425
suitable grade and adequate construction to safely provide for the
needs of vehicular traffic generated by the development. Access
roads shall be designed and constructed according to the
requirements of the Agawam Subdivision Rules and Regulations or
as otherwise modified by the Planning Board.
Garages or off-street parking spaces, or a combination thereof,
shall be provided for all occupants, employees, and visitors, and
shall be not less than two garage spaces per dwelling unit. Road
widths and other factors will be evaluated when considering onstreet
parking.
(4)
The development shall be served by sidewalks in accordance with
the Planning Board Subdivision Rules and Regulations. The use
of exterior stairs and raised curbing in areas where there will be
pedestrian activity shall be minimized.
(5)
Landscaping requirements.
A coordinated landscape design for the entire project area,
including landscaping of structures, parking areas, driveways and
walkways, and buffer strips shall be submitted for approval by the
Planning Board.
(1)
Wherever possible, existing trees and vegetative cover shall be
conserved and integrated into the landscape design.
(2)
Proper maintenance of the landscaping, including the buffer strip,
shall be the responsibility of the owner, and shall be a condition of
conformance with the Zoning Bylaws.
(3)
M.
Common open space requirements.
All land within the active adult community which is not covered by
buildings, roads, driveways, parking areas or other development,
or which is not set aside as private yards, patios or gardens for the
residents, shall be common open space. The area of the common
open space shall equal at least 30% of the total area of the active
adult community tract. Such land shall have a shape, dimension,
character and location suitable to assure its use for park,
recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes by all the
residents of the development.
(1)
Suitable and usable outdoor recreational area or areas shall be
provided for the use of tenants. At least 1,000 square feet per
dwelling unit must be usable open space for active and passive
recreation. [This amount may be included in the thirty-percent
common open space requirement set forth in Subsection N(1)
above.] Such space shall not include wetlands as determined by the
Conservation Commission. Usable open space may be defined to
include land for community gardens, hiking/jogging paths, tennis
courts, swimming pools or similar facilities.
(2)
N.
§ 180-115 AGAWAM CODE § 180-115
177:426
Further subdivision of common open land or its use for other than
recreation, conservation, or agriculture, except for easements for
underground utilities shall be prohibited.
(3)
Provision shall be made so that the common open space shall
be owned in common and readily accessible to the owners and
residents of all units in the development or by a membership
corporation, trust or association whose members are the owners
and residents of the units. In all cases the common open space shall
be subject to a perpetual restriction running to or enforceable by
the Town which shall be recorded in respect to such land. Such
restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Planning
Board shall prescribe, and may contain such additional restrictions
on development as the Planning Board may deem appropriate.
(4)
Community association.
An owners' association shall be established requiring membership
of each unit owner in the active adult community. The association
shall be responsible for the permanent maintenance of communal
water, sewage, recreational and thoroughfare facilities. An
association agreement or covenant shall be submitted with the
application guaranteeing the continuing maintenance of such
common utilities, land and facilities, assessing each unit a share
of maintenance expenses. Such agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of Agawam legal counsel and the Planning
Board and shall be recorded in the Hampden County Registry of
Deeds.
(1)
Such agreements or covenants shall provide that in the event that
the association fails to maintain the common facilities in reasonable
order and condition in accordance with the agreement, the Town
may, after notice to the association and public hearing, enter upon
such land and maintain it in order to preserve the taxable value of
the properties within the development and to prevent the common
land from becoming a public nuisance. The covenants shall also
provide that the cost of such maintenance by the Town shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the development.
(2)
O.
Project identification.
As a condition of its approval, the Planning Board may permit
a sign showing the project name to be permanently affixed at
each entrance to the development, which shall be designed to
be compatible with the character of the development and the
surrounding neighborhood. Each sign shall be of a size and design
to be approved by the Planning Board, provided that no such sign
shall exceed 32 square feet in size.
(1)
All streets shall be posted with standard street signs, and all street
names shall be approved by the Planning Board. Dwelling units
(2)
P.
§ 180-115 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-115
177:427
shall be assigned street numbers as assigned by the Assessor's
Office.
Enforcement.
As a condition of its approval, the Planning Board may establish
time limits for any development or phases thereof.
(1)
Before any building permits are issued for buildings in a given
phase, the developer may be required to provide the Town with
performance security in a form and amount satisfactory to the
Planning Board to guarantee the construction of required site
improvements.
(2)
Q.
Waivers. The Planning Board may waive or modify any requirement of
this section for compelling reasons of safety, aesthetics or site design.
R.
§ 180-115 AGAWAM CODE § 180-115
177:428
ARTICLE XVII
Historic Preservation Overlay District
[Added 3-19-2007 by TOR-2007-157]
§ 180-116. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to create an overlay district to allow for the
conversion of Agawam's historic structures while preserving the character
of nearby residential neighborhoods; to encourage the preservation, reuse
and renovation of historic properties; and to promote diversified housing
opportunities.
§ 180-117. Application.
The Historic Preservation (HPOD) Overlay District shall be applied in all
zoning districts. Within the HPOD all regulations of the underlying
district(s) shall continue to be in full force and effect, except where these
regulations supersede such underlying requirements or provide an
alternative to such requirements.
§ 180-118. Historic eligibility.
An historic structure or historic place must meet one of the following
criteria:
§ 180-119. Conditions for conversion of existing buildings.
Be included in the Agawam Inventory of Historic Structures prepared
by the Agawam Historical Commission, as amended from time to time,
including buildings listed for which complete surveys may be pending;
or
A.
Be listed on or be within an area listed on the National Register of
Historic Places or be subject of a pending application for listing on the
National Register of Historic Places, or have been determined to be
eligible by the Massachusetts Historical Commission for listing, either
individually or within an historic district, on the National Register of
Historic Places.
B.
Existing buildings being converted under the terms of this article are
not subject to the minimum lot area, minimum setbacks, maximum
building height, or maximum number of stories requirements listed
in the underlying district. Additions or alterations to the existing
structures are subject to the height and setback requirements of the
underlying district.
A.
Existing buildings on existing lots that are deficient in frontage may
be converted under the terms of this section without a variance, but
B.
57.Editor's Note: This ordinance adopted this material as Art. XVI, §§ 180-112 through
180-117. As the Code already contained an Art. XVI, and §§ 180-112 through 180-115, this
material was renumbered as Art. XVII, §§ 180-116 through 180-122.
§ 180-116 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-119
177:429
§ 180-120. Grant of special permit.
The Agawam City Council may grant a special permit to authorize actions
upon and uses of historic structures and historic places that exceed those
allowed in the underlying district, if such actions or uses comply with the
requirements of this section, § 180-11, and are in the Town of Agawam's
best interest to preserve and enhance historic structures and historic
places.
§ 180-121. Review of special permit application.
Whenever an application for such a special permit is filed with the City
Council, the applicant shall also file, within five working days of the filing
of the completed application, copies of the application, accompanying site
plan, and other documentation to the Agawam Historical Commission, the
Agawam Planning Board, the Agawam Health Department, the Agawam
Fire Department and the Agawam Safety Officer for their consideration,
review and report. The copies necessary to fulfill this requirement shall
be furnished by the applicant. Reports from other boards and officials
shall be submitted to the City Council by the date of the public hearing,
but in any case within 35 days of the receipt of the reviewing party of
all of the required materials; failure of these reviewing parties to make
recommendations after having received copies of all such required
materials shall be deemed a lack of opposition thereto.
§ 180-122. Permitted uses.
Allowed uses, if found to be appropriate by the Agawam City Council, shall
be limited to residential, and bed-and-breakfast homes allowing a maximum
of one week's stay.58
existing lots which meet or exceed the minimum required frontage may
not be subdivided in such a manner as to leave the existing building on
a lot that lacks the minimum required frontage.
The exterior design of the structure shall be maintained to the greatest
extent possible.
C.
The original building area is not to be increased more than 10% of its
gross floor area. Additions and alterations made to comply with the
requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act are not subject to
this limit.
D.
58.Editor's Note: Former Art. XVIII, Temporary Parking, added 6-18-2007 by TOR-2007-6, was
repealed 11-19-2007.
§ 180-119 AGAWAM CODE § 180-122
177:430
ARTICLE XVIII
Medical Marijuana Facilities
[Added 9-16-2013 by TOR-2013-7; amended 5-5-2014 by
TOR-2014-1]
§ 180-123. Purpose.
§ 180-124. Additional requirements/conditions.
In addition to the standard requirements for uses requiring a special permit
and site plan approval, the following shall also apply to all registered
marijuana dispensaries and off-site medical marijuana dispensaries:
It is recognized that the nature of the substance cultivated, processed,
and/or sold by medical marijuana treatment centers and off-site medical
marijuana dispensaries may have objectionable operational
characteristics and should be located in such a way as to ensure the
health, safety, and general well-being of the public as well as patients
seeking treatment. The specific and separate regulation of registered
marijuana dispensaries ("RMD") as medical marijuana treatment
centers and off-site medical marijuana dispensary ("OMMD") facilities
is necessary to advance these purposes and ensure that such facilities
are not located within close proximity of minors and do not become
concentrated in any one area within the Town of Agawam.
A.
Subject to the provisions of this Zoning Bylaw, Chapter 40A of the
Massachusetts General Laws, and 105 CMR 725.000, registered
marijuana dispensaries and off-site medical marijuana dispensaries will
be permitted to provide medical support, security, and physician
oversight that meet or exceed state regulations as established by the
Massachusetts Department of Health ("MDPH").
B.
Use.
RMD and OMMD facilities may only be involved in the uses
permitted by its definition and may not include other businesses or
services.
(1)
No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or
ingested within the premises.
(2)
The hours of operation shall be set by the special permit granting
authority, but in no event shall an RMD or OMMD facility be
open to the public, and no sale or other distribution of marijuana
shall occur upon the premises or via delivery from the premises,
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
(3)
RMD facilities that can demonstrate that they comply with the
agricultural exemption under MGL c. 40A, § 3 must still apply for
site plan approval.
(4)
A.
B. Physical requirements.
§ 180-123 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-124
177:431
All aspects of the use/facility relative to the acquisition, cultivation,
possession, processing, sales, distribution, dispensing, or
administration of marijuana, products containing marijuana,
related supplies, or educational materials must take place at a fixed
location within a fully enclosed building and shall not be visible
from the exterior of the business.
(1)
(2) No outside storage is permitted.
No OMMD facility shall have a gross floor area in excess of 2,500
square feet.
(3)
Ventilation. All RMD and OMMD facilities shall be ventilated in
such a manner that no:
Pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products used
in the cultivation or processing are dispersed into the outside
atmosphere; and
(a)
No odor from marijuana or its processing can be detected by
a person with an unimpaired and otherwise normal sense of
smell at the exterior of the medical marijuana business or at
any adjoining use or property.
(b)
(4)
Signage.
Signage shall be displayed on the exterior of the RMD and OMMD
facility's entrance, in plain sight of clients, stating "Registration
Card Issued by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
Required," in text two inches in height.
(1)
All signage must conform to the requirements of § 180-7 of these
bylaws.
(2)
In addition, all signage must conform to the requirements of 105
CMR 725.105(L) as amended.
(3)
C.
Location.
No RMD or OMMD facility shall be located on a parcel which is
within 500 feet (to be measured in a straight line from the nearest
points of each property line) of a parcel occupied by:
A public or private elementary, junior high, middle, vocational
or high school, college, junior college, university or child-care
facility or any other use in which children commonly
congregate in an organized, ongoing, formal basis; or
(a)
Another RMD or OMMD facility, except that this limitation
shall not apply in Industrial Zones.
(b)
(1)
No RMD or OMMD facility shall be located on a lot which abuts
a residential use (including commercial residential uses such as
hotels, motels, lodging houses, etc.) or residential zoning district.
(2)
D.
§ 180-124 AGAWAM CODE § 180-124
177:432
No RMD or OMMD facility shall be located inside a building
containing residential units, including transient housing such as
motels and dormitories.
(3)
Reporting requirements.
All special permit and site plan approval holders for an RMD or
OMMD facility shall provide the Police Department, Fire
Department, Building Inspector and the special permit granting
authority with the names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses of
all management staff and key holders, including a minimum of two
operators or managers of the facility identified as contact persons
to whom one can provide notice if there are operating problems
associated with the establishment. All such contact information
shall be updated as needed to keep it current and accurate.
(1)
The local Building Inspector, Board of Health, Police Department,
Fire Department and special permit granting authority (in cases
where a special permit and site plan approval were granted) shall
be notified, in writing, by an RMD or OMMD facility owner/
operator/manager:
A minimum of 30 days prior to any change in ownership or
management of that facility.
(a)
A minimum of 12 hours following a violation or potential
violation of any law or any criminal or potential criminal
activities or attempts of violation of any law at the RMD or
OMMD.
(b)
(2)
Permitted RMD and OMMD facilities shall file an annual report
to and appear before the special permit granting authority no
later than January 31, providing a copy of all current applicable
state licenses for the facility and/or its owners and demonstrating
continued compliance with the conditions of the special permit.
(3)
The owner or manager is required to respond by phone or e-mail
within 24 hours of contact by a city official concerning his or her
RMD or OMMD at the phone number or e-mail address provided to
the city as the contact for the business.
(4)
E.
Issuance/transfer/discontinuance of use.
Special permits/site plan approvals shall be issued to the RMD
operator.
(1)
Special permits/site plan approvals shall be issued for a specific
site/parcel.
(2)
Special permits/site plan approvals shall be nontransferable to
either another RMD operator or site/parcel.
(3)
F.
§ 180-124 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-124
177:433
§ 180-125. Application requirements.
In addition to the standard application requirements for special permits and
site plan approvals, such applications for an RMD or OMMD facility shall
include all of the following:
Special permits/site plan approvals shall have a term limited to the
duration of the applicant's ownership/control of the premises as an
RMD or OMMD, and shall lapse:
(a) If the permit holder ceases operation of the RMD; and/or
The permit holder's registration by MDPH expires or is
terminated.
(b)
(4)
The permit holder shall notify the Zoning Enforcement Officer and
special permit granting authority, in writing, within 48 hours of
such lapse, cessation, discontinuance or expiration.
(5)
An RMD or OMMD facility shall be required to remove all material,
plants, equipment and other paraphernalia prior to surrendering
its state registration or ceasing its operation.
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for an RMD or
OMMD, the applicant is required to post with the Town
Treasurer a bond, or other form of financial security
acceptable to said Treasurer, in an amount set by the Planning
Board. The amount shall be sufficient to cover the costs of
the Town removing all materials, plants, equipment and other
paraphernalia if the applicant fails to do so. The Building
Inspector shall give the applicant 45 days' written notice in
advance of taking such action. Should the applicant remove
all materials, plants, equipment and other paraphernalia to the
satisfaction of the Building Inspector prior to the expiration of
the 45 days' written notice, said bond shall be returned to the
applicant.
(a)
(6)
The name and address of each owner of the RMD or OMMD facility/
operation;
A.
A copy of its registration as an RMD from the Massachusetts
Department of Public Health or documentation that demonstrates that
said RMD or OMMD facility, and its owner/operators, qualifies and is
eligible to receive a certificate of registration and meets all of the
requirements of an RMD in accordance with 105 CMR 725.000 of the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health;
B.
Evidence that the applicant has site control and right to use the site for
an RMD or OMMD facility, in the form of a deed or valid purchase and
sales agreement or, in the case of a lease, a notarized statement from
the property owner and a copy of the lease agreement;
C.
§ 180-124 AGAWAM CODE § 180-125
177:434
§ 180-126. Findings.
In addition to the standard findings for a special permit and site plan
approval, the special permit granting authority must also find all the
following:
A notarized statement signed by the RMD or OMMD organization's
chief executive officer and corporate attorney disclosing all of its
designated representatives, including officers, directors, shareholders,
partners, members, managers, or other similarly situated individuals
and entities and their addresses. If any of the above are entities rather
than persons, the applicant must disclose the identity of all such
responsible individual persons;
D.
In addition to what is normally required in a site plan, details showing
all exterior proposed security measures for the RMD or OMMD,
including lighting, fencing, gates and alarms, etc., ensuring the safety
of employees and patrons and to protect the premises from theft or
other criminal activity;
E.
A detailed floor plan identifying the areas available and functional uses
(including square footage);
F.
G. All signage being proposed for the facility;
A traffic study to establish the RMD or OMMD impacts at peak demand
times; and
H.
A management plan including a description of all activities to occur on
site, including all provisions for the delivery of medical marijuana and
related products to OMMDs or off-site direct delivery to patients.
I.
That the RMD or OMMD facility is designed to minimize any adverse
visual or economic impacts on abutters and other parties in interest;
A.
That the RMD or OMMD facility demonstrates that it will meet all
the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all
applicable state laws and regulations;
B.
That the applicant has satisfied all of the conditions and requirements
of this section and other applicable sections of this article.
C.
D. That the RMD or OMMD project meets a demonstrated need;
That the RMD or OMMD facility provides adequate security measures
to ensure that no individual participant will pose a direct threat to
the health or safety of other individuals, and that the storage and/or
location of cultivation is adequately secured; and
E.
That the RMD or OMMD facility adequately addresses issues of traffic
demand, circulation flow, parking and queuing, particularly at peak
periods at the facility, and it impact on neighboring uses.
F.
§ 180-125 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-127
177:435
§ 180-127. through § 180-138. (Reserved)
§ 180-127 AGAWAM CODE § 180-127
177:436
ARTICLE XIX
Mixed-Use Business C District
[Added 6-2-2014 by TOR-2014-4]
§ 180-139. Scope.
The scope of this article is to regulate mixed-use development in
appropriate areas of the Town and to protect the public health, safety, and
general welfare in the Town of Agawam by establishing controls that will
facilitate flexible development while protecting the public interest.
§ 180-140. Purpose; intent.
The purpose of this article is to foster a greater opportunity for creative
development by providing guidelines which encourage a mix of uses
compatible with existing and neighboring properties, to provide
housing and business uses in locations where a variety of Town services
are available, to promote utilization of existing buildings and property,
and to encourage the provision of open areas.
A.
The intent, furthermore, is to encourage interaction among activities
located within a mixed-use development, to enhance business vitality,
reduce vehicular traffic, provide employment opportunities for
residents close to home, ensure the compatibility with each other of the
commercial and residential uses, and ensure that the appearance and
effects of buildings and uses are harmonious with the character of the
area in which they are located by:
Allowing a diversity of uses in close proximity in the district within
a limited area, including residential, commercial, and office;
(1)
Accommodating mixed-use buildings with neighborhood-serving
retail, service and other uses on the ground floor and residential
units above;
(2)
Encouraging development that exhibits the physical design
characteristics of pedestrian-oriented storefront-style shopping
streets;
(3)
Promoting the opportunity for people to work, meet, shop and
utilize services in the vicinity of their residences;
(4)
(5) Providing opportunities for the development of affordable housing;
(6) Providing opportunities for a mixture of uses in the same building;
(7) Promoting a positive pedestrian environment in the district;
(8) Facilitating integrated physical design;
(9) Promoting a high level of design quality;
B.
§ 180-139 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-140
177:437
§ 180-141. Establishment and administration.
Encouraging the development of flexible space for small and
emerging businesses;
(10)
Facilitating development proposals responsive to current and
future market conditions; and
(11)
Encouraging the development of open spaces and parks within
the district to accommodate workers, residents, pedestrians, and
shoppers.
(12)
The Agawam Mixed-Use Business C District shall include the properties
listed below. These properties are included by reason of their potential
to provide a flexible development area aligned with the purpose of this
article.
Assessor's Map, Block and Lot
I14-5-34
I15-9-1
J15-1-1
J15-1-2
J15-1-3
J15-4-1
J15-4-2
J15-4-3
J15-4-4
J14-3-3
J14-3-4
J14-3-5
J14-3-7
J14-4-1
J14-4-2
J14-4-3
J14-4-5
J14-4-6
J14-4-7
J14-4-8
J14-4-9
J14-5-8
A.
The provisions of this § 180-141 shall be administered by the Planning
Board, except as otherwise provided herein.
B.
§ 180-140 AGAWAM CODE § 180-141
177:438
§ 180-142. Definitions.
The following definitions shall apply to all mixed-use applications under
these zoning ordinances:
ASSISTED LIVING — Housing for adults, with services provided, such as
meals, laundry, and housekeeping.
BUSINESS SERVICES — Services used in the conducting of business and
commerce, including only:
CAFE — A coffee house or small restaurant, often with an enclosed or
outdoor section extending onto the sidewalk.
DRIVEWAY — A space, located on a lot, built for access to a garage or offstreet
parking or loading space.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — An establishment whose principal business is
the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food directly to the customer
in a ready-to-consume state for consumption either within the restaurant
building or off the premises. Orders are not generally taken at the
customer's table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or
containers.
LIVE/WORK UNIT — A single unit (e.g., studio, loft, or one-bedroom)
consisting of both a commercial/office and a residential component that
is occupied by the same resident. The live/work unit shall be the primary
dwelling of the occupant.
LOT COVERAGE — The area of a lot covered by the footprint of all
structures, as well as decks, balconies, porches, and similar architectural
features and driveway areas, expressed as a percentage of the total lot area.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT — The development of a tract of land,
building, or structure with two or more different uses, such as, but not
limited to, residential, office, commercial, institutional, or entertainment,
in a compact village form, with vehicular access to an accepted public
way. A proposed mixed-use development shall demonstrate that the project
shall be served by Town water and sewer service upon completion of the
proposed development.
The Planning Board may waive any information requirements it judges
to be unnecessary to the review of a particular plan. Such waiver
decisions must be documented in writing by the Planning Board.
C.
A. Consumer and mercantile credit reporting;
B. News services;
C. Research, development and testing;
D. Business management and consulting;
E. Insurance company service offices;
F. Real estate offices.
§ 180-141 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-142
177:439
ODOR — A strong and unpleasant smell, for example, a garbage or chemical
smell.
PERSONAL SERVICES — Establishments primarily engaged in providing
services involving the care of a person or his/her apparel, including but not
limited to:
PROFESSIONAL SERVICES — Services performed by professional persons
for business and personal use, including but not limited to:
SENIOR AND/OR HANDICAPPED HOUSING or SENIOR APARTMENTS —
Age-restricted multi-unit housing for adults 55 and older, or handicapped
persons, with self-contained living units for older adults who are able to
care for themselves. Usually no additional services such as meals or
transportation are provided.
SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT — An eating establishment with turnover rates
generally of at least one hour or longer, serving food intended for
consumption on the premises.
TREEBELT — Can consist of tree planters, brick pavers, and benches with a
minimum width of five feet.
§ 180-143. Use regulations.
Laundering, dry cleaning and garment services not exceeding 5,000
square feet of floor area per establishment;
A.
B. Coin-operated laundries;
C. Shoe repair;
D. Photographic services;
E. Beauty and barber shops;
F. Apparel repair and alteration;
G. Funeral services;
H. Health clubs;
I. Clothing rental.
A. Medical and health offices and clinics;
B. Planning;
C. Engineering and architectural;
D. Accounting;
E. Auditing and bookkeeping;
F. Educational and scientific.
A. Uses allowed by right with site plan review in a mixed-use development.
§ 180-142 AGAWAM CODE § 180-143
177:440
Mixed-use developments may be constructed in the Mixed-Use
Development Overlay District with site plan review by the Planning
Board in accordance with § 180-13. The following uses may be
included by right with site plan review within a mixed-use structure
in a mixed-use development:
(a) Retail uses;
(b) Sit-down restaurants;
(c) Cafes and outdoor dining areas;
(d) Multifamily residential uses;
(e) Home occupations;
(f) Professional service offices;
(g) Personal service establishments;
(h) Municipal uses;
Banks or financial institutions, automated teller machines
(ATMs);
(i)
(j) Health club;
Townhouses (single-family dwellings connected by one or more
walls);
(k)
(l) Cinema, theater, or auditorium;
(m) Park, recreation or playground;
(n) Artist studio/residence;
Assisted-living residential uses, senior apartments and senior
housing;
(o)
Artisan manufacturing or production (hand tools only, e.g.,
jewelry or ceramics);
(p)
(q) Civic uses;
(r) Live/work units;
(s) Multiple uses in the same structure;
(t) Bars and cocktail lounges.
(1)
The above uses are not allowed as stand-alone structures in this
district.
(2)
B. Special permit uses in a mixed-use development.
§ 180-143 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-143
177:441
The following uses may be included within a mixed-use
development with the approval of a special permit from the Board
of Appeals in accordance with §§ 180-11 and 180-12:
(a) Hotel/motel not exceeding 10 guest rooms per establishment;
Dry cleaning, linen cleaning, or diaper services which clean
clothing articles on site;
(b)
(c) Animal hospitals;
Drive-up service windows associated with banks, pharmacies
or cafes;
(d)
(e) Fast-food restaurants.
(1)
Within a mixed-use development, the above-listed uses shall not be
allowed as freestanding buildings.
(2)
Prohibited uses in a mixed-use development.
The following uses shall not be included within a mixed-use
development:
(a) Industrial uses;
(b) Motor vehicle sales, maintenance and repair facilities;
(c) Gasoline filling stations;
(d) Adult entertainment uses;
(e) Automobile or truck sales;
(f) Junkyards.
(1)
C.
Same-structure/on-site mixed-uses.
Within an approved mixed-use development, there shall be no
restriction on combining different categories of use within the
same building except any imposed by the State Building Code or
other federal, state, or local regulations.
(1)
No mixed-use development shall have more than 75% of the total
square footage in the development used for residential uses,
including multifamily uses, assisted living and senior housing.
(2)
D.
Special permit criteria for all mixed-use developments.
All mixed-use developments requiring a special permit in
§ 180-143B above must meet the special permit requirements in
§ 180-11 and the site plan approval requirements in § 180-13.
(1)
All mixed-use developments requiring a special permit must also
meet the following additional special permit criteria:
(2)
E.
§ 180-143 AGAWAM CODE § 180-143
177:442
§ 180-144. Performance standards for mixed-use developments.
To the extent feasible, all mixed-use developments must meet the
performance standards in § 180-144 A through O below. No use shall be
permitted that causes or results in dissemination of dust, smoke, gas or
fumes, excessive odor, noise, vibration or excessive light violating the
standards set forth in the performance criteria in this § 180-144 A through
Q. Any other performance standards of the Town shall also apply to uses
conducted under this § 180-144 of the Agawam Zoning Ordinance.
The project complies with the additional performance
standards for mixed-use developments in § 180-144 below.
(a)
The project is consistent with the purposes of this article, as
stated in § 180-140.
(b)
Dimensional requirements. The dimensional requirements applicable to
the Mixed-Use Overlay District are shown in the Table of Dimensional
and Density Regulations below:
Table of Dimensional and Density Regulations for the Mixed-Use Business C District
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Frontage
Minimum
Front
Yard
Minimum
Side Yard
Minimum
Rear
Yard
Maximum
Height
Maximum
Lot
Coverage
Maximum
Setback
0 square
feet
25 feet 10 feet 0 feet 20 feet 45 feet/3
stories
75% 15 feet
F.
Access and traffic impacts:
Traffic and safety impacts to the existing and proposed roads shall
be minimized.
(1)
Access provided via shared curb cuts shall be encouraged. Curb
cuts shall be as narrow as is feasible, without resulting in traffic
safety issues.
(2)
Pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be separated, and walkways
shall be provided for access to adjacent properties and between
businesses.
(3)
Plans must illustrate provisions for safe automobile, pedestrian and
bicycle circulation. Provisions must be made for motor vehicle,
bicycle, and pedestrian circulation connections to adjacent lots.
(4)
The Planning Board shall require a detailed traffic study for the
following uses:
High-volume-traffic-generating uses with a trip generation rate
over 700 vehicles/day (based on Institute of Transportation
Engineers rates found in trip generation);
(a)
(5)
A.
§ 180-143 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-144
177:443
The construction of a new mixed-use development structure of
more than 25,000 square feet in gross floor area; and
(b)
Any external enlargement that brings the mixed-use
development total to 25,000 square feet gross floor area for all
structures.
(c)
The Planning Board may waive any or all requirements for a traffic
study for external enlargements of less than 2,000 square feet of
gross floor area in excess of the 25,000 square feet gross floor area
threshold. The traffic impact statement shall contain:
The projected number of motor vehicle trips to enter or leave
the site, estimated for daily and peak-hour traffic levels;
(a)
The proposed traffic flow pattern for both vehicles and
pedestrian access shall be described and related to the site
plan, including vehicular movements at all major intersections
likely to be affected by the proposed use of the site;
(b)
Traffic flow patterns at the site, including entrances and
egresses, loading and unloading areas, and curb cuts on site
and within 100 feet of the site;
(c)
A detailed assessment of the traffic safety impacts of the
proposed project or use on the carrying capacity of any
adjacent highway or road, including the projected number of
motor vehicle trips to enter or depart from the site estimated
for daily hour and peak-hour traffic levels, road capacities and
impacts on intersection. Existing daily and peak-hour traffic
levels and road capacities shall also be given;
(d)
A parking lot vehicle traffic and pedestrian circulation plan
shall be designed to minimize conflicts and safety problems.
(e)
(6)
Noise:
In order to protect, preserve, and promote the health, safety,
welfare, and peace and quiet of the inhabitants of Agawam through
the reduction, control, and prevention of such loud or raucous
noise that unreasonably disturbs, injures, or endangers the
comfort, privacy, repose, health, peace or safety of reasonable
persons, all noise levels, measured at a height of four feet above
the ground surface at all property lines, using a sound meter which
meets the most current American National Standards Institute's
Specification for Type II Sound Level Meters, must not exceed the
following standards:
Time of Day Maximum Sound Level (dBA)
7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m. 65*
7:00 p.m. to 11:00 p.m. 50
(1)
B.
§ 180-144 AGAWAM CODE § 180-144
177:444
Time of Day Maximum Sound Level (dBA)
11:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. 45
* Note:
65 dba = normal conversation
50 dba = noise level of a normal working refrigerator
45 dba = a quiet library
These standards shall not apply to power tools and equipment (i.e.,
lawn mowers, leaf blowers, sweepers, etc.) used in the normal
maintenance of the site's outdoor areas (i.e., lawn, garden, parking,
etc.). Such outdoor maintenance shall be limited to between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
(2)
Emissions and odors:
Emissions and odors shall be completely and effectively confined
within the building or so regulated as to prevent any nuisance,
hazard, or other disturbance from being perceptible (without the
use of instruments) at any lot line of the premises on which the use
is located. No emissions are permitted which can:
(a) Cause any damage to health of humans, animals or vegetation;
(b) Cause excessive soiling;
Result in odorous gases or odoriferous matter in such
quantities as to be offensive.
(c)
(1)
The determination of what emissions are in violation of this
provision shall be made by the Zoning Enforcement Officer or his/
her designee, taking into consideration all of the following:
(a) The level of the odor;
(b) The nature of the odor is usual or unusual;
(c) The origin of the odor is natural or unnatural;
(d) The level of the ambient odor;
(e) The proximity of the odor to living/sleeping facilities;
The nature and zoning of the area from which the odor
emanates and the area where it is received;
(f)
The duration of the odor; and whether the odor is recurrent,
intermittent, or constant.
(g)
(2)
C.
Lighting:
Lighting systems should be designed, constructed, and installed
in a manner that controls glare and light trespass, minimizes
(1)
D.
§ 180-144 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-144
177:445
obtrusive light, conserves energy and resources while maintaining
safety, visibility, security of individuals and property and curtailing
the degradation of the nighttime visual environment. Evenly
distributed lighting throughout a site will minimize impacts on
surrounding neighborhoods and increase efficiency. By directing
light where it is needed and only the intensity necessary to serve
the intended purpose, these standards will prevent glare and its
harsh shadows and blind spots.
All lighting shall comply with the following:
Except for approved exterior lighting, operations producing
glare shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building.
No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or
from high temperature processes such as welding shall be
permitted beyond its lot lines onto neighboring properties, or
onto any street.
(a)
Exterior lighting, including but not necessarily limited to
lighting of exterior walls of buildings from an external light
source, lighting of parking areas, and lighting of walks and
drives, shall be done in such a manner as to direct light away
from adjacent lots and public ways.
(b)
All outdoor light fixtures and illuminated signs shall be
designed, located, installed and directed in such a manner as
to prevent light trespass beyond the property line and light
above a ninety-degree horizontal plane. If necessary, an
applicant may need to provide photometric plans and/or
manufacturing specification sheets to show conformance with
these standards.
(c)
All nonessential lighting, including display, parking, and sign
lighting, shall be turned off after business hours, leaving only
the lighting necessary for site and pedestrian security, crime
prevention and streetlighting.
(d)
All lighting shall be recessed and shielded to prevent off-site
glare.
(e)
Site lighting shall conform to the following output standards:
Maximum
(footcandle)
Site Average
(footcandle)
Footcandle at Property
Line
5 2.5 0
(f)
(2)
Storage:
All materials, supplies and equipment shall be stored in accordance
with Fire Prevention Standards of the National Board of Fire
(1)
E.
§ 180-144 AGAWAM CODE § 180-144
177:446
Underwriters and shall be screened from view from public ways
and abutting properties.
Waste disposal:
Waste disposal shall follow state and Town Board of Health
regulations.
(1)
Storage of waste and waste facilities shall be screened from view
from public ways and neighboring properties.
(2)
Appropriate provisions shall be made for the disposal of trash,
which may include, but shall not be limited to, the provision of
trash compactors within the building or on site, as well as a signed
annual contract for rubbish removal.
(3)
Dumping of dumpsters shall be limited to weekdays between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. only. Dumpsters must be fenced,
gated and screened from view.
(4)
F.
Loading/unloading:
The Planning Board may require that operations, including loading
and unloading, shall be limited to weekdays between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. only.
(1)
Loading and unloading platforms and doorways specially designed
for loading/unloading are prohibited on the front side of any
building.
(2)
G.
Walkways:
For public convenience, a pedestrian and/or bicycle way or
sidewalk system shall connect all uses on the site and otherwise
provide appropriate circulation or continuity to an existing
pedestrian or bicycle circulation system. These uses include, but
are not limited to, residential, parking, transit, bicycling,
recreation, and commercial uses.
(1)
Walkways and sidewalks must conform to requirements of the
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and the Massachusetts
Architectural Access Board (MAAB).
(2)
Sidewalks are required along all Town streets. A treebelt is
required adjacent to sidewalk areas. The Planning Board can waive
treebelt requirements in situations where they determine that local
conditions warrant.
(3)
The development should provide internal and/or public pedestrian
connections that are direct, convenient and pleasant with
appropriate amenities (e.g., attractive sidewalks and benches).
(4)
H.
Vehicular access, parking and loading, and shared parking
requirements:
I.
§ 180-144 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-144
177:447
Parking shall be located to the side or rear of buildings. In no case
shall parking be allowed in the treebelt adjacent to the sidewalk or
within the front setback of any lot.
(1)
Parking spaces may be located either on or off the lot. Applicant
must show proof of space, dedicated to the use, its location relative
to the building, and must indicate if the space is owned or leased.
(2)
Buildings that do not have frontage on a street must provide access
for emergency and service vehicles through the layout and design
of driveways, interior service roads, or pedestrian and bicycle
circulation corridors.
(3)
The Planning Board may allow shared parking in a mixed-use
development.
(4)
A parking study shall be required for all new structures within
the district. A parking study is not required for reuse of existing
structures. A formal parking study may be waived for small
developments where there is established experience with the land
use mix and its impact is expected to be minimal. If standard
rates are not available or limited, the applicant may collect data at
similar sites to establish local parking demand rates.
(5)
Alleys:
Alleys are permitted to access parking in the rear of structures,
with Planning Board review.
(1)
(2) Alleys must be safe, secure and well lit.
(3) Alleys must be paved, with a minimum width of 10 feet.
J.
Development and design standards:
Existing buildings shall be reused for mixed-use developments,
where feasible, as a priority over new construction.
(1)
Buildings or structures that are listed or eligible for inclusion on
the National Register of Historic Places and/or the Massachusetts
Register of Historic Places shall be converted, constructed,
reconstructed, restored or altered to maintain or promote the
status of the building or structure on, or eligibility for inclusion on,
the State or National Register of Historic Places.
(2)
K.
Signs:
Signs shall conform to the existing ordinances of the Town of
Agawam in §§ 180-75 through 180-89.
(1)
Permitted signs include signs located within the sign band on
building facades; awning signs; hanging signs projecting from
building facades; window signs and unmovable freestanding signs.
(2)
L.
§ 180-144 AGAWAM CODE § 180-144
177:448
Temporary signs permitted include political signs; special events
signs; and for-sale or for-lease signs.
(3)
Prohibited signs include flashing signs; roof signs; movable signs;
internally lit plastic signs.
(4)
(5) Each business may display not more than two permanent signs.
Sign materials should be durable and easy to maintain. Signs may
be constructed of wood, metal, stone, gold leaf, glass, canvas or
stained glass or encased in a wooden frame.
(6)
Sign illumination may include external white light illumination,
provided it is shaded from view off the premises, and neon.
(7)
(8) Sign size. Signs may not exceed 16 square feet in area.
Sign height. Freestanding pole signs shall have a maximum height
of 10 feet; other freestanding signs shall have a maximum height of
four feet.
(9)
Landscaping requirements:
Screening of mechanical equipment, trash, and loading areas shall
be provided through the use of walls, fences, and/or dense,
evergreen plant materials.
(1)
The landscaped perimeter area shall have a minimum width of at
least five feet and can consist of tree planters, brick pavers, and
benches.
(2)
Landscaping shall be provided for driveways and other vehicular
use areas to provide visual and climatic relief from broad expanses
of pavement and to channelize and define logical areas for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
(3)
Interior parking areas shall be landscaped with sufficient shade
trees to provide 50% shade within 15 years of installation.
(4)
Completion of the landscaping requirements may be postponed
due to seasonal weather conditions for a period not to exceed six
months from the time of project completion.
(5)
M.
Green infrastructure and stormwater runoff:
To the extent feasible, mixed-use development projects shall
recharge all stormwater on site. The use of green infrastructure
strategies for stormwater recharge, such as permeable pavements,
tree box filters, green streets, rain gardens, stormwater infiltration
basins and green roofs, are strongly encouraged.
(1)
Applicants' site plans shall indicate how the proposed development
addresses green infrastructure and stormwater recharge.
(2)
N.
§ 180-144 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-144
177:449
Maintenance of landscaping and screening:
All landscaping and screening shall be maintained by the property
owner.
(1)
Landscaping and screening plant materials shall not encroach on
the public walkways or roadways in a way that impedes pedestrian
or vehicular traffic or visibility.
(2)
Shrubs or trees that die shall be replaced within one growing
season.
(3)
O.
Appearance/architectural design:
Architectural design shall be compatible with the historic character
and scale of buildings in the neighborhood and the Town of
Agawam through the use of appropriate building materials,
screening, breaks in roof and wall lines and other architectural
techniques.
(1)
In making its decision, the Planning Board may consider whether
the building design is compatible with the following design
guidelines:
Exterior facades are faced with stone or brick, or clapboards of
wood, aluminum or vinyl;
(a)
Exterior facade treatment is compatible on all sides visible
from a public way or parking lot;
(b)
(c) Facades facing Town streets have windows facing the street.
(2)
Variations in architectural detail, form and siting shall be used to
provide visual interest and avoid monotony.
(3)
Existing buildings subject to reconstruction or rehabilitation and
proposed buildings shall be compatible with the historic character
and scale of contiguous buildings within the immediate
neighborhood vicinity.
(4)
(5) Proposed buildings should relate harmoniously to each other.
Buildings shall be designed so that retail, restaurant, and personalservice
establishments are strongly encouraged to be located on
the ground or below-grade building levels.
(6)
The entire building facade must be oriented to front and side street
property lines and must be located within 15 feet of such property
lines, with sidewalks in front of buildings.
(7)
Public open spaces, such as plazas and pocket parks, are
encouraged within the development.
(8)
P.
Q. Outdoor dining:
§ 180-144 AGAWAM CODE § 180-144
177:450
§ 180-145. Optional affordable housing bonus.
Outdoor dining shall be permitted by right, as an accessory use for
any restaurant use, and must comply with the following standards:
Alcohol may be served to and consumed by patrons in outdoor
dining areas, provided that all necessary licenses are acquired.
These licenses are to be gathered through the Liquor
Commission, the Building Department and the Board of Health.
(a)
The hours of operation of outdoor dining areas may be equal
to or less than the hours of operation of the main restaurant.
Dining areas which abut residential areas must end outdoor
dining and seating by 11:00 p.m.
(b)
(c) Litter must be cleaned up regularly.
(1)
A density bonus may be provided by the Planning Board, in return for
provision of affordable housing, if the following criteria are met:
At least 10% of the total dwelling units in a mixed-use development
may be designated as affordable housing. Affordable housing will
be defined as those residential units affordable to a household
earning up to 80% of the median income in Agawam's statistical
area.
(1)
The affordable housing units shall include resale, lease or rental
controls that will ensure continued affordability by future low- and
moderate-income households. Deed restrictions or similar devices
shall be used to limit future sale or rental prices for these purposes.
(2)
The affordable units may be located in an existing structure if their
construction constitutes a net increase in the number of dwelling
units in the development.
(3)
A.
The Planning Board shall determine the density bonus, which may
consist of both of the following:
(1) An increase in building height to a maximum of four stories;
(2) An increase in lot coverage to a maximum of 95%.
B.
§ 180-144 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-145
177:451

ARTICLE XX
Recreational Marijuana Establishments
[Added 9-18-2017 by TOR-2017-9]
§ 180-146. (Reserved)
§ 180-147. Definition; temporary moratorium.
Definition.
RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A use operated by
an entity licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission, and pursuant
to all other applicable state laws and regulations, that acquires,
cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related
products such as food, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), packages,
delivers, obtains, manufactures, purchases, transfers, transports, sells,
distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing
marijuana, or related supplies for nonmedical, or recreational use.
A.
Temporary moratorium. Notwithstanding any other provision of the
Zoning Ordinance to the contrary, the Town hereby adopts a temporary
moratorium on the use of land or structures as a recreational marijuana
establishment. The moratorium shall be in effect until December 31,
2019. During the moratorium period, the Town shall undertake a
planning process to address the potential impacts of recreational
marijuana in the Town, consider the Cannabis Control Commission
regulations regarding recreational marijuana facilities and related
uses, and consider adopting new zoning ordinances to address the
impact and operation of recreational marijuana facilities and related
uses.
B.
Relation to registered marijuana dispensaries and off-site medical
marijuana dispensaries. This section shall not be construed to affect
the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance relating to registered marijuana
dispensaries, also known as "medical marijuana facilities," as defined in
Article XVIII, §§ 180-123 through 180-126.
C.
§ 180-146 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-147
177:453

ARTICLE XXI
Solar Energy Systems
[Added 4-2-2018 by TOR 2017-13]
§ 180-148. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the reasonable regulation of
solar energy systems, including commercial ground-mounted solar energy
installations, by providing standards for the placement, design,
construction, operation, monitoring, modification and removal of such
installations that address public health, safety, and welfare and minimize
impacts on scenic, natural and historic resources and provide adequate
financial assurance for the eventual decommissioning of such installations.
§ 180-149. Definitions.
PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM — An active solar energy system that converts
solar energy directly into electricity.
RATED NAMEPLATE CAPACITY — The maximum rated output of electric
power production of the photovoltaic system in watts of direct current (DC).
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy received from the sun that can be
collected in the form of heat or light by a solar collector.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A device or structural design feature, a
substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting or
provide for the collection, storage and distribution of solar energy for space
heating or cooling, electricity generation, or water heating.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM BUILDING-INTEGRATED — A solar energy
system that is directly incorporated into the building by replacing typical
building materials.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED — An active solar energy
system that is structurally mounted to the ground and is not roof-mounted;
may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale).
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE-SCALE — An active solar energy system
that occupies more than one acre of surface area (equivalent to a rated
nameplate capacity of about 250 kW DC or greater).
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, MEDIUM-SCALE — An active solar energy
system that occupies more than 1,750 square feet of surface area but less
than one acre of surface area (equivalent to a rated nameplate capacity of
about 10 to 250 kW DC).
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, OFF-GRID — A photovoltaic solar energy system
in which the circuits energized by the solar energy system are not
electrically connected in any way to electric circuits that are served by an
electric utility.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED — An active solar energy
system that is structurally mounted to the roof of a building or structure;
may be of any size (small-, medium- or large-scale).
§ 180-148 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-149
177:455
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL-SCALE — An active solar energy system
that occupies 1,750 square feet of surface area or less (equivalent to a rated
nameplate capacity of about 10 kW DC or less).
SOLAR THERMAL SYSTEM — An active solar energy system that uses
collectors to convert the sun's rays into useful forms of energy for water
heating, space heating, or space cooling.
§ 180-150. Solar energy systems.
See the Table of Use Regulations for allowed principal and accessory uses
in all zoning districts.59
§ 180-151. Solar energy systems, building-integrated, roof-mounted
and small scale.
Building-integrated solar energy systems, roof-mounted solar energy
systems and small-scale solar energy systems are allowable as an accessory
use in all zoning districts, subject to the following requirements:
Height. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not project beyond
three feet above the peak of the roof and shall not be more than three
feet above the roof surface to which they are attached. The height of a
small-scale solar energy system shall not exceed 15 feet.
A.
Setback. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall comply with all
building setbacks in the applicable zoning district and shall not extend
beyond the exterior perimeter of the building on which the system is
mounted.
B.
Coverage. Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not cover more
than 90% of the total area of the roof.
C.
Exempt. Building-integrated solar energy systems are exempt from
the requirements of this section and shall be regulated as any other
building element.
D.
Certifications. Roof-mounted and building-integrated solar energy
system components shall be certified by Underwriters' Laboratories,
Inc., and the Solar Rating and Certification Corporation. The Town
reserves the right to deny a building permit for proposed solar energy
systems deemed to have inadequate certification.
E.
Aesthetics. All roof-mounted and building-integrated solar energy
systems shall use colors that blend with the color of the roof or other
structures. Reflection angles from collector surfaces shall be oriented
so as not to interfere with the use and enjoyment of other properties.
Where necessary, screening shall be required to address glare.
F.
Small-scale solar energy systems shall be located in the rear or side
yard areas only.
G.
59.Editor's Note: The Table of Use Regulations is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-149 AGAWAM CODE § 180-152
177:456
§ 180-152. Solar energy systems, medium-scale.
All medium-scale solar energy system installations shall undergo site plan
review as outlined in § 180-13 of the Code of the Town of Agawam prior
to construction, installation or modification of the facility. The total area
of medium-scale solar energy structures shall include the total of all areas
where the solar panels are installed, all appurtenant and accessory
buildings, access roads, landscaping, fencing and visual screening
elements. The height of a medium-scale solar energy system shall not
exceed 15 feet.
§ 180-153. Solar energy systems, large-scale.
The balance of this article shall apply to large-scale solar energy system
installations which measure one acre and larger. The area included for
determining whether a proposed installation is a large-scale solar energy
system is contained in § 180-155 below. The provisions of this article shall
not apply to land owned by the Town of Agawam.
§ 180-154. General requirements for large-scale solar energy
system installations.
Compliance with laws, ordinances and regulations. The construction
and operation of all large-scale solar energy installations shall be
consistent with all applicable local, state and federal requirements,
including but not limited to all applicable safety, construction,
electrical, and communications requirements. All buildings and fixtures
forming part of a large-scale solar energy system installation shall be
constructed in accordance with the state building code and any other
applicable state and federal laws.
A.
Location. Large-scale solar energy system installations shall be allowed
as a matter of right in any industrial zone, and shall be allowed by
special permit only in the Agricultural Zone. No large-scale solar
energy system installations shall be constructed or installed in any
residential or business zone.
B.
Special permit. Large-scale solar energy system installations shall be
allowed by special permit only in the Agricultural Zone. The City
Council shall be the special permit granting authority and shall include
as part of its special permit review and proceedings all the provisions
and requirements of the site plan review. The City Council shall
consider the following criteria in determining whether to grant a
special permit:
That the use is in harmony with the general purpose and intent of
the zoning ordinances of the Town of Agawam;
(1)
That the use is in an appropriate location and is not significantly
detrimental to the neighborhood and does not significantly alter
the character of the neighborhood;
(2)
C.
§ 180-152 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-154
177:457
§ 180-155. Site plan review.
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper
operation of the proposed use; and
(3)
That the proposed use would not be detrimental or offensive to the
adjoining zoning districts and neighboring properties due to the
effects of lighting, odors, smoke, noise, sewage, refuse materials
and/or other visual nuisances.
(4)
Building permit. No large-scale solar energy system installation shall
be constructed, installed or modified as provided in this article without
first obtaining site plan approval by the Planning Board and then a
special permit from the City Council (if necessary) and finally a building
permit.
D.
All large-scale solar energy system installations shall undergo site plan
review as outlined in § 180-13 of the Code of the Town of Agawam prior
to construction, installation or modification of the facility as provided
in this article. The total area of large-scale solar energy systems shall
include the total of all areas where the solar panels are installed,
all appurtenant and accessory buildings, access roads, landscaping,
fencing and visual screening elements.
A.
Required documents. In addition to the required site plan content
described in § 180-13 of the Code of the Town of Agawam, the project
proponent shall provide the following additional documents and
information to the Planning Board. The Planning Board may waive any
of these requirements as it deems appropriate.
A site plan showing:
Property lines and physical features, including roads for the
project site, wetlands, wildlife corridors and other relevant
features;
(a)
Location and approximate height of existing and proposed tree
cover, including any trees on public property that are
approximated to be 72 years and older or with a diameter of 36
inches or greater;
(b)
Proposed changes to the site, including proposed roads,
grading, vegetation clearing and planting, parking areas,
exterior lighting, screening vegetation, stormwater controls,
and all structures;
(c)
Elevations of the solar energy system installation, including
the proposed layout of the system and any potential shading
from structures and vegetation, including those on abutting
properties;
(d)
(1)
B.
§ 180-154 AGAWAM CODE § 180-155
177:458
§ 180-156. Site control, operation and maintenance plan, and utility
notification.
A three-line electrical diagram detailing the solar energy
system installation, associated components, and electrical
interconnection methods, with all National Electrical Code
compliant disconnects and overcurrent devices;
(e)
Documentation of the major system components to be used,
including the photovoltaic panels, mounting system and
inverter;
(f)
Name, address, and contact information for the proposed
system installer;
(g)
Name, address, and contact information for the project
proponent, as well as all co-proponents and property owners,
if any;
(h)
The name and contact information of any agents representing
the project proponent;
(i)
Documentation of actual or proposed access and control of the
project site;
(j)
(k) An operation and maintenance plan for the proposed project;
The location of active farmland and prime farmland soils,
wetlands, permanently protected open space, priority habitat
areas and critical natural landscape core habitat areas as set
forth by the Natural Heritage and Endangered Species
Program (NHESP) and "Important Wildlife Habitat" mapped by
the Massachusetts DEP; and
(l)
(m) Locations of any local or national historic districts.
Proof of property and liability insurance consistent with industry
standards for the proposed facility;
(2)
(3) Description of financial surety consistent with this article; and
A public outreach plan, including a project development timeline,
which indicates how the project proponent will inform and educate
abutters and the community about the project.
(4)
All plans shall be prepared, stamped and signed by a professional
engineer licensed in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
C.
The project proponent shall submit documentation of actual or
proposed access and control of the project site sufficient to allow for
the construction and operation of the proposed large-scale solar energy
system installation.
A.
§ 180-155 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-156
177:459
§ 180-157. Dimension and density requirements.
§ 180-158. Design, safety, and environmental standards.
The project proponent shall submit a plan for the operation and
maintenance of the large-scale solar energy system installation, which
shall include measures for maintaining safe access to the installation
and stormwater controls, as well as general procedures for operational
maintenance of the installation.
B.
The project proponent shall submit evidence that the utility company
that operates the electrical distribution system grid where the
installation is to be located has been informed of the proposed largescale
solar energy system installation. Off-grid large-scale solar energy
system installations shall be exempt from this requirement.
C.
Setback and height requirements. The setbacks for large-scale solar
energy system installations, including appurtenant structures and
parking areas, shall be at least 75 feet from any property boundary. The
setback areas shall not be included in the calculation of the size of the
large-scale solar energy system installations. The height of any largescale
solar energy system installation or any appurtenant structure
shall not exceed 15 feet.
A.
Lot coverage. The lot coverage requirements of § 180-58 of the Code of
the Town of Agawam shall not apply to large-scale solar energy system
installations.
B.
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to large-scale solar
energy system installations shall comply with the requirements of the
Code of the Town of Agawam. All such appurtenant structures include,
but are not limited to, equipment shelters, storage facilities,
transformers, fencing and substations.
C.
Lighting. Lighting of large-scale solar energy system installations shall
be consistent with local, state and federal law. Lighting of other parts
of the installation, such as appurtenant structures, shall be limited
to that required for safety and operational purposes, and shall be
reasonably shielded from abutting properties. Lighting of the largescale
solar energy system installations shall be directed downward and
shall incorporate all feasible measures to reduce light pollution.
A.
Signage. Any signs on large-scale solar energy system installations and
property shall comply with Article XIII of the Code of the Town of
Agawam. A sign shall be required which shall identify the owner and
provide a twenty-four-hour emergency contact phone number. Largescale
solar energy system installations shall not be used for displaying
any advertising except for reasonable identification of the
manufacturer or operator of the large-scale solar energy system
installation.
B.
§ 180-156 AGAWAM CODE § 180-158
177:460
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts, as determined by the Planning
Board during the site plan review, shall be made to place all utility
connections from the large-scale solar energy system installation
underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions, shape, and
topography of the site and any requirements of the utility provider.
Electrical transformers for utility interconnections may be above
ground if required by the utility provider.
C.
Landscaping. All land associated with the large-scale solar energy
system installations shall be covered and grown in natural vegetation.
All ground surface areas beneath solar arrays and setback areas shall
be pervious to maximize on-site infiltration of stormwater. Impervious
paving of areas beneath solar arrays is prohibited. To the greatest
extent feasible, a diversity of plant species, including both deciduous
and coniferous plantings, shall be used, with preference given to
species that are native to New England. All original plantings shall be
at least six feet high. Reasonable efforts shall be taken to minimize
the establishment of invasive species. All plantings shall be maintained
annually, and herbicides shall be applied only by properly licensed
personnel in conformance with all applicable state and federal laws.
D.
Parking and access. Reasonable on-site parking is required for vehicles
that will service the installation only.
E.
Visual impact mitigation. The plan for a large-scale solar energy system
installation shall be designed to maximize the preservation of on-site
and abutting natural and developed features. In undeveloped areas,
existing vegetation shall be retained to the greatest extent feasible,
especially where such vegetation provides a benefit to the natural
environment. In developed areas, the design of the large-scale solar
energy system installation shall consider and incorporate contextual
landscaping and landscape amenities that complement the physical
features of the site and abutting properties. To the greatest extent
feasible, structures should be screened from view by vegetation and/
or joined or clustered to avoid adverse visual impacts and be
architecturally compatible with each other. Vegetation shall be of
varieties native to New England. Vegetative screening shall reach a
mature form to effectively screen the installation within five years of
installation. The mature height of the vegetated screening shall be such
that the installation's structures are not apparent to a person upon
any public road and viewing the installation from a height of eight
feet. Planting of the vegetative screening shall be completed prior to
final approval of the large-scale solar energy system installation by the
Building Inspector.
F.
Emergency services. The owner or operator of the large-scale solar
energy system installation shall provide a copy of the project summary,
electrical schematic, and site plan to the Agawam Fire Department.
Upon request, the owner or operator shall cooperate with local
emergency services in developing an emergency response plan. All
means of disconnecting the large-scale solar energy system installation
G.
§ 180-158 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-158
177:461
§ 180-159. Monitoring and maintenance.
shall be clearly marked. The owner or operator shall identify and
provide contact information for a person who is responsible for
responding to all public and emergency inquiries related to the
installation. This information shall be updated as needed, and at least
on an annual basis.
Land clearing, soil erosion and habitat impacts. Clearing of natural
vegetation shall be limited to that which is necessary for the
construction, operation and maintenance of the large-scale solar
energy system installation or otherwise prescribed by applicable laws,
regulations, and ordinances. Sufficient vegetation shall be maintained
to minimize soil erosion. Large-scale solar energy system installations
shall be installed only upon water-permeable surfaces as approved
during site plan review.
H.
Preservation of trees. Large-scale solar energy system installations
shall be designed and constructed to preserve and maintain the health
and root systems of significant trees on public property that are
approximated to be 75 years and older or with a diameter of 36 inches
or greater.
I.
Wildlife corridors. Large-scale solar energy system installations shall be
designed and constructed to minimize the impacts on wildlife corridors.
J.
Sound levels. Sound levels under normal operating conditions of the
large-scale solar energy system installation measured at the boundary
of the lot on which the installation is sited shall not be more than
10 decibels greater than would otherwise exist in the absence of the
facility.
K.
Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials that are stored, used, or
generated on site shall not exceed the amount for a very small quantity
generator of hazardous waste as defined by Massachusetts DEP and
shall meet all applicable requirements, including storage of hazardous
materials in a building with an impervious floor that is not adjacent
to any floor drains to prevent discharge to the outside environment.
If hazardous materials are utilized within the solar electric equipment,
then impervious containment areas capable of controlling any release
to the environment and to prevent potential contamination of
groundwater are required.
L.
Independent engineer. Upon request of the Planning Board, the
proponent shall pay for a licensed third-party independent engineer
selected by the Planning Board to assist the Planning Board in its
review of submitted materials.
M.
Solar photovoltaic installation conditions. The owner or operator of a
large-scale solar energy system installation shall maintain the facility
in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not be limited to,
A.
§ 180-158 AGAWAM CODE § 180-159
177:462
§ 180-160. Financial surety.
The project proponent of large-scale solar energy system installations shall
provide a form of surety, either through escrow account, bond or line of
credit from a creditable financial institution, in an amount sufficient to
painting, structural repairs, landscaping and integrity of security
measures. Site access shall be maintained to a level acceptable to the
Agawam Fire Chief, Building Inspector and Town's Electrical Inspector.
The owner or operator shall be responsible for the cost of maintaining
the installation and any access road, unless accepted as a public way.
Modifications. All material modifications to a large-scale solar energy
system installation made after issuance of the required building permit
shall require site plan approval by the Planning Board.
B.
Removal requirements and abandonment.
Abandonment. Absent notice of a proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
a large-scale solar energy system installation shall be considered
abandoned when it fails to operate for more than one year without
a written waiver by the Planning Board. If the owner or operator
of a large-scale solar energy system installation fails to remove
the installation in accordance with the requirements of this section
within 150 days of abandonment or the proposed date of
decommissioning, the Town or its agents may enter the property
and physically remove the installation, the full cost of which shall
be the responsibility of the owner or operator.
(1)
Removal requirements. Any large-scale solar energy system
installation which has reached the end of its useful life or has been
deemed abandoned consistent with this article shall be removed.
The owner or operator shall physically remove the installation no
more than 150 days after the date of discontinued operations.
The owner or operator shall notify the Planning Board by certified
mail of the proposed date of discontinued operations and plans for
removal. Decommissioning shall consist of:
Physical removal of all solar photovoltaic installations,
structures, equipment, security barriers and electrical lines
from the site;
(a)
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations;
(b)
Stabilization and revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion; and
(c)
The Planning Board may allow the owner or operator to leave
landscaping or designated below-grade foundations to
minimize erosion and disruption to vegetation.
(d)
(2)
C.
§ 180-159 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-160
177:463
cover the cost of removal in the event the Town of Agawam deems the
large-scale solar energy system installation to be abandoned and must
remove the installation and remediate the landscape. The amount and
form of the surety shall be determined to be reasonable by the Planning
Board, but in no event should exceed more than 110% of the cost of
removal and compliance with the additional requirements set forth herein,
as determined by the project proponent. Such surety is not required for
municipally owned or state-owned facilities. The project proponent shall
submit a fully inclusive estimate of the costs associated with removal
prepared by a qualified engineer. The amount shall include a mechanism for
calculating increased removal costs due to inflation.
§ 180-160 AGAWAM CODE § 180-160
177:464
ARTICLE XXII
Tables of Uses and Dimensions
[Added 11-19-2018 by TOR 2018-13]
§ 180-161. Abbreviations.
For the purposes of this article, certain abbreviations shall have the
following meanings:
Y - Use Permitted
N - Use Not Permitted
SP - Use Permitted by Special Permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals
V - Variance from the Zoning Board of Appeals
NA - Not Applicable
RA1 - Residence A-1 Districts
RA2 - Residence A-2 Districts
RA3 - Residence A-3 Districts
RA4 - Residence A-4 Districts
RA5 - Residence A-5 Age-Restricted Housing District
RA6 - Residence A-6 Low-Density Multifamily Community District
RB - Residence B Districts
AG - Agriculture Districts
BA - Business A Districts
BB - Business B Districts
IA - Industrial District A
IB - Industrial District B
O - Overlay
§ 180-162. Table of uses.
See the attachment marked as "Appendix A, Table of Use Regulations," with
accompanying footnotes for a catalog of uses permitted, uses not permitted,
and uses that require a special permit in all districts.
§ 180-163. Table of dimensions.
See the attachment marked as "Appendix B, Table of Dimension
Regulations," with accompanying footnotes for a catalog of dimension
requirements.
§ 180-161 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § 180-163
177:465
Chapter A184
COUNCIL RULES AND REGULATIONS
§ A184-1. Rule 1: Authority.
Pursuant to Section 2-7(c) of the Charter in the Code of the Town of
Agawam, the City Council may determine its own rules of procedure for
meetings. The following set of rules shall be in effect upon their adoption by
the City Council and until such time as they are amended or new rules are
adopted.
§ A184-2. Rule 2: Regular meetings.
§ A184-3. Rule 3: Special meetings.
All regular meetings of the City Council shall be held on the first and
third Mondays of the month except for the months of July and August
where it shall be held only on the first Monday of those months. If the
regularly scheduled City Council meeting falls on a holiday, the Council
shall meet on the following day. In October and November, the City
Council shall have its meeting the day immediately following any local,
state or federal election day.
A.
The regular City Council meetings shall commence at 7:00 p.m. and
not adjourn until such time as the business of the Town of Agawam is
completed.
B.
The regular City Council meetings shall be held in the Auditorium of
the Roberta G. Doering School located at 68 Main Street, Agawam,
Massachusetts, unless otherwise noted and properly posted.
C.
Except for executive sessions as permitted by state law, all regular
meetings of the City Council and its committees shall be open to the
public, subject to recording by various means by prior arrangement
with the Council President, provided that such arrangements do not
interfere with the orderly conduct of the meetings and are done under
such rules as the Council may prescribe.
D.
As stated in the Charter, the Council President, or the Mayor, or any
five members of the Council may call special meetings of the Council
whenever, in their opinion, the public business may require it.
A.
Whenever a special meeting shall be called, a notice in writing, signed
by the Council President or presiding officer, shall be posted in the City
Clerk's office and served upon each member of the Council stating the
date and hour of the meeting and the purpose for which such meeting is
called, and no business shall be transacted at the meeting except such
as is stated in the notice.
B.
§ 180-163 AGAWAM CODE § A184-3
177:466
§ A184-4. Rule 4: Election and duties of the presiding officer.
No special meeting, except an emergency meeting as determined by the
Council President, shall be held until notice complying with the Open
Meeting Law60 has been given by the Council Administrative Assistant
at least 48 hours after the call is issued.
C.
Executive sessions shall be held in accordance with the provisions of
the Open Meeting Law.
D.
After a new City Council has been sworn in, a new Council President
and Vice President shall be elected during the first meeting in January.
The President and Vice President shall serve a one-year term.
A.
The first meeting in January after a new Council has been sworn in
shall be known as the organizational meeting, where the only business
conducted shall be the election of President and Vice President. The
position of President and Vice President shall be listed individually on
the Council agenda and require a majority vote of the full Council for
election. On the off year, the first meeting in January shall include
regular Council business along with the elections for President, Vice
President, Auditor and Administrative Assistant, which shall require a
majority vote of the full Council for election.
B.
The Councilor with the most seniority on the City Council shall sit
to the left of the President. The senior Councilor shall also chair the
organizational meeting prior to the election of the President and Vice
President. After election of officers, the Vice President shall sit to the
right of the newly elected Council President and the senior Councilor
shall sit to his/her left.
C.
The seats of the City Council shall be numbered and determined by
lot at the organizational meeting and at the first meeting in January
thereafter. No member shall change his/her seat except by permission
of the President.
D.
The duties of the presiding officer where applicable shall be in
accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.
E.
During the absence or disability of the President, the Vice President
shall discharge the duties and exercise the powers and authority of the
President. In the absence of both the President and Vice President, the
senior Councilor shall preside. Said Council member shall discharge the
duties and exercise the powers and authority of the President.
F.
In the event the President or Vice President of the City Council resigns
or is called upon to act as Mayor in a permanent fashion, the City
Council will hold elections to determine a new President and/or Vice
President.
G.
60.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 30A, § 18 et seq.
§ A184-3 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-4
177:467
§ A184-5. Rule 5: Call to order.
§ A184-6. Rule 6: Rules of order.
The City Council rules and regulations shall govern the proceedings of
the Council in all cases, unless they are in conflict with the Town Charter
or Massachusetts General Laws, in which case the Charter and/or
Massachusetts General Law shall have precedence.
§ A184-7. Agenda review.
Prior to any regular or special City Council meeting, the Mayor may conduct
an agenda review meeting to review the Council agenda with the Council
President and/or Council Vice President. No more than three other City
Council members may also attend said agenda review meeting, on an
The President shall preserve order and decorum at all regular and
special meetings of the City Council and confine members in debates
pertaining to the question under discussion.
H.
The President shall sign all ordinances, resolutions and measures
adopted by the Council during his/her presence. In the event of the
absence of the President, the presiding officer shall sign ordinances,
resolutions and measures as then adopted.
I.
When the President wishes to participate in a debate, he/she may call
upon the Vice President or, in his/her absence, the senior Councilor to
temporarily chair the meeting in order to take part in the debate. After
expressing his/her opinion on the issue, he/she may return to the chair
if not objected to by the majority of the Council present.
J.
All rules and regulations of the City Council shall be given to every
newly elected City Councilor within two weeks of the date of his/her
election.
K.
The President shall be classified as the department head of the
Legislative Branch and is responsible for any and all administrative
decisions and actions with respect to the City Council and its personnel.
Those administrative duties and responsibilities shall include the
approval of all payroll warrants, and the approval of accounts payable
warrants and requests for payment in amounts less than $200. Any
accounts payable warrant or request for payment in excess of $200
shall require approval by vote of the Council.
L.
The presiding officer shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the
meeting and shall immediately call the Council to order.
A.
In the absence of the President and the Vice President, the senior
Councilor is to preside as temporary Chair; and upon the arrival of
the President or Vice President, the temporary Chair shall immediately
relinquish the position of the presiding officer upon the conclusion of
the business item immediately before the Council.
B.
§ A184-4 AGAWAM CODE § A184-7
177:468
alternative rotating basis. Attendance at any one agenda review meeting
shall not exceed five City Council members, including the Council President
and Council Vice President.
§ A184-8. Rule 8: Quorum.
A majority of the members of the City Council shall constitute a quorum and
be necessary for the transaction of business. If, at the time any meeting is
called to order, a quorum is not present and if, after a recess of not more
than 30 minutes, a quorum is still not present, the President shall declare
the meeting adjourned to a later time and those in attendance shall be
named.
§ A184-9. Rule 9: Committee appointments.
After the organizational meeting and annually thereafter, all subcommittees
shall be appointed and announced by the President unless otherwise
provided for or specifically directed by the City Council. Any member shall
have the right to appear before any subcommittee of the City Council and
be heard. The Chairperson of any subcommittee may cancel a scheduled
meeting for cause; otherwise, the senior member by length of service shall
preside at the scheduled subcommittee meeting. The Chairperson shall
assign the task of secretary to a subcommittee member to take minutes at
any such subcommittee meeting.
§ A184-10. Rule 10: Standing subcommittees.
The members of the standing subcommittees listed below shall serve
annually, and each subcommittee shall be charged with the mission
statement enumerated below. The Council President or presiding
officer shall refer agenda items to the appropriate subcommittee for
review. (See Rule 22.) The subcommittee shall provide verbal reports to
the Council as a whole and keep written minutes of its meetings. These
minutes shall be submitted to the Council Administrative Assistant in a
timely manner. (See Rule 20B.)
A.
The Council President and Council Vice President shall be ex-officio
members of all standing subcommittees for purposes of establishing a
quorum at any subcommittee meeting.
B.
The Council shall have the following five-member standing
subcommittees:
Finance Subcommittee: This subcommittee would be charged with
reviewing financial and budget requests submitted to the Council,
including funding requests pursuant to the Community
Preservation Act.61 In addition, the subcommittee would be
responsible for submitting Council requests for inclusion in the
Town's operating and capital improvement budgets, and for review
(1)
C.
61.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 44B.
§ A184-7 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-10
177:469
§ A184-11. Rule 11: Decorum.
§ A184-12. Rule 12: Enforcement of decorum.
§ A184-13. Rule 13: Rights and duties of Council members.
of the capital improvement budget presented by the Mayor to the
Council.
Legislative Subcommittee: This subcommittee would be charged
with reviewing and initiating ordinances and legislation to be
considered by the Council, including zoning ordinances.
(2)
Community Relations Subcommittee: This subcommittee would be
charged with handling internal relations between the Council and
the other Town departments, and external relations with the
business community and the citizenry as a whole.
(3)
Administrative Subcommittee: This subcommittee would be
charged with Council administrative duties such as review of
license applications, street acceptance and sewer expansion. In
addition, the subcommittee would be responsible for initiating and
reviewing any reorganization efforts.
(4)
While the Council is in session, the members must preserve order and
decorum, and no member shall, neither by conversation nor otherwise,
delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the Council or
disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the
Council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise herein provided.
A.
Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks or
who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council shall be
asked to remove himself or herself from Council Chambers, forthwith,
by the presiding officer.
B.
At the will of the presiding officer, the Chief of Police, or such member
or members of the Police Department as he may designate, shall be
Sergeant-at-Arms of the City Council meetings. He/she or they shall
carry out all orders and instructions given by the presiding officer for
the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the City Council
meeting.
A.
Upon instructions of the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the
Sergeant-at-Arms to remove any person(s) who violates the order and
decorum of the meeting.
B.
The members' right to speak shall be in accordance with Roberts' Rules
of Order. Any Council member shall have the right to have the reasons
for his/her dissent from, or protest against, any action of the Council
entered into the minutes.
A.
§ A184-10 AGAWAM CODE § A184-13
177:470
§ A184-14. Rule 14: Policies related to City Council personnel.
§ A184-15. Rule 15: Filing deadline.
No new item may be included on a regular City Council agenda unless
said item is submitted to the Administrative Assistant to the City Council
in writing by Thursday, 12:00 noon, prior to the next regularly scheduled
meeting of the City Council. At the time of submission of any item of
business for the Council agenda, the person or persons proposing the
measure shall submit supporting information or documentation sufficient
to specify the nature of the business to be considered by the City Council.
Without such backup information, the item may not be allowed on the City
Council agenda. In the event a City Councilor is unable to submit a proposed
item personally, he or she can authorize the Administrative Assistant to
the City Council to submit the item by telephone message or e-mail. The
Administrative Assistant to the City Council shall compile an agenda of
all such proposed resolutions, orders, ordinances and other new business
along with the agenda of the old business items remaining before the City
Council and shall see that a copy of the completed agenda is delivered to
each member of the City Council. The Administrative Assistant to the City
Council shall include the name of the member or members proposing an
item of agenda. Any orders, resolutions and ordinances shall reflect their
origin and may be sponsored by the Mayor or by any member of the City
Council.
In the event the President wishes to speak on the subject matter of an
issue or article of legislation before the full Council, the President shall
turn such Council meeting over to the Council Vice President while the
President is so addressing the Council. The President shall resume the
Chair after his/her presentation.
B.
The City Auditor and Council Administrative Assistant.
The salary and benefits for the City Auditor and Administrative
Assistant are set forth in the Code of the Town of Agawam.
(1)
The City Auditor and the Administrative Assistant to the City
Council shall have their performance evaluated annually by the
City Council.
(2)
The City Council shall elect the City Auditor and Administrative
Assistant to the City Council as set forth in Rule 4 above. This
will allow the Council to have one year's worth of experience to
adequately evaluate said employees' performance.
(3)
A.
The Zoning Board of Appeals and the Community Preservation Act
Committee are also elected by the City Council.
B.
§ A184-13 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-16
177:471
§ A184-16. Rule 16: Form of reports.
All reports and other papers submitted to the City Council shall be in
writing, properly endorsed, and all the appropriate supplemental
information attached thereto. If such reports, documents or papers
submitted shall be solely for the City Council, they should be clearly labeled
"Council Only."
§ A184-17. Rule 17: Order of business.
§ A184-18. Rule 18: Roll call; order of vote.
The order of voting shall be by roll call in alphabetical order. The first to
vote shall be determined by alphabetical order rotation at the beginning of
each regular or special meeting. This order shall start from the beginning
alphabetical order at the first meeting in January. If a Councilor is not
present during the City Council meeting at which his/her position is the
first to vote, then said Councilor shall forgo his/her opportunity to vote in
At every regular City Council meeting, unless otherwise determined by
a majority of the members present, the order of business shall be as
follows:
Item 1 Roll call
Item 2 Moment of silence and the Pledge of Allegiance
Item 3 Citizen's speak time
Item 4 Approval of minutes
Item 5 Declaration from Council President
Item 6 Presentation of petitions and memorials
Item 7 Reports of Council committees
Item 8 Elections
Item 9 Public hearings
Item 10 Old business
Item 11 New business
Item 12 Any other matter that may legally come before the
City Council
A.
No person shall address a public meeting of the City Council without
permission of the presiding officer after having signed up for Citizen's
Speak Time prior to the meeting, and all persons shall, at the request
of the presiding officer, be silent. If, after warning from the presiding
officer, a person persists in disorderly or disruptive behavior, said
officer may order him/her to withdraw from the meeting and, if he/
she does not withdraw, may order a police officer or any other person
to remove him/her to some convenient place until the meeting is
adjourned.
B.
§ A184-16 AGAWAM CODE § A184-18
177:472
the first position. The next meeting's voting order will begin with the next
Councilor following the alphabetical order.
§ A184-19. Rule 19: Citizen's speak time.
The Agawam City Council shall provide a citizen's speak time during each
regular City Council meeting. Citizen's speak time is subject to the following
conditions:
§ A184-20. Rule 20: Minutes.
After being recognized by the Council President or presiding officer, the
person shall state his/her name, address and subject he/she wishes to
speak on for the record.
A.
B. Speak time shall be only at the regular meetings of the City Council.
Each speaker shall have up to five minutes, if needed, to present the
subject of his or her concern, unless otherwise permitted by the Council
President and/or a majority of the Council members present.
C.
D. The time shall be kept by the Council Administrative Assistant.
No speaker will be allowed to bequeath time to another or for another
speaker.
E.
Prior to the meeting, each speaker must show his or her desire to
speak by giving name, address and the subject to be presented on a
signup sheet which is provided for this and is placed upon the podium
where the person shall speak. At two minutes prior to the beginning of
the Council meeting, the Council Administrative Assistant shall bring
this list to the President or presiding officer. Once the meeting has
commenced, no person shall be able to speak during citizen's speak
time unless his/her name is on the signup sheet.
F.
There shall be no dialogue exchanged between the citizen and any City
Council member. This is for citizen input only.
G.
The City Council President or presiding officer of the meeting shall
maintain order and decorum.
H.
Any person making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks or
who shall become boisterous while addressing the Council shall be
asked to remove himself or herself from Council Chambers, forthwith,
by the presiding officer.
I.
If a speaker wishes to speak on an item of agenda where a public
hearing is scheduled during the Council meeting, his/her remarks shall
be made during the public hearing and not during citizen's speak time.
J.
All regular City Council meetings are recorded by both video and audio
means, and the City Council Administrative Assistant shall prepare
written minutes that reflect the date, time and place of the meeting,
A.
§ A184-18 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-20
177:473
§ A184-21. Rule 21: Presentation of petitions and memorials.
§ A184-22. Rule 22: Referral to subcommittees.
a list of the members present or absent, and the decisions made and
actions taken including a record of all votes. Said written minutes shall
also include a summary of the discussions on each subject and include
a list of the documents and other exhibits used at the meeting. These
minutes shall be distributed to the City Council to be approved at the
next regularly scheduled Council meeting. After approval, said minutes
shall be posted on the Town of Agawam website as well as posted in the
office of the City Clerk in compliance with Massachusetts General Laws
governing public meetings.
Minutes of all special meetings and subcommittee meetings shall be
maintained in written form. The subcommittee Chairperson shall
designate a recording secretary from its committee members. The
minutes shall be submitted to the City Council Administrative Assistant
in a timely manner prior to the next regularly scheduled City Council
meeting. The minutes shall reflect:
(1) The date, time and place of the meeting;
(2) The members recorded as either present or absent;
A general description of all matters proposed, discussed or
decided; and
(3)
(4) A record of any votes or recommendations taken. (See Rule 22.)
B.
Minutes of all executive session meetings shall not be available to the
public until such time as the City Council determines that it is no longer
necessary to protect the public interest or the privacy of the matter on
which it met or such matter has been released by the courts.
C.
Copies of all minutes shall be kept in the office of the City Council, and
any video/audio recordings shall also remain in the Council office for
public review. A copy of the video may be requested in writing, and
there may be a fee for costs associated with the copying of said video
assessed to the person(s) requesting it.
D.
Resolutions, petitions, etc., or subjects requiring action by the Council
under this agenda item may be introduced and sponsored by a member
of the Council or the Mayor.
A.
B. All resolutions shall be presented to the Council in typewritten form.
All resolutions shall first appear under new business and at the next
regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council shall be moved to old
business upon which a discussion will be had and action of the City
Council shall be taken.
C.
§ A184-20 AGAWAM CODE § A184-22
177:474
§ A184-23. Rule 23: Elections.
The City Council appoints vacancies on the Zoning Board of Appeals as
well as the Community Preservation Act Committee. When a vacancy arises
or a term expires, the Council Administrative Assistant is responsible for
contacting, in writing, the person(s) and getting a letter of intent on
whether he/she wishes to be reappointed to that position. If a person wishes
to resign from the position, notification must be submitted in writing to the
City Council office. Vacancies shall be advertised in the local newspaper. An
election shall take place in a timely fashion with the item(s) being placed on
the Council agenda for a vote of the Council.
§ A184-24. Rule 24: Public hearings.
When an order, resolution or ordinance relates to a subject which
should properly be examined and reported upon by a standing
subcommittee of the City Council, such order, resolution or ordinance
shall, upon presentation, be referred by the Council President to such
committee and must be reported back by the committee. All petitions,
memorials, communications or any other matter before the City Council
may be referred as follows:
(1) To a standing subcommittee of the City Council.
(2) To a special committee of the City Council.
(3) To the Mayor.
(4) To boards or commissions.
A.
Any matter may be referred to an ad hoc committee, advisory
committee or Board for advice sought by the City Council.
B.
Should a matter be referred to more than one subcommittee, it is
recommended that those committees have one or more joint meetings
of the Chairpersons or the full committee to assure the information
brought before the full Council is unified or any discrepancies between
subcommittees clearly noted, all following the guidelines of the Open
Meeting Laws.62
C.
After referral, it is the discretion of the subcommittee Chairperson
to determine if a meeting of the subcommittee is necessary. If a
subcommittee meeting is held, the subcommittee may take a vote for a
recommendation to the full Council on each item on the agenda.
D.
The Chairperson of the subcommittee is responsible for notifying the
City Council Administrative Assistant to schedule the subcommittee
meeting and specify any department heads and/or other persons of
interest to be invited to the meeting.
E.
62.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 30A, § 18 et seq.
§ A184-22 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-24
177:475
§ A184-25. Rule 25: Old business.
Old business first appears as new business and then is moved to old
business. Any resolutions or petitions will appear under Item 6 of the
Council agenda, "Presentation of Petitions and Memorials." Any public
hearing items will appear under Item 9, "public hearing," and any
A legal notice of public hearing must be advertised in a local newspaper
no less than 14 days prior to the suggested date of the public hearing
[as stated in Section 5-2(a) of the Town Charter]; and, if necessary,
abutters shall also be notified with a legal notice of public hearing.
Proponents and opponents shall be allowed time for the presentation
of their respective cases to the City Council during all public hearings
before the City Council.
A.
All public hearings will be subject to the following conditions:
Each speaker has up to 10 minutes, total, if needed, to present
the subject of his or her concern, both for and against the subject
matter on hand.
(1)
Time limits may be shortened and/or extended by a majority vote of
Council members present at the meeting.
(2)
Questions by members of the City Council shall be allowed after the
speaker has completed his/her presentation.
(3)
No speaker will be allowed to bequeath time to another or for
another speaker.
(4)
Any person shall have the right to be recorded for or against the
subject being heard.
(5)
After close of all hearings, no further evidence, oral or written, may
be presented.
(6)
The City Council President or presiding officer of a hearing shall
preserve order and decorum.
(7)
Any person shall be allowed to address the City Council only once
on any given subject or topic being heard unless the City Council
has a question of that person and he/she may be asked to return to
the podium.
(8)
B.
No person shall address a public meeting of the City Council without
permission of the presiding officer or having signed up for citizen's
speak time prior to the meeting, and all persons shall, at the request
of the presiding officer, be silent. If, after warning from the presiding
officer, a person persists in disorderly or disruptive behavior, said
officer may order him/her to withdraw from the meeting and, if he/
she does not withdraw, may order a police officer or any other person
to remove him/her to some convenient place until the meeting is
adjourned.
C.
§ A184-24 AGAWAM CODE § A184-25
177:476
ordinances or Town orders (such as financial transfers) shall appear under
Item 10, "Old Business." All items can be acted on in one meeting, except
ordinances, which shall require two readings, therefore requiring the item
to appear at least twice under old business.
§ A184-26. Rule 26: New business.
§ A184-27. Rule 27: Ordinances.
§ A184-28. Rule 28: Motions out of order.
The presiding officer may at any time, by a majority vote of the Council,
permit a member to move an agenda item out of regular order.
§ A184-29. Rule 29: Any item that may legally come before the City
Council.
The presiding officer shall go in whatever order he/she so chooses and
provides each Councilor the opportunity to speak upon any such matter
that was not included in the agenda. This item should pertain only to
matters concerning the City Council, such as setting meetings, supplying
information concerning the City Council and the like.
New business is classified as any resolution, ordinance, petition, public
hearing notice, Town order, etc., which must be submitted to the City
Council office by 12:00 noon on the Thursday prior to the next regularly
scheduled City Council meeting. Any letters or written explanation
providing backup to the agenda item must be included. These must also
have an originally signed copy by the Mayor, Auditor or City Solicitor,
depending on the type of item.
A.
If the item appears as new business suggesting a public hearing date,
the presiding officer will declare the suggested date to ensure
availability of the Council.
B.
All ordinances shall require two separate readings by the Council after
first appearing under new business, and the second shall never be had
on the same day as the first.
A.
Ordinances shall require a minimum of eight votes of the City Council
for passage.
B.
All ordinances shall be referred to the City Council Ordinance
Subcommittee, and the Subcommittee shall report said ordinance to the
City Council at the subsequent meeting. The ordinance shall stand for
final action in accordance with the report of the Subcommittee.
C.
When passed by the City Council, an ordinance shall be signed by the
presiding officer and then submitted to the Mayor, after which said
ordinance shall be filed and preserved in the office of the City Clerk.
D.
§ A184-25 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-30
177:477
§ A184-30. Rule 30: Votes required.
Please see the attached Schedule A (voting schedule).63
§ A184-31. Rule 31: Request for legal opinions.
Any member of the City Council may request, in writing, written legal
opinions relating to Town business and involving matters within the
authority of the City Council and, for purposes of inquiry, request an opinion
or advice on Town legal matters from the City Solicitor.
§ A184-32. Rule 32: Budget review.
The votes shall be taken upon the passage of all ordinances,
resolutions, appropriations, transfers and Town orders by roll call and
entered upon the official record of the Council.
A.
When the City Council is in doubt as to the number of votes required to
pass a measure or if the measure contains a tax or fee to be assessed
to the residents of the City of Agawam, the Council President, as
the Parliamentarian, has the right to determine the number of votes
required to pass the measure.
B.
All matters incurring debts shall comply with Massachusetts General
Law, Chapter 44, Section 2.
C.
The entire Council shall review the proposed annual operating budget
and capital improvement budget for the Town.
A.
The Council President shall name the five members of the School
Budget Committee to assist the Council in reviewing the proposed
School Department budget.
Committee Name Items Reviewed
School Budget Committee (Five
Council members)
School budget
B.
The School Budget Subcommittee shall issue a report to the full Council
within 30 days of the completion of the School Committee budget
hearing, and copies of the proposed school budget will be submitted to
all Council members. After submission of the annual operating budget
by the Mayor to the Council, a workshop shall be conducted in order to
review the proposed school budget with the School Department staff in
attendance.
C.
In the event that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts delays the
issuance of Cherry Sheets and this delay prohibits the Mayor from
presenting the operating budget to the Council with enough time to
follow the above-described budget review process before the Council's
approval deadline (in accordance with Massachusetts General Laws),
D.
63.Editor's Note: Schedule A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ A184-30 AGAWAM CODE § A184-32
177:478
§ A184-33. Rule 33: Inquiries and investigations.
this rule shall become subject to the discretion of the Council President,
who then shall, as he/she sees fit, schedule a workshop with the Mayor
to review the operating budget in as many meetings as it takes for the
Council to fully gather the information it deems necessary to grant final
approval of the operating budget.
The City Council shall, with an affirmative majority vote of the full
Council, conduct an inquiry, hearing or investigation of any department,
department head, and/or employees and City officials.
A.
The procedure to be taken by the City Council shall be as follows:
The City Solicitor and Associate Solicitor shall be excluded as
legal counsel from all hearings and executive sessions held by the
City Council for purposes of investigation of any City official or
department.
(1)
If requested by the City Council, any attorney whose services shall
be employed for purposes of inquiry or investigation shall be
subject to approval by the majority of the full Council.
(2)
Funds shall be used from the account entitled "City Council
Professional Consultant Services" to pay for services rendered by
the attorney employed by the City Council for said inquiry or
investigation.
(3)
All subpoenas and letter of notices to witnesses and/or subjects
of discussion shall be included in the duties of the legal counsel
employed by the City Council. It is understood that the witnesses
may waive the subpoena and voluntarily come forward.
(4)
All written notices requiring 48 hours' notice prior to any hearings
shall be hand-delivered to persons by the Police Department, as
authorized by the Administrative Assistant to the City Council.
(5)
The City Council may, by an affirmative vote of the majority of the
full Council, establish a three-person committee appointed by the
Council President to hear testimony, collect evidence and present
facts to the full Council in executive session.
(6)
The meetings of the City Council and/or subcommittee, unless
otherwise requested by the individual or department involved, may
be held in executive session. They shall also be conducted in
accordance with the Open Meeting Law, Massachusetts General
Laws Chapter 30A, § 11A1/2.
(7)
The proceedings of the meetings shall be recorded and transcribed
verbatim and provided to the full Council along with a copy of the
subcommittee findings.
(8)
B.
§ A184-32 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-33
177:479
§ A184-34. Rule 34: Suspension and amendment of these rules.
§ A184-35. Rule 35: Special permits. [Added 4-2-2018 by
TR-2018-16]
The subcommittee will report its findings and recommendations to
the full Council.
(9)
The full Council will make the final determination and shall take
any action it deems necessary.
(10)
Any provision of these rules not governed by the Town Charter may be
temporarily suspended by a vote of a majority of the City Council. The
vote on any such suspension shall be taken by roll call and entered upon
the record.
A.
These rules may be amended, or new rules adopted, by a majority
vote of all members of the City Council, provided that the proposed
amendments or new rules shall have been introduced into the record as
required herein.
B.
Pursuant to § 180-154 of the Code of the Town of Agawam and MGL
c. 40A, the City Council shall hear and decide applications for special
permits for solar energy systems. All applications shall be on the form
approved by the City Council, a copy of which is attached hereto
and incorporated herein by reference.64 Any application that the City
Council deems to be not complete and accurate shall not start the
administrative clock under MGL c. 40A, § 9, as the document filed
shall not be considered an application. The City Council may deny any
incomplete and inaccurate application and shall notify the applicant
of such denial. All applications for a special permit from the City
Council must receive site plan review from the Planning Board prior to
submitting the special permit application with the City Council.
A.
All applicants must submit three sets of plans and other supporting
materials to the City Council along with their application. All plans
and other supporting materials shall also be submitted to the City
Council in digital PDF format. All plans shall be drawn to scale, shall
show the north arrow as well as the dimensions of the lot to be built
upon, the exact size and location of all buildings, accessory buildings
and solar energy systems on the lot or to be erected on the lot, the
distance of same to the nearest existing building located on abutting
properties, and such other information and plans as may be necessary
to determine the merits of the application. The City Council reserves
the right to change the requirements for plans submitted. A copy of the
deed showing ownership of the property must be submitted with the
application. An application fee, as set forth in the Code of the Town of
Agawam, shall be submitted with each application. In addition to the
B.
64.Editor's Note: Said form is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ A184-33 AGAWAM CODE § A184-35
177:480
application fee, each applicant shall be responsible for payment of all
costs of notice publication.
The City Council shall send notices by registered or certified mail,
postage prepaid, to all "parties in interest" as defined in MGL c. 40A,
§ 9. "Parties in interest" shall include the petitioner, abutters, owners of
land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, abutters
to abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the petitioner, the
Planning Board and the Planning Board of every abutting city or town.
In addition, the following boards and departments shall be notified:
Inspection Services, Assessor, Department of Public Works,
Engineering Department, Conservation Commission, Fire Department,
Police Department, and Board of Health. The City Council shall be
responsible for determining the parties in interest who are required to
receive notice. The Assessor's Office, which maintains the applicable
tax records, shall certify to the City Council the names and addresses
of the abutters and abutters to abutters within 300 feet of the property
line of the petitioner, and such certification shall be conclusive for all
purposes. The City Council may accept a waiver of notice from any
party in interest or any successor owner of record who may not have
received a notice by mail.
C.
The City Council shall cause the notice of the time and place of the
public hearing to be published in accordance with MGL c. 40A, once in
each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than
14 days before the day of the public hearing. The City Council shall also
post such notice in a conspicuous place in the City Hall for a period of
not less than 14 days before the public hearing.
D.
The City Council shall set the time and date its public hearing within 65
days from the date of the filing of the application with the City Council
and the City Clerk. A decision shall be made within 90 days from the
date of the close of the public hearing.
E.
The public hearing shall be held at the call of the President of the City
Council, who shall convey the rules of procedure for the public hearing
and then read or direct the reading of the public hearing notice before
the public hearing. After the President opens the public hearing, the
order of business shall generally proceed as follows:
The applicant and/or their representative shall be given a
reasonable time period to present the merit of the application.
(1)
The City Council may question the applicant and/or their
representative on matters concerning the application.
(2)
The City Council shall hear next from people in favor of the request
of the applicant.
(3)
The City Council shall allow people to be recorded in name only in
favor of the request of the applicant.
(4)
F.
§ A184-35 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A184-35
177:481
Chapter A185
LOCAL OPTION STATUTES
The City Council shall hear next from people in opposition to the
request of the applicant.
(5)
The City Council shall allow people to be recorded in name only in
opposition to the request of the applicant.
(6)
The City Council shall give the applicant a reasonable opportunity
to answer any questions raised regarding the merit of the
application.
(7)
The President will close the public hearing and announce the right
of appeal pursuant to MGL c. 40A, § 17, within 20 days after the
decision of the City Council has been filed with the City Clerk.
(8)
The City Council may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations,
both of time and use in the issuance of a special permit. The approval
of a special permit shall require a 2/3 vote by the City Council.
G.
The City Council shall cause to be made a detailed record of its
proceedings, showing the motions properly before the City Council and
the vote of each member on each motion, and setting forth clearly the
reason or reasons for its decision. A draft of the decision by the City
Council shall be written by the President or, in his/her absence, by
the Vice President, except when the President shall designate another
member of the City Council to write the draft of the decision.
H.
An applicant may withdraw their application from further consideration
by the City Council at any time after the filing of the application and
prior to the publication of the notice of a public hearing. Applications
withdrawn in this time period will be withdrawn without prejudice or
time penalty. Any application withdrawn after the publication of the
public hearing notice may be granted without prejudice only with the
approval of 2/3 vote of the City Council.
I.
If this rule is inconsistent with the zoning provisions of the Code of the
Town of Agawam or MGL c. 40A, the zoning provisions of the Code of
the Town of Agawam and/or MGL c. 40A shall take precedence.
J.
§ A184-35 AGAWAM CODE § A185-1
177:482
§ A185-1. List of local option statutes.
Local
Option
Statutes
Accepted
or
Rejected
by
the
Town
of
Agawam
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
382 1871 8-29-1874 Accepted Betterments
386 1890 4-6-1891 Accepted Ballots
431 1888 4-7-1890 Accepted Superintendent of
Schools
347 1890 4-6-1891 Accepted To have public
libraries
417 1893 4-2-1894 Accepted Precinct voting
353 1905 7-28-1905 Accepted Providing a water
supply
560 1907 4-4-1910 Accepted Town election date
560, § 381 1907 10-25-1910Accepted Precinct voting
503 1912 11-5-1912 Accepted Pensioning laborers
807 1913 11-4-1913 Accepted Workmen's
compensation
807 1913 3-2-1914 Accepted Workmen's
compensation
487 1913 1914 No action
taken
Promotion of call
men
494 1911 3-2-1914 Accepted 8-hour day
217 1914 11-3-1914 Accepted Vacations for
workers
688 1914 11-3-1914 Accepted Saturday half
holiday
790 1914 11-3-1914 Accepted Abolition — party
enrollment — primaries
§ A185-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A185-1
177:483
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
1916, c.
104
11-7-1916 Accepted New Year's Day a
legal holiday
41,
§ 25A
11-7-1916 Accepted Appointment of
Assistant Assessors
311G 1919 11-4-1919 Accepted Continuation
schools
32, Art.
16
3-7-1917 Accepted Fire Department of
towns
§§ 33, 34
and 35
516 1922 3-5-1923 Accepted Accounting system
94,
§ 120
3-7-1923 Accepted Licensing
slaughterhouses
41,
§§ 73-81
371 1926 12-3-1926 Accepted Railroad securities
3-9-1929 Accepted Adopt a Board of
Survey
118 1938 5-9-1938 Accepted Payment of certain
bills on account of
deaths and injuries
suffered by certain
town officers
54,
§ 103A
227 1938 5-9-1938 Accepted
Rejected
Payment of
annuities to the
widows of Rocco
Cascella and C.B.
Jones Absentee
voting
32,
§ 1-28
11-5-1946 Accepted Contributory
retirement system
632 1955 11-8-1955 Accepted Establish
representative town
government by
limiting town
meetings
§ A185-1 AGAWAM CODE § A185-1
177:484
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
33, § 59 10-22-1956Accepted Town employees
shall not lose pay or
vacation State
Militia or during an
annual tour of duty
not exceeding 15
days as a member
of the reserve
component of the
Armed Forces of the
United States
48,
§ 58B
2-18-1957 Accepted 48-hour week for
permanent fire
fighters
41,
§ 19B
2-18-1957 Accepted Tenure of office of
Town Clerk
32B 730 1956 2-17-1958 Accepted Group insurance
31, § 47 2-17-1958 Accepted Provisions
regarding civil
service
93, § 3 1957 2-17-1958 Accepted Board of Selectmen
constitute Sewer
Commission
93 1957 3-17-1958 Accepted Operating and
establishing a
system of sewerage
and sewage
disposal
332 1958 3-7-1959 Accepted Supervision of
plumbing
241 1960 11-8-1960 Accepted Chief of Fire
Department under
Civil Service Laws
297 1960 11-8-1960 Accepted Holding of town
elections
56 1961 3-4-1961 Accepted Veterans Agent in
Western Hampden
Veterans Service
District
§ A185-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A185-1
177:485
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
286 1967 3-16-1968 Accepted Time off or pay for
police officers in
certain criminal
cases
78,
§ 19A
3-8-1969 Library
appropriation
41,
§ 108
3-8-1969 Accepted Fixing
compensation for
town elected offices
44, § 65 3-8-1969 Accepted Vacation pay,
advances to
employees
90,
§ 20C
3-8-1969 Accepted Parking of motor
vehicles
32,
§ 58C
400 1967 3-8-1969 Rejected Retirement
allowances for
police and fire
41,
§ 108I
3-13-1971 Accepted A member of the
Police Department
assigned to photo
or fingerprint
identification work
shall, after 1 year's
service in such
assignment,
receive, in addition
to his annual salary,
$600. per year
41,
§ 108L
3-13-1971 Accepted Establishing a
career incentive
pay program for the
Police Department
486 1971 11-16-1971Accepted Licensing Beano
41,
§ 100B
1971 3-11-1972 Accepted Indemnification of
retired police
officers and fire
fighters
1974, C.
729
9-3-1974 Accepted Recreation
Department
establish Revolving
Fund
§ A185-1 AGAWAM CODE § A185-1
177:486
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
40, § 21 11-10-1975Accepted No parking in fire
lanes of private
ways
140,
§§ 58
and 59
11-10-1975Accepted Fines for license
holders
40, § 21
§ 21
11-10-1975Accepted
Special
Act
11-8-1976 Accepted Remove Police
Chief from civil
service
83, as
amended
40,
§ 22D
9-13-1978
11-20-1978
Accepted
Accepted
Sewers, drains and
sidewalks Removal
of vehicles parked
in violation of law
377 1978 1-16-1979 Rejected Granting of
seasonal licenses
for sale of alcoholic
beverages to be
drunk on the
premises
148,
§ 26C
6-4-1979 Accepted Requiring
installation of
automatic smoke or
heat detectors
40, § 8D 7-2-1979 Accepted Establishing
Historical
Commission
32B,
§ 9A
870 1977 9-4-1979 Accepted
138,
§ 17A
6-2-1980 Rejected
(referred
to
Ordinance
Committee)
40, § 81 9-17-1980 Accepted Energy Resource
Commission
1980, C.
416, § 2
1-7-1981 Accepted Qualifications of
certain Assessors
§ A185-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A185-1
177:487
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
1974, C.
729
11-4-1981 Accepted Park and
Recreation
revolving fund
($4,000.)
90,
§ 20A1/2
12-21-1981Accepted Certain changes in
the laws relative to
parking of motor
vehicles
1981, C.
339
4-20-1982 Adopted Authorizing cities
and towns to
allocate certain
anticipated receipts
1981, C.
743
6-21-1982 Accepted Exemption for
surviving spouse
and minor child,
persons over 70
138,
§ 12B
9-7-1982 Accepted Nudity in premises
licensed to sell
alcoholic beverages
1982, C.
296
2-22-1983 Accepted Authorize cities and
towns to
compensate School
Committee
members
40, § 56 5-2-1983 Adopted Residential factor of
1 for fiscal year
1983
40, § 56 1-17-1984 Accepted Adopt residential
factor open space
property
1983, C.
348
4-2-1984 Accepted Licensing and
keeping of dogs
60A, § 1 5-21-1984 Accepted Motor vehicle
excise tax
exemption for
former POW's
40, § 56 11-6-1985 Accepted Residential factor
property taxed at
same rate
188,
§ 13
1985 1-21-1986 Accepted Accept professional
development grants
§ A185-1 AGAWAM CODE § A185-1
177:488
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
71, § 52 8-4-1986 Accepted Compensation to
School Committee
members
1986, C.
73
9-17-1986 Accepted Enabling the town
to provide relief
from the impact of
revaluation to
persons 70 years
old
32B,
§ 10A
9-17-1986 Accepted Extending dental
insurance benefits
to employees and
retirees
32B,
§ 11A
9-17-1986 Accepted Extending optional
life insurance to
active employees
32B,
§ 16
9-17-1986 Accepted Health insurance
44,
§ 53D
63 1986 12-15-1986Accepted Increase Park and
Recreation
revolving fund to
$10,000
1986, C.
194
6-15-1987 Accepted Authorizing a city
or town to establish
a scholarship fund
1986, C.
705
12-21-1987Accepted Life insurance
coverage for town
employees and
retired employees;
increase limit to
$5,000
40, § 56 8-1-1988 Adopted Residential factor of
1 and all property
be taxed at same
rate
40, § 56 11-21-1988Adopted Residential factor of
1 and all property
be taxed at same
rate for FY 1989
41, § 91 1-17-1989 Accepted Constables
§ A185-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A185-1
177:489
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
140,
§ 147A
8-7-1989 Accepted Empowered to
enact bylaws and
ordinances relative
to the regulation of
dogs
40, § 56 8-7-1989 Adopted Residential factor of
82.6951 be utilized
for FY 1990
1989, C.
213
10-16-1989Accepted Authorizing cities
and towns to
penalize those who
abandon motor
vehicles
148,
§ 26G
4-17-1990 Accepted Install automatic
sprinklers in new
buildings of more
than 7,500 gross
square feet in
nonresidential
buildings
148,
§ 26I
4-17-1990 Accepted Installation of
automatic
sprinklers in
buildings hereafter
constructed or
rehabilitated for
residence and
containing not
fewer than 4
dwelling units
C. 653,
§ 40, of
Acts of
1989
6-4-1990 Accepted Concerning
assessment of
buildings erected
during the period of
January 2 through
June 30
§ A185-1 AGAWAM CODE § A185-1
177:490
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
32,
§ 22D
12-3-1990 Accepted Wellness program,
entrance and inservice
physical
fitness standards
for applicable police
and fire personnel,
and the repeal of
the CAP of $30,000
in conjunction with
the Hampden
County Retirement
Board
40,
§ 39J1/2
12-17-1990Accepted
or town
shall
charge
for
As of 1-1-1991, no
city water on a
descending unit
rate basis
30B,
§ 12(b)
2-19-1991 Accepted Authorizing the
chief procurement
officer to solicit and
award any and all
contracts for any
term not to exceed
5 years
1990, C.
291
4-1-1991 Accepted Participation in
enhanced 911
emergency
telephone system
71,
§ 20A
2-18-1992 Accepted Creation of an
instructional trust
fund account
40, § 56 9-21-1992 Accepted Adopting a
residential factor of
.941375
59, § 5 5-3-1993 Accepted Raising tax
exemption for
veteran service
organizations
59, § 5 5-3-1993 Accepted Allowing tax
exemption for
veteran service
organizations
§ A185-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A185-1
177:491
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
41,
§ 108L
12-20-1993Accepted "Quinn Bill"
entitling members
of the bargaining
unit to receive
police career
incentive pay
benefits
44,
§ 53F1/2
2-7-1994 Establishing an
enterprise fund for
operation of golf
course
138,
§ 12
C. 481 1993 6-6-1994 Accepted Allowing common
victualers licensed
to sell wine and
malt beverages to
also sell liqueurs
and cordials
40,
§§ 13A
and 13C
10-3-1994 Accepted Allowing the town
to establish funds to
pay workers'
compensation
claims
41, § 19J 4-6-1998 Approved Increase annual
stipend for the
Clerk of the Board
of Registrars
32, § 9D 6-1-1998 Approved Pay one-half the
amount of the
premium to be paid
by the surviving
spouse of an
insured or retired
employee for health
insurance
§ A185-1 AGAWAM CODE § A185-1
177:492
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
32,
§ 103H
12-6-1999 Accepted Granting
noncontributing
retirees cost of
living adjustments
in the same amount
and at the same
time that such
adjustments are
granted to
contributory
retirees
170 1999 3-8-2000 Accepted Allowing additional
compensation of a
town clerk or
municipal collector
or treasurer upon
certification
32B,
§ 7A;
32B,
§ 9E
6-18-2001 Accepted Authorizing the
Town to pay more
than 50% of an
active or retired
insured employee's
total monthly cost
for health insurance
44B,
§§ 3
through
7
9-4-2001 Accepted To establish a
Community
Preservation Fund
40, § 8J 4-20-2004 Accepted Establish a
Commission on
Disability
39,
§ 23D
11-8-2006 Accepted Attendance
requirements for
members of
municipal boards
43D 3-24-2008 Accepted Expediting
permitting process
(Priorty
Development Sites)
32B,
§ 20
8-6-2012 Accepted Other Post
Employment
Benefits Liability
Trust Fund
§ A185-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § A185-1
177:493
MGL
Chapter
Amended
by Chapter
Of the
Acts of
Date of
Action
Result
of
Action Topic
40, § 5B,
paragraph
4
2-20-2018 Accepted Dedication of
energy revenues to
the Energy
Management
Project Stabilization
Fund
44,
§ 53F3/4
6-18-2018 Accepted Establish a PEG
Access and Cable
Related Fund
Chapter A186
OVERFLOW TRASH BAG REVOLVING FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Departmental revolving funds — See Ch. 33.
§ A186-1. Fund name; authorized use.
There shall be a separate fund called the "Overflow Trash Bag Revolving
Fund" authorized for use by the Department of Public Works.
§ A186-2. Revenues.
The Town Auditor shall establish the Overflow Trash Bag Revolving Fund
as a separate account and credit to the fund all of the receipts from
the purchase of the overflow trash bags charged and received by the
Department of Public Works in connection with the Department of Public
Works' system of collecting and disposing of trash.
§ A186-3. Purposes and expenditures.
During each fiscal year, the Department of Public Works may incur liabilities
against and spend monies from the Overflow Trash Bag Revolving Fund
for the manufacturing, collection, disposal, and reordering cost of overflow
trash bags in connection with the Department of Public Works' system of
collecting and disposing of trash.
§ A186-4. When effective.
The Overflow Trash Bag Revolving Fund shall operate for fiscal years that
begin on or after July 1, 2017, and thereafter.
Chapter DL
§ A185-1 AGAWAM CODE § A186-4
177:494
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TR-91-2 2-4-1991 Veterans Council Ch. 61
TR-91-19 4-16-1991 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TOR-91-8 9-3-1991 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-91-12 10-21-1991 Burglar alarms Ch. 69, Art. II
TO-91-21 11-5-1991 Charter amendment § 4-1, § 4-2, § 4-5
TOR-91-11 11-6-1991 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 175
TR-91-50 12-16-1991 Vehicles and traffic NCM
TR-92-5 2-18-1992 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TOR-92-1 3-2-1992 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-92-3 3-2-1992 Cable Television
Advisory Commission
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2018-12
TOR-92-5 3-2-1992 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2011-2
3-19-1992 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TOR-92-6 4-21-1992 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 175
TR-92-7 4-21-1992 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TOR-92-9 5-4-1992 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 155
TOR-92-7 6-1-1992 Tag sales Ch. 161
TOR-92-12 6-15-1992 Funds amendment Superseded by
TOR-92-16
TR-92-30 6-15-1992 Enabling amendment NCM
6-18-1992 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TR-92-37 7-6-1992 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TR-92-53 9-21-1992 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TR-92-48 10-5-1992 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
§ A186-4 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § DL-1
177:495
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TR-92-61 11-4-1992 Support of State Bill No.
5610
NCM
TOR-92-16 11-16-1992 Funds amendment Ch. 32
TOR-92-17 1-19-1993 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-93-1 5-3-1993 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2011-2
TR-93-13 5-3-1993 Sewer connection fees NCM
TR-93-15 5-3-1993 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TR-93-20 5-17-1993 Enabling legislation NCM
TR-93-15 5-3-1993 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TOR-93-2 8-9-1993 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
11-10-1993 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TR-93-55 12-20-1993 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TOR-93-6 2-7-1994 Municipal Golf
Commission
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.1
TOR-94-1 3-21-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-94-2 3-7-1994 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-94-3 3-7-1994 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-94-4 3-21-1994 Town officers
amendment
Ch. 3, Art. IV
TOR-94-5 5-2-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TR-93-52 5-2-1994 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TR-94-16 6-6-1994 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TOR-94-6 8-1-1994 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-94-6(A)(B7)-5-1994 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-94-6(C) 7-5-1994 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TR-94-24 9-21-1994 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TR-94-22 10-3-1994 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TOR-94-7 11-9-1994 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-94-8 11-9-1994 Trespassing and
loitering in schools
Ch. 140
TOR-94-9 1-3-1995 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-94-11 1-3-1995 Council on Aging
amendment
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-4
§ DL-1 AGAWAM CODE § DL-1
177:496
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TOR-95-3 3-20-1995 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TR-95-13 4-18-1995 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TOR-95-5 8-7-1995 Dogs and other animals
amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2011-2
TOR-95-7 7-24-1995 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-95-8 8-7-1995 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-95-10 3-6-1996 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 155
TOR-96-2 5-6-1996 Fees amendment;
personnel amendment
Ch. 103; Ch. 49
TOR-96-4 6-3-1996 Fees amendment;
personnel amendment
Ch. 103; Ch. 49
TR-96-16 6-3-1996 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TOR-96-5 6-17-1996 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-96-7 11-6-1996 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
12-5-1996 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TR-97-1 1-21-1997 Amusement devices
permits
Ch. 75, Editor's Note
only
TOR-96-9 2-3-1997 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 155
TOR-97-2 5-2-1997 Amusements
amendment
Ch. 75
TOR-97-3 4-28-1997 Mayor's salary NCM
TOR-97-7 5-2-1997 City Councillors' salary NCM
TR-97-22 6-16-1997 Authorization of salary
increase for School
Committee
NCM
TOR-97-8 9-20-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-97-9 9-2-1997 Town Council Clerk's
salary
NCM
9-18-1997 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TOR-97-10 10-20-1997 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-97-12 12-1-1997 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-97-13 3-2-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
§ DL-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § DL-1
177:497
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TR-98-7 3-16-1998 Approval of sewer and
water connection fees
NCM
TR-98-10 4-6-1998 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TOR-98-2 5-4-1998 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-983 5-18-1998 Secondhand motor
vehicles amendment
Ch. 114, Art. II
TR-98-20 6-1-1998 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TOR-98-4 8-3-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-98-5 1-21-1999 Secondhand motor
vehicles amendment
Ch. 114, Art. II
TOR-98-6 9-21-1998 Veterans Council
amendment
Ch. 61
TOR-98-7 10-5-1998 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TR-98-37 12-21-1998 Town Council regulation
amendment
NCM
TOR-98-8 1-19-1999 Street acceptance
amendment
Ch. 155, Art. III
TOR-99-1 5-17-1999 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 82
TR-99-13 5-17-1999 Authorization of salary
increase for School
Committee
NCM
TOR-99-2 6-21-1999 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-99-3 6-21-1999 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TR-99-18 6-21-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NCM
TOR-99-4 9-7-1999 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 175
TOR-99-5 10-6-1999 Board of Health
amendment
Ch. 35
TR-99-30 10-6-1999 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
NCM
TOR-99-6 11-15-1999 Smoking in public
places
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2018-6
TR-99-33 12-6-1999 Accepting General Law Ch. A185
TOR-99-7 12-20-1999 Municipal Golf
Commission amendment
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.1
§ DL-1 AGAWAM CODE § DL-1
177:498
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TR-99-28 12-20-1999 Council rules and
regulations
Ch. A184
TOR-99-9 1-18-2000 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-99-10 2-7-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2000-1 3-8-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TR-2000-13 3-8-2000 Acceptance of MGL c.
190; additional
compensation to Clerk
for certification
Ch. A185
TOR-2000-3 3-20-2000 Sister City Commission Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.2
TR-2000-12 3-20-2000 City Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TOR-2000-5 7-5-2000 Smoking in public
places amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2018-6
TOR-2000-6 6-5-2000 Smoking in public
places amendment
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2018-6
TOR-2000-7 10-2-2000 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 82
TOR-2000-9 9-20-2000 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2000-10 9-20-2000 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TR-2000-58 2-14-2001 Charter amendment § 2-6
TOR-2001-1 2-20-2001 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
3-15-2001 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TR-2001-24 6-18-2001 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TR-2001-28 6-18-2001 Elections and precincts
amendment
Ch. 3, Art. I
TR-2001-36 9-4-2001 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TOR-2001-3 9-17-2001 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2001-5 11-7-1001 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2001-6 12-17-2001 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2001-7 3-18-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TR-2002-15 5-20-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TR-2002-18 7-1-2002 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2002-2 9-3-2002 Parking amendment Ch. 169
§ DL-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § DL-1
177:499
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TR-2002-19 9-18-2002 Sewer use rates Ch. 175
TOR-2002-4 11-6-2002 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2002-5 12-2-2002 General provisions
amendment
Ch. 1
TR-2002-53 12-2-2002 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2002-8 1-21-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2002-9 1-6-2003 Community Preservation
Act Committee
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.3
TR-2003-9 3-17-2003 Dedication of land NCM
TOR-2003-2 5-5-2003 Gasoline service stations Ch. 111
TOR-2003-3 4-14-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2003-4 4-14-2003 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TR-2003-33 10-20-2003 Fund established NCM
3-4-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TOR-2004-1 4-5-2004 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2004-2 2-17-2004 Parks and Recreation
Department amendment
Ch. 45
TOR-2004-3 8-2-2004 Secondhand motor
vehicles amendment
Ch. 114, Art. II
TOR-2004-4 7-6-2004 Secondhand motor
vehicles amendment
Ch. 114, Art. II
TOR-2004-5 9-7-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2004-7 9-7-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2004-8 7-6-2004 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 169
TOR-2004-9 9-7-2004 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2004-10 9-7-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2004-11 9-7-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2004-13 10-18-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 103
10-28-2004 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TOR-2004-15 11-3-2004 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2004-17 11-15-2004 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2004-18 1-18-2005 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TR-2004-9 4-20-2004 Acceptance of General
Laws
Ch. A185
§ DL-1 AGAWAM CODE § DL-1
177:500
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TR-2004-32 9-20-2004 Initiation of zoning
amendment
NCM
TOR-2005-1 6-6-2005 Unregistered vehicles
amendment
Ch. 172
TOR-2005-2 11-21-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2005-3 6-6-2005 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 155
TOR-2005-4 6-6-2005 Weights and measures:
noncriminal disposition
of violations
Ch. 177, Art. I
TOR-2005-6 6-6-2005 Dumping amendment Ch. 109, Art. II
TOR-2005-8 6-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2005-11 12-5-2005 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
1-16-2006 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TOR-2005-12 2-6-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2006-1 3-20-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TR-2006-10 3-20-2006 Restrictions on certain
property acquired by
Town
NCM
TR-2006-9 4-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2006-2 5-15-2006 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 175
TR-2006-19 5-15-2006 Adoption of Community
Preservation Plan
NCM
TR-2006-22 6-5-2006 Approval of water use
rates
See Ch. 175
TR-2006-23 6-5-2006 Approval of water
connection and service
charges
See Ch. 175
TOR-2006-6 10-5-2006 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2006-8 10-5-2006 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TR-2006-37 11-8-2006 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TOR-2006-9 12-4-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TR-2006-46 12-4-2006 Establishment of
revolving fund for
noncriminal Fire Code
violation revenues
NCM
§ DL-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § DL-1
177:501
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TOR-2006-10 12-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2006-11 12-18-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2006-12 12-4-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2006-14 11-20-2006 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2006-15 12-18-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2006-16 12-18-2006 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2007-1 3-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2007-2 3-19-2007 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2007-3 6-18-2007 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2007-4 5-21-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2007-6 6-18-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
11-19-2007 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2007-7 10-1-2007 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2007-9 10-1-2007 Sale or gifts of tobacco
products
Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2018-6
TOR-2007-10 11-19-2007 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TR-2008-5 3-24-2008 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TR-2008-29 6-16-2008 Approval of sewer use
rates
See Ch. 175
TR-2008-50 9-17-2008 Approval of sewer
connection and service
charges
See Ch. 175
9-18-2008 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
TR-2008-2 11-5-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2008-4 11-17-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2008-5 12-1-2008 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 155
TR-2009-12 5-12-2009 Approval of water use
rates
See Ch. 175
TR-2009-13 5-4-2009 Approval of water
connection and service
charges
See Ch. 175
TOR-2008-6 6-15-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2009-2 5-4-2009 Agawam Agricultural
Commission
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.4
§ DL-1 AGAWAM CODE § DL-1
177:502
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TOR-2009-3 6-1-2009 Veterans Council
amendment
Ch. 61
TR-2009-22 7-27-2009 Town Council rules and
regulations amendment
NCM
TOR-2009-4 9-8-2009 Agawam Energy
Commission
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.5
TOR-2009-5 9-8-2009 Town officers
amendment
Ch. 3, Art. IV
TOR-2009-6 12-9-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2009-7 12-21-2009 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2010-1 6-7-2010 Petition to the General
Court to adopt
legislation regarding
drag racing
NCM
TR-2010-32 6-21-2010 Intermunicipal
agreement
NCM
TOR-2010-5 9-20-2010 Water and sewers
amendment
Ch. 175
TOR-2010-6 10-4-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2010-7 10-4-2010 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TR-2011-22 4-19-2011 Approval of
conservation restrictions
NCM
TOR-2011-2 6-4-2011 Dogs and other animals Repealed by Ord. No.
TOR-2016-5
TR-2011-62 12-5-2011 Approval of sewer use
rates
See Ch. 175
TR-2012-38 8-6-2012 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TOR-2012-3 11-7-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TR-2013-27 5-6-2013 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Superseded by
TR-2015-16
TOR-2013-2 5-20-2013 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2013-4 6-3-2013 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2013-5 6-18-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2013-6 8-12-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2013-7 9-16-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
9-19-2013 Subdivision of land
amendment
Ch. 159
§ DL-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § DL-1
177:503
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TR-2014-16 4-22-2014 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Superseded by
TR-2015-16
TOR-2014-1 5-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2014-2 5-5-2014 Agawam Housing
Committee
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.6
TOR-2014-3 9-2-2014 Pawnbrokers, junk
dealers and secondhand
dealers
Ch. 114, Art. I
TOR-2014-4 6-2-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR 2014-6 10-6-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2014-7 10-20-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2014-8 10-20-2014 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2014-9 11-5-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2015-1 3-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2015-3 4-6-2015 Fire alarm equipment
amendment; fees
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. I; Ch. 103
TOR-2015-4 4-21-2015 Criminal record
background checks
Ch. 91
TR-2015-16 4-21-2015 Council rules and
regulations amendment
Ch. A184
TOR-2015-6 6-15-2015 Blighted properties Ch. 78
TOR-2015-8 10-5-2015 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2015-9 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2016-1 3-21-2016 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2016-2 5-16-2016 Agawam Housing
Committee amendment
Ch. 3, Art. III, § 3-8.6
TR-2016-26 5-16-2016 Petition to General
Court to enact special
legislation changing
process to fill vacancies
on the School
Committee
NCM
TOR-2016-3 11-9-2016 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2016-4 11-9-2016 Fees amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2016-5 11-21-2016 Dogs and other animals Ch. 96
TR-2016-64 12-5-2016 Adoption of Stretch
Energy Code
See Ch. 82, Art. II
§ DL-1 AGAWAM CODE § DL-1
177:504
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TOR-2017-2 3-6-2017 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2017-4 4-3-2017 Fees Ch. 103
TOR-2017-5 4-18-2017 Overflow Trash Bag
Revolving Fund
Ch. A186
TOR-2017-6 6-19-2017 Departmental revolving
funds
Ch. 33
TOR-2017-8 8-7-2017 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2017-9 9-18-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
Referendum 11-7-2017 Charter amendment § 4-6
TOR-2017-12 12-4-2017 Personnel amendment Ch. 49
TR-2018-11 2-20-2018 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TOR-2017-13 4-2-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2018-1 3-19-2018 Personnel Amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2018-2 4-2-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 103
TR-2018-16 4-2-2018 Council Rules and
Regulations Amendment
Ch. A184
TOR-2018-3 5-7-2018 Personnel Amendment Ch. 49
TOR-2018-4 5-7-2018 Departmental Revolving
Funds Amendment
Ch. 33
TOR-2018-6 7-9-2018 Smoking and Tobacco
Products
Ch. 149
TOR-2018-7 6-4-2018 Fees Amendment Ch. 103
TOR-2018-8 6-18-2018 Personnel Amendment Ch. 49
TR-2018-47 6-18-2018 Acceptance of General
Law
Ch. A185
TOR-2018-9 7-9-2018 Departmental Revolving
Funds Amendment
Ch. 33
TOR-2018-11 9-5-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2018-12 9-17-2018 Cable Television
Advisory Commission
Ch. 12
TOR-2018-13 11-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2018-14 11-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2018-15 11-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 180
TOR-2018-16 11-19-2018 Zoning Amendment Ch. 180
1-17-2019 Subdivision of Land
Amendment
Ch. 159
§ DL-1 WEIGHTS AND MEASURES § DL-1
177:505
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
TOR-2018-17 1-22-2019 Personnel Amendment Ch. 49
§ DL-1 AGAWAM CODE § DL-1
177:506

ZONING
180 Attachment 4
Appendix B
Table of Dimension Regulations
[Added 11-19-2018 by TOR-2018-13]
Dimensions
Districts
Minimum
Lot Area
(square feet)
Minimum
Frontage
(feet)
Minimum
Front Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Stories Corner Lots
Maximum
Lot
Coverage by
Buildings
(%)
RA1 17,000 125 35 151
252
35 2.5 30 30
RA2 15,000 110 303
154
205
356
2.5 25 40
RA3 2 acres 150 40 40 40 35 2 None 40
RA47
7 acres None 40 40 40 35 2 None See8
RA5 10 acres 150 509
5010 5011 35 2 — —
RA6 10 acres 150 509
5010 5011 35 2 — —
RB12 12,000 100 3013 1514 2015 3516 2.5 20 40
AG 20,000 120 3517 15 20 356
2.5 25 None
BA18 None 2019 35 See State
Building
Code
25 45 3 10 50
BB18 10,000 100 35 1020 35 45 3 1021 50
BB Retail
Shopping
Center22
5 acres 100 100 100 100 None 1 None 35
1A 40,000 100 40 25 25 40 2 40 50
1B23 1 acre24 10025 75 25 25 40 2 25 —
NOTES:
1 Detached garages or accessory buildings shall be placed at least five feet from a side lot line if located more than 65 feet from a street line.
2 A one-story accessory building shall be placed at least five feet from the rear lot line. A one-and-one-half-story accessory building shall be placed at least 10
feet from the rear lot line.
3 No part of any garage or other accessory building situated within 65 feet of any street line shall extend within 15 feet of any lot line intersecting such street
which serves as a side lot line located in any residence district or within 15 feet of any street line.
4 Detached garages or accessory buildings shall be placed at least five feet from the side lot line if located more than 65 feet from a street line.
5 One-story accessory buildings shall be placed at least five feet from the rear lot line, and one-and-one-half-story accessory buildings shall be placed at least
10 feet from the rear lot line.
180 Attachment 4:1 05 - 01 - 2019
AGAWAM CODE
6 Other buildings such as schools, telephone exchanges, community center buildings, colleges, public libraries or museums, churches or other places of
worship, parish houses and Sunday school buildings shall not exceed 50 feet in height. Chimneys, steeples and flag or radio poles are exempt from the height
provision of this section. Accessory buildings or structures, including private garages, shall not exceed 17 feet in height for a one-story building. A one-andone-half-story accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
7 There shall be a landscaped strip of not less than 15 feet in width appropriately planted with lawn, trees and shrubs adjacent and parallel to all property lines
of the site.
8 Development shall contain not more than 16 family dwelling units per acre of lot area. Not more than 12 dwelling units may be constructed in each building.
9 The minimum front yard (setback) shall be 25 feet from the interior paved way. The minimum front yard (setback) shall be 50 feet where it abuts a public
way only.
10 The side yard and rear yard requirements shall be 50 feet inclusive of a landscaped buffer strip of not less than 15 feet and shall pertain only to the periphery
of the development. Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Planning Board.
11 The side yard and rear yard requirements shall be 50 feet inclusive of a landscaped buffer strip of not less than 15 feet and shall pertain only to the periphery
of the development. Additional buffering may be required in sensitive areas at the discretion of the Planning Board.
12 All four-family buildings or structures used for residential purposes shall be erected on a parcel of land containing not less than one acre in area and having
not less than 150 feet of frontage on a street.
13 No part of any building or other structure shall be erected or altered so as to be nearer to the street line of any street on which it faces than the nearest
building on either side thereof facing on the same street and within the same block and zoning district, but in no case need the required setback be greater
than 30 feet. Where the alignment of the building is not controlled by the preceding paragraph, no part of any building shall be placed within 20 feet of the
street line. No part of any garage, stable or other accessory building situated within 65 feet of any street line shall extend within 15 feet of any lot line
intersecting such street which serves as a side lot line located in any residence district or within 15 feet of any street line.
14 There shall be a side yard between a building and each side lot line. For a building of four stories or over 45 feet in height, it shall be not less than 25 feet in
width in its least dimension; for a building of three stories or over 35 feet in height, it shall be not less than 20 feet wide in its least dimension; for one-, oneand-one-half-, two- or two-and-one-half-story buildings, the side year shall be not less than 15 feet wide in its least dimension.
15 One-story accessory buildings shall be placed at least five feet from the rear lot line, and one-and-one-half- or two-story accessory buildings shall be placed
not less than 10 feet from the rear lot line.
16 Accessory buildings or structures, including private garages, shall not exceed 17 feet in height for a one- or one-and-one-half-story building. A two-story
accessory building shall not exceed 25 feet in height.
17 All buildings other than those for the sale of farm products and dwellings with or without garages shall be at least 100 feet from the street line.
18 A building devoted in whole or in part to residence shall comply with the requirements for Residence B Districts.
19 The Town of Agawam does not have a minimum frontage requirement in Business A. Minimum requirements are found in MGL c. 41, § 81L.
20 Side yard requirements shall be a minimum of 10 feet, except adjacent to residential or agricultural zones, at which time it would be 15 feet.
21 Fifteen feet adjacent to residential or agricultural zones.
22 See Chapter 180, § 180-48I, for further requirements.
23 Except for office, professional or administrative buildings, no buildings shall be less than 5,000 square feet in area.
24 Lots of less than one acre are allowed with the Board of Appeals’ approval if shown on a previously filed plan and said lot does not abut an additional parcel
owned by the same owner which if combined would meet with the one-acre requirement.
25 This frontage requirement shall not apply to lots established by a deed or plan recorded in the Hampden County Registry of Deeds prior to the first notice of
the public hearing on this subsection amendment (March 3, 1994) if, and only if, said parcel of land was not held in common ownership with sufficient
adjoining parcels of land on the date of the first notice of public hearing on this subsection amendment (March 3, 1994) to satisfy, in combination, the
required 100 feet of frontage on a street line.
180 Attachment 4:2 05 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
180 Attachment 3
Appendix A
Table of Use Regulations
[Added 11-19-2018 by TOR-2018-13]
Districts
Principal Use RA1 RA2 RA3 RA4 RA5 RA6 RB AG BA BB IA IB O
Residential Uses
Single-family dwelling Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y Y
1 N
2 N
2 NA
Two-family dwelling N N N N Y Y Y N Y Y
1 N
2 N
2 NA
Apartment/garden apartment with
not more than 8 dwelling units
N N Y N N N N N N N N N NA
Multifamily dwelling with not
more than 4 dwelling units
N N Y N N N Y N Y Y
1 N N NA
Boardinghouse N Y
3 N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y NA
Facilitated and independent senior
living
N N N N N N SP SP SP SP SP SP NA
Second housekeeping unit N V N N N N Y V Y Y Y
1 Y
1 NA
Home occupation Y
4 Y
5 N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y NA
Lodging house N N N N N N Y N Y Y N N NA
Age-restricted housing N N N N Y N N N N N N N NA
Low-density multifamily
community
N N N N N Y N N N N N N NA
Exempt and Institutional Uses
Use of land or structures for
religious purposes
Y Y Y Y N N Y Y Y Y Y Y NA
Adult day-care facility SP SP SP SP N N SP SP SP SP SP SP NA
Child-care facility Y Y N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y NA
Use of land for the primary
purpose of agriculture,
horticulture, floriculture, or
viticulture on a parcel of more
than 5 acres in area
Y Y N N N N Y Y Y Y Y Y NA
180 Attachment 3:1 05 - 01 - 2019
AGAWAM CODE
Principal Use RA1 RA2 RA3 RA4 RA5 RA6 RB AG BA BB IA IB
O
Facilities for the sale of produce
and wine and dairy products,
provided that during the months
of June, July, August and
September of every year, or
during the harvest season of the
primary crop, the majority of such
products for sale, based on either
gross sales dollars or volume,
have been produced by the owner
of the land containing more than
5 acres in area on which the
facility is located
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Cemeteries
6
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Municipal facilities
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Airport
7
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Hospitals/sanitariums/charitable
institutions
8
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Commercial Uses
Nonexempt agricultural use
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N NA
Nonexempt farm stand for
wholesale or retail sale of
products
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N NA
Nonexempt educational use
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N NA
Animal clinic
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Animal hospital
N
N
N
N
N
N
N SP SP SP SP SP NA
Animal kennel
9
N
N
N
N
N
N
N SP SP SP SP SP NA
Private club or lodge
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
N
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Nursing or convalescent home10
N
N
N
N
N
N
N SP SP SP SP SP NA
Funeral home
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Motel or hotel
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Retail stores and services not
elsewhere set forth
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Motor vehicle sales and rental
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y NA
Motor vehicle body repair
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Y
Y
Y
Y NA
Restaurant, drive-in and drivethrough
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N SP SP SP SP NA
180 Attachment 3:
2 05 - 01 - 2019
ZONING
Principal Use RA1 RA2 RA3 RA4 RA5 RA6 RB AG BA BB IA IB O
Business or professional office,
including medical
N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y NA
Bank, financial agency N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y NA
Roller-skating rink N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y NA
Bowling alleys, arcades,
amusement parks
N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y NA
Golf course11 N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y Y NA
Service establishment N N N N N N N N Y Y Y Y NA
Adult entertainment establishment N N N N N N N N SP SP SP SP NA
Wireless communications
facilities12
N N N N N N N N N N N N SP
Other Outdoor Commercial
Recreation
Retail shopping centers13 N N N N N N N N N SP N N N
Mixed-use district (Business C) N N N N N N N N N N N N Y
14
Medical marijuana facilities N N N N N N N N N N SP N N
Solar energy systems N N N N N N N SP15 N N Y Y N
Major commercial project
Industrial Uses
Removal of topsoil, sand and
gravel
SP SP SP SP N N SP SP SP SP SP SP NA
Light manufacturing N N N N N N N N N Y
16 Y Y NA
Warehouse, self-storage, miniwarehouse, or distribution facility
N N N N N N N N N Y Y Y
Manufacturing N N N N N N N N N Y
13 Y Y NA
Trucking terminal N N N N N N N N N SP SP SP NA
Other Uses
Transient parking N N N N N N N N N N N N NA
NOTES:
1 No new building or other structure shall be erected for residential purposes unless the land so located in the Business B District is part of a subdivision plan
duly recorded prior to the enactment of this section or unless individual building lots have been similarly recorded.
2 All residential development is prohibited, except that alterations, reconstruction, extension or structural change to any existing residential structure is
permitted.
3 The renting of rooms and the furnishing of table board to not more than four resident persons in a dwelling occupied as a private residence. No display, sign
or other advertising device, illuminated or otherwise, shall be visible from the street except a nonilluminated announcement sign having an area of not more
than 144 square inches.
180 Attachment 3:3 05 - 01 - 2019
AGAWAM CODE
4 The office of a physician, surgeon, dentist or lawyer residing on the premises. No display, sign or other advertising device shall be permitted except an
interior illuminated, reflective or nonilluminated professional nameplate having an area of not more than 144 square inches.
5 The office or studio of a dentist, artist, architect, professional engineer or teacher of scholastic subjects residing on the premises or a beauty parlor wherein
one of the residents is the sole operator. The space occupied by such office, studio or parlor shall not exceed 20% of the total floor area of the dwelling,
exclusive of the basement. No display, sign or other advertising device shall be permitted except an interior illuminated, reflective or nonilluminated
profession nameplate having an area of not more than 144 square inches. The studios or offices of dancing or music teachers, photographers, masseurs,
veterinarians, riding schools and other similar businesslike pursuits are prohibited.
6 Adjacent to or in extension of existing cemeteries and crematories, provided that such crematories are situated within a cemetery.
7 No airport shall be located to the east of Suffield Street.
8 Not allowed are those for contagious diseases, for the care of epileptics or drug or liquor patients, for correctional purposes or for the care of the insane or
feebleminded.
9 The subject property must be five acres or more in area, with the following additional requirements: (1) the setback shall be 500 feet from the street line; (2)
the side lot line shall be 200 feet; (3) the rear yard setback shall be 200 feet. No animals shall be kept in outdoor cages, runs, kennels or yards.
10 Minimum parcel size shall be 10 acres.
11 Golf courses operated for profit shall be permitted with that portion of land covered by a clubhouse to be zoned Business A. All golf courses must be on
plots having a minimum of 75 acres.
12 See Article XIV, Personal Wireless Service Facilities and Towers, Chapter 180, §§ 180-90 through 180-103.
13 See Chapter 180, § 180-48G.
14 See Article XIX, Mixed-Used Business C District, Chapter 180, § 180-143B(1).
15 The City Council is the special permit granting authority for solar energy systems.
16 No more than 20,000 square feet.
180 Attachment 3:4 05 - 01 - 2019

ZONING
180 Attachment 1
Town of Agawam
Table of Creative Development Dimensional Requirements
[Added 12-4-2006 by TOR-2006-9]
Development
Type Zoning District
Minimum
Lot Size
(per dwelling
unit)
Minimum
Required
Open
Space
Minimum
Lot
Frontage
(continuous
in feet)
Minimum
Frontage for
Total
Development
Parcel
(feet)
Minimum
Front
Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Standard
Subdivision
or ANR
Development
Residence A-1 17,000 square
feet
None 125 N/A 35 15 25 35
Residence A-2 15,000 square
feet
None 110 N/A 30 15 20 35
Agricultural 20,000 square
feet
None 120 N/A 35 Requirements
of nearest
residential
district
Requirements
of nearest
residential
district
35
OSRD
Development
Residence A-1
Town water/sewer
Individual systems
1 acre 50% 60 100 35 15 25 35
Residence A-2
Town water/sewer
Individual systems
1 acre 35% 60 100 30 15 20 35
Agricultural
Town water/sewer
Individual systems
1 acre 50% 60 100 35 Requirements
of nearest
residential
district
Requirements
of nearest
residential
district
35
180 Attachment 1:1 07 - 01 - 2008