PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Rules of Interpretation
[Adopted as Art. I, §§ 1.02, 1.04, 1.07 and 1.09, of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 1-1. Rules of construction; definitions.
Generally. The provisions of this Code shall be liberally construed to
effect the purposes expressed therein or implied from the expression
thereof. Words and phrases shall be construed and understood
according to their common and usual meaning unless the contrary is
clearly indicated. Technical words and phrases and such others as may
have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be
construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate
meaning.
A.
In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following
rules shall be observed and the following definitions shall apply:
CHARTER — The Charter and any amendment to it hereafter adopted.
CITY AGENCY — Any multiple-member body, any department, division,
or office of the City of Beverly, Massachusetts.
CITY BULLETIN BOARD — The bulletin board in the City Hall on which
the City Clerk posts official notices of meetings and upon which other
official City notices are posted, and the bulletin boards at any other
locations as may be designated City bulletin boards by the City Council.
CITY OFFICER — When used without further qualification or
description, a person having charge of an office or department of the
City who, in the exercise of the powers or duties of such position,
exercises some portion of the sovereign power of the City. The term
shall include the City Accountant, the City Assessor, the City Clerk,
the City Collector, the City Solicitor, the City Treasurer, the Director of
Emergency Management, the Director of Public Health, the Director of
Municipal Finance, the Director of Municipal Inspections, the Director
of Human Resources, the Director of Purchasing, the Director of
Planning and Development, the Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works, the Fire Chief, the Police Chief, and the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services.[Amended 3-17-2014 by Ord.
No. 89; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
CITY OFFICERS AND DEPARTMENTS — Whenever reference is made
to an officer of a department, the same shall be construed as if followed
by the words "of the City of Beverly, Massachusetts."
CITY or THIS CITY — The City of Beverly, Massachusetts.
CODE — The Code of Ordinances, City of Beverly, Massachusetts as
designated in Article III of this chapter.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
B.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:3
COMPUTATION OF TIME — In computing time under the Charter, if
seven days or less, "days" shall refer to secular days, not including
Saturdays, Sundays or legal holidays. If more than seven days, every
day shall be counted. The time within which an act is to be done
as provided in any ordinance or in any order issued pursuant to any
ordinance, when expressed in days, shall be computed by excluding the
first day and including the last, except that if the last day is Sunday
it shall be excluded; and when any such time is expressed in hours
the whole of Sunday, from 12:00 midnight to 12:00 midnight, shall be
excluded.
COUNCIL — The City Council of the City of Beverly, Massachusetts,
the body vested with the legislative powers of the City of Beverly,
Massachusetts.
COUNTY — The County of Essex, the county in which the City of
Beverly is located.
DAYS — Business days, not including Saturdays, Sundays and legal
holidays when the time set is less than seven days; when the time set is
seven days or more, every day shall be counted.
EMERGENCY — A sudden, unexpected, unforeseen happening,
occurrence or condition which necessitates immediate action or
response.
FULL COUNCIL; FULL MULTIPLE-MEMBER BODY — The entire
authorized complement of the City Council, School Committee or other
multiple-member body, notwithstanding any vacancy which might exist.
GENDER — Words importing the feminine gender shall include the
masculine gender; words importing the masculine gender shall include
the feminine gender.
GENERAL LAWS —
HERETOFORE; HEREAFTER — Whenever the word "heretofore"
occurs in any ordinance, it shall be construed to mean any time
previous to the day when such ordinance shall take effect; and
whenever the word "hereafter" occurs, it shall be construed to mean
the time after the ordinance containing such word shall take effect.
general laws. The words "general laws" (all lowercase letters) shall
mean laws enacted by the State Legislature which apply alike to all
cities and towns, to all cities, or to a class of two or more cities and/
or cities and towns of which the City of Beverly is a member.
(1)
General Laws. The words "General Laws" (initial letter of each
word in uppercase letters) shall mean the General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, a codification and revision of
statutes enacted on December 22, 1920, and including all
amendments thereto subsequently adopted.
(2)
§ 1-1 BEVERLY CODE § 1-1
1:4
HIGHWAY — Includes any street, alley, highway, avenue or public place
or square, bridge, viaduct, tunnel, underpass, overpass and causeway
in the City dedicated to public use.
JOINT AUTHORITY — All words purporting to give joint authority to
three or more City officers or other persons shall be construed as giving
such authority to a majority of such officers or other persons unless it
shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving the authority.
LOCAL NEWSPAPER — A newspaper of general circulation within the
City of Beverly, with either a weekly or daily circulation.
MAJORITY VOTE — When used in connection with a meeting of a
multiple-member body, a majority of those present and voting, unless
another provision is made by ordinance, by law, or by its own rules.
MAY — Is to be construed as being permissive.
MAY NOT — The phrase "may not" or phrases of like import have a
mandatory negative effect and state a prohibition.
MAYOR — The Mayor of the City of Beverly, the officer vested with the
executive powers of the City of Beverly, Massachusetts.
MEASURE — Any ordinance, order, resolution, or other vote or
proceeding adopted, or which might be adopted, by the City Council or
the School Committee.
MONTH — A calendar month.
MULTIPLE-MEMBER BODY — Any board, commission, committee,
subcommittee or other body consisting of two or more persons, whether
elected, appointed or otherwise constituted, but not including the City
Council or the School Committee.
MUST — Shall be construed as being mandatory.
NUMBER — Words used in the singular include the plural and the
plural include the singular.
OATH — Shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in
which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in
such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the
words "affirm" and "affirmed."
ORDINANCE — A vote or order of the City Council entitled "ordinance"
and designed for the permanent regulation of any matter within the
jurisdiction of the City Council as laid down in this chapter.
OWNER — As applied to any property, shall include any part owner,
joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of
the whole or a part of such property.
PERSON — Shall extend and be applied to associations, corporations,
firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to
natural persons.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-1
1:5
§ 1-2. Effective date of ordinances.
All ordinances passed by the City Council, except when otherwise
specifically provided, shall take effect and be in force on the 21st day
following the date the City Council has voted to approve the ordinance
unless the Mayor has exercised his power, pursuant to Charter Section
3-7, to disapprove of the ordinance, in which case the ordinance shall
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Includes all tangible and intangible property
other than real property.
PRECEDING; FOLLOWING — Next before and next after, respectively.
PROPERTY — Includes real and personal property.
REAL PROPERTY — Includes lands, tenements and hereditaments.
REASONABLE TIME OR NOTICE — In all cases where any ordinance
shall require any act to be done in a reasonable time or reasonable
notice to be given, such reasonable time or notice shall be deemed to
mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt performance
of such duty or compliance with such notice.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.
SHALL — Is to be construed as being mandatory.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between the curbline and the
adjacent property intended for the use of pedestrians.
STATE — The Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
STREET — Includes any highway, alley, street, avenue or public place
or square, bridge, viaduct, underpass, overpass, tunnel and causeway
in the City dedicated to public use.
TENANT; OCCUPANT — As applied to a building or land, shall include
any person who occupies, pursuant to an oral or written lease, the
whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
TENSES — The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the
future when applicable.
VOTERS — Registered voters of the City of Beverly.
WEEK — Shall be construed to mean seven days; but publication in a
newspaper of any notice or other matter indicated to be for a stated
number of weeks shall be construed to mean one insertion in each
week, unless specifically stated to be for each day of the week or for
more than one day in each week; and all publications heretofore made
in accordance with the terms of this subsection are hereby validated.
WRITTEN or IN WRITING — Shall be construed to include any
representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or
otherwise.
YEAR — A calendar year.
§ 1-1 BEVERLY CODE § 1-2
1:6
take effect on the 21st day following the date the City Council has voted,
by a two-thirds vote of the full Council, to again approve the ordinance
notwithstanding the objections of the Mayor.
§ 1-3. Regulations.
All City agencies are hereby authorized to adopt rules and regulations,
subject to the approval of the City Council.
§ 1-4. City Seal.
The City Seal shall be circular in form, and the design hereto annexed
shall be the device thereof, as follows:
A.
The field is occupied by the full length ideal figure of the Puritan
planter; his left hand rests on the stump of the tree he has just felled,
and his right hand holds the King's arm which he has taken up; he
stands in an attitude of attention. The forest background is to the left
and sea with a ship is to the right of the figure.
B.
The inscription encircling the figure is "Beverly, Founded 1626. Town
1668. City 1894." The legend, or motto, is placed in a scroll to the left of
the figure and reads, "Patri Similima Proles," signifying the continuance
of the ancestral virtues and public devotion in the children, generation
after generation.
C.
§ 1-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:7

ARTICLE II
Fees and Fines
[Adopted as Art. I, §§ 1.05 and 1.06, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 1-5. Establishment of fees. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
The City has adopted the provisions of MGL c. 40 § 22F, pursuant to City
Council Order 2004-193, permitting that any municipal board or officer
empowered to issue a license, permit, certificate, or to render a service
or perform work for a person or class of persons, may, from time to time,
fix reasonable fees for all such licenses, permits, or certificates issued
pursuant to statutes or regulations wherein the entire proceeds of the fee
remain with such issuing city or town, and may fix reasonable charges to be
paid for any services rendered or work performed by the city or town or any
department. Such fees shall be subject to the approval of the City Council.
§ 1-6. Noncriminal disposition of violations.
Any ordinance of the City of Beverly or any rule or regulation of its
officers, boards or departments, the violation of which is subject to a
specific penalty, may, in the discretion of the City official who is the
appropriate enforcing person, be enforced by the method provided in
MGL c. 40, § 21D. The noncriminal fine for each such violation, if not
otherwise specified, shall be $25.
A.
"Enforcing person," as used in this section, shall mean any City police
officer of the City of Beverly, with respect to any offense, and the
Director of Municipal Inspections and his designees, duly authorized
designees of the Conservation Commission, duly authorized designees
of the Board of Health, the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works, or his designees, the Animal Inspector,
and such other officials as the Mayor may from time to time designate,
each with respect to violation of ordinances and rules and regulations
within their respective jurisdictions. If more than one official has
jurisdiction in a given case, any such official may be an enforcing
person with respect thereto. Police officers shall in all cases be
considered enforcing persons for the purpose of this section.
B.
Unless otherwise provided, each day a violation continues shall
constitute a separate and repeat violation.
C.
§ 1-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:9

ARTICLE III
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
§ 1-7. Adoption of Code.
The ordinances of the City of Beverly of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the City Council, as previously consolidated in the prior Code
of Ordinances of the City of Beverly, and the ordinances of a general and
permanent nature adopted by the City Council subsequent to that date,
all as revised, codified and consolidated into chapters and sections by
General Code, LLC, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 300, are hereby
approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as the Code of the City of Beverly,
hereinafter known and referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-8. Code supersedes prior ordinances.
This ordinance and the Code shall supersede all other general and
permanent ordinances enacted prior to the enactment of this Code, except
such ordinances as are hereinafter expressly saved from repeal or
continued in force.
§ 1-9. When effective.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon passage and publication
according to law.
§ 1-10. Inclusion of ordinance in Code.
This ordinance shall, upon adoption, be included in the Code as Chapter 1,
General Provisions, Article III, Adoption of Code.
§ 1-11. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in loose-leaf form has been filed in the office of the
City Clerk and shall remain there for use and examination by the public
until final action is taken on this ordinance; and, if this ordinance shall be
adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Clerk of the City of Beverly
by impressing thereon the Seal of the City as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Clerk of the City to
be made available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times
while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-12. Publication; filing.
The Clerk of the City of Beverly, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published,
in the manner required, a copy of this adopting ordinance in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City. Sufficient copies of the Code shall be
maintained in the office of the Clerk for inspection by the public at all times
during regular office hours. The enactment and publication of this adopting
ordinance, coupled with the availability of copies of the Code for inspection
§ 1-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-12
1:11
by the public, shall be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal
publication of all provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, amendments or supplements to the Code, when
passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intent of the City
Council to make them a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code of the City of Beverly shall
be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments.
Whenever such additions, amendments or supplements to the Code shall
be adopted, they shall thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder,
inserted in the loose-leaf book containing the Code as amendments and
supplements thereto.
§ 1-14. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-20A and prior to the effective date of this ordinance
given in § 1-13 are hereby deemed to be part of the Code and shall, upon
being printed, be included therein.
§ 1-15. Code to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Clerk, or someone authorized and directed by
the Clerk, to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book containing the
Code required to be filed in the Clerk's office for the use of the public. All
changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which shall be adopted specifically as part of the
Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by reference until
such changes or new ordinances are published as supplements to said Code,
at which time such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-16. Sale of Code; supplementation.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the Clerk
upon the payment of a fee to be set by the City Council, which may also
arrange for procedures for the periodic supplementation thereof.
§ 1-17. Altering or tampering with Code; violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code, or to alter or tamper with
such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City
of Beverly to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section shall,
upon conviction, be subject to a fine of not more than $300.
§ 1-18. Severability.
Severability of Code provisions. Each section of the Code, and every
part of each section, is an independent section or part of a section, and
A.
§ 1-12 BEVERLY CODE § 1-18
1:12
§ 1-19. Repeal of ordinances.
§ 1-20. Ordinances saved from repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-19 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
the holding of any section or a part thereof to be unconstitutional, void
or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or
constitutionality of any other sections or parts thereof.
Severability of ordinance provisions. Each section of this ordinance is
an independent section, and the holding of any section or part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be
deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other sections
or parts thereof.
B.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent
nature, adopted and in force on the date of the adoption of this
ordinance and not contained in the Code, and in conflict and/or
inconsistent with the provisions contained in the Code, are hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this adopting ordinance, except as
hereinafter provided.
A.
The following provisions of the prior Code of Ordinances are specifically
repealed:
(1) Article XXII, § 22.21, Smoking Around Docks, Warehouses, Etc.
Article XXII, § 22.32, Smoking Prohibited in Municipal Buildings
and Upon Public School Grounds.
(2)
B.
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to December 21, 2015.
Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision prior to the effective date of this ordinance, or
any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of such right or
liability.
B.
Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of
this ordinance in violation of any legislative provision, or any penalty,
punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
C.
Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered, prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision.
D.
Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred.
E.
Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing grade, changing name,
F.
§ 1-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-20
1:13
§ 1-21. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place, or any portion thereof.
Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond or other instruments or evidence of
the City's indebtedness.
G.
Ordinances authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
H.
I. The levy or imposition of taxes, assessments or charges.
The dedication of property or approval of preliminary or final
subdivision plats.
J.
K. Any ordinance providing for salaries or compensation.
In compiling and preparing the ordinances for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain grammatical changes and other minor changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
City Council that all said changes be adopted as part of the Code as
if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended to
read as such.
A.
In addition, the amendments and/or additions as set forth in Schedule
A attached hereto and made a part hereof are made herewith, to
become effective upon the effective date of this ordinance. (Chapter
and section number references are to the ordinances as they have been
renumbered and appear in the Code.)1
B.
The following nomenclature changes have been made throughout the
Code:
(1) "Bell Atlantic" is changed to "Verizon and Comcast."
(2) "Board of Aldermen" is changed to "City Council."
(3) "Boston Gas Company" is changed to "National Grid Gas."
(4) "City Electrician" is changed to "Inspector of Wires."
(5) "Collector-Treasurer" is changed to "Treasurer-Collector."
C.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-21B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article III. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
013." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
City offices.
§ 1-20 BEVERLY CODE § 1-21
1:14
"Committee on Public Services and Aid" is changed to "Committee
on Public Services."
(6)
"Director of Public Services" is changed to "Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works."
(7)
"Director of Public Works" is changed to "Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works."
(8)
"Historical Commission" is changed to "Historic Districts
Commission."
(9)
"Industrial Development Financing Authority" is changed to
"Industrial Development Finance Authority."
(10)
"Massachusetts Electric Company" is changed to "National Grid
Electric."
(11)
"Recreation Commission" is changed to "Parks and Recreation
Commission."
(12)
§ 1-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-21
1:15
Chapter 7
AGENCIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commission, councils, committees
and authorities — See Ch. 15.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 58.
School Committee — See Ch. 72.
§ 1-21 BEVERLY CODE § 1-21
1:16
ARTICLE I
Administrative Organization
§ 7-1. Departments and offices.
The administrative organization of the City shall be divided under the Mayor
into the following service departments, with offices thereunder responsible
to each respective department:
Community Services Department.
Veterans Services Office
Council on Aging
Parks and Recreation Office
Public Library
Commission on Disabilities
Cultural Council
Beverly Golf and Tennis Commission
Health Services
Youth Activities Commission
Affirmative Action and Equal Employment Opportunity Program
A.
Engineering Department.
Office of Engineering Services
Office of Contract Supervision
Office of Cemetery Operations
B.
Fire Department.
Fire Office
Emergency Management Committee
Emergency Medical Services Commission
C.
Municipal Finance Department.
Office of Collections
Office of Treasury Management
Office of Accounting
Office of Assessing
Office of Data Processing and Management-Information Systems
Office of the Parking Clerk
D.
E. Municipal Inspections Department.2
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-1
1:17
Building Code Office
Gas/Plumbing Inspector Office
Electrical Office
Sanitary Office
Weights and Measures Office
Zoning Enforcement Office
Historic Districts Commission
Conservation Commission
Fire Safety Office
Planning and Development Department.3
Planning Office
Zoning Appeals Office
Conservation Office
Historic Districts Office
Office of Community Development
Design Review Board
Airport Office
Parking and Traffic Office
Harbor Management Authority
F.
Police Department.
Police Office
School traffic supervisors
Animal Control Office
Harbor Office
G.
H. Purchasing Department.4
Public Services Department.
Office of Labor Services
Office of Garage and Motor Vehicle Maintenance
Water/Sewer Office
Forestry and Grounds Office
I.
2. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
4. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 7-1 BEVERLY CODE § 7-2
1:18
§ 7-2. Administrative policy and procedures for department heads.
§ 7-3. Operation of administrative service.
Responsible to the Mayor. The heads of departments shall be
responsible to the Mayor as the chief executive and administrative
officer of the City, and shall be immediately responsible to the Mayor
for the effective administration of their respective departments and all
activities assigned thereto.
A.
Inaugurate sound practices. The heads of departments shall keep
informed as to the latest practices in their particular fields and shall
inaugurate, with the approval of the Mayor, such new practices as
appear to be of benefit and service to the public.
B.
Report to Mayor. The heads of departments shall submit annual reports
of the activities of their departments to the Mayor.
C.
Maintain records. The heads of departments shall establish and
maintain systems of filing and indexing records and reports in sufficient
detail to furnish all information necessary for proper control of
departmental activities and to form a basis for the annual report to the
Mayor.
D.
Authority over employees. The heads of departments shall have power,
when authorized by the Mayor in accordance with Sections 3-3 and 8-15
of the Beverly Home Rule Charter, to appoint and remove all of their
subordinates.5
E.
Maintain equipment. The heads of departments shall be responsible for
the proper maintenance of all City property and equipment used in their
departments.
F.
Office hours. All units in the administrative service shall be open
between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 4:30 p.m. on Monday, Tuesday and
Wednesday; between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 7:30 p.m. on Thursday,
and between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 1:00 p.m. on Friday and shall
be closed Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays.
A.
Deposits. All units in the administrative service shall, not less
frequently than weekly, make a deposit with the City Treasurer of any
monies received directly from the public.
B.
Payment of moneys. All units in the administrative service shall pay
out monies belonging to the City only in the manner established by
state statutes, City ordinances, and the policies, procedures and other
directives established by the Finance Director.6
C.
5. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
6. Editor's Note: Original Section 6.02 of the Code of Ordinances, Accounting Office, which
immediately followed this section, is now included in Art. IX, § 7-23D, of this chapter.
Original Section 6.03, Assessor's Office, is now included in Art. IX, § 7-23E, of this chapter.
§ 7-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:19
Original Section 6.04, Central Municipal Maintenance Department, was repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). Former Subsections (a)
through (g) of that section, regarding the Police Department, are now included in Art. XII
of this chapter. Original Section 6.05, Civil Defense and Emergency Planning Department,
was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III). See now
Art. III of this chapter, Emergency Management Department.
§ 7-3 BEVERLY CODE § 7-3
1:20
ARTICLE II
Community Services Department
[Amended 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 89]
§ 7-4. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Community Services, which shall be
responsible for the coordination of all the community-service-related
activities of the City, including, but not limited to, programs or services
provided to specific groups, including senior citizens, youths, veterans,
and others, services provided to the public generally, including parks and
recreation activities, health services, cultural activities and the operation of
the public library.
§ 7-5. Scope of activities.
The Department of Community Services shall be responsible for the
coordination of all community-service-related activities of the City
government, and shall include the following functions:
§ 7-6. Operating offices.
The Department of Community Services shall consist of the following
offices, the duties and responsibilities of which shall be further set forth by
ordinance:
A. Veterans Services.
B. Council on Aging.
C. Parks and Recreation Commission.
D. Public Library, Board of Trustees of.
E. Commission on Disabilities.
F. Cultural Council.
G. Beverly Golf and Tennis Commission.
H. Health Services.
I. Youth Activities Commission.
Veterans Services Office. The Veterans Services Office shall be headed
by a Veterans Services Director appointed by the Mayor. The Veterans
Services Office shall be responsible for the delivery of every service to
which a veteran is or may be entitled under the provisions of state and
federal law. The Director of Veterans Services shall assist veterans and
the survivors of veterans in making appropriate applications to secure
benefits to which they are entitled under state and federal law.7
A.
7. Editor's Note: See also § 15-49, Veterans Memorial Advisory Committee.
§ 7-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-6
1:21
Council on Aging. The Council on Aging shall coordinate and sponsor
programs for the senior citizens of the City of Beverly.8
B.
Parks and Recreation Office. The Parks and Recreation Commission
shall coordinate and carry out programs for leisuretime activities of
persons of all ages.9
C.
Public library. The public library shall be headed by a board of trustees
which shall set policies to govern the operation of the public library of
the City and shall supervise the implementation of such policies by its
staff.10
D.
Commission on Disabilities. The Commission on Disabilities shall
coordinate and carry out programs designed to assist disabled
persons.11
E.
Cultural Council. The Cultural Council shall coordinate and carry out
programs designed to improve the culture of the City and to develop
programs in art, music and theater.12
F.
Beverly Golf and Tennis Commission. The Beverly Golf and Tennis Club
Commission shall set policies to govern the operation and use of the
Beverly Golf and Tennis Club and shall supervise the implementation of
such policies by its licensee or other operator.13
G.
Health services. All health-related programs, activities and services of
the City, including those of the Health Department, shall be coordinated
through the Department of Community Services.
H.
Youth Activities Commission. The Youth Activities Commission shall
establish and conduct programs for the youth of the City in conjunction
with other entities, public and private.14
I.
Affirmative Action and Equal Employment Opportunity Program. There
shall be established within the Department of Community Services an
Affirmative Action and Equal Employment Opportunity Program Office
which shall be responsible, in conjunction with the Commission on
Disabilities, for the development and implementation of the Affirmative
Action and Equal Employment Program of the City.15
J.
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-10, Aging, Council on.
9. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-44, Parks and Recreation Commission.
10.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-40, Library Trustees, Board of.
11.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-28, Disabilities, Commission on.
12.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-25, Cultural Council.
13.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-15, Beverly Golf and Tennis Club Commission.
14.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-50, Youth Activities Commission.
15.Editor's Note: Original Section 6.07 of the Code of Ordinances, Data Processing and
Management Office, which immediately followed this section, is now found in Art. IX,
§ 7-23C, of this chapter.
§ 7-6 BEVERLY CODE § 7-6
1:22
ARTICLE III
Emergency Management Department16
§ 7-7. Emergency Management Director.
The Emergency Management Department shall be headed by an Emergency
Management Director, appointed by the Mayor, subject to review of the
Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter.
§ 7-8. Responsibilities.
The Emergency Management Department shall be responsible for the
implementation of the so-called "civil defense law," Chapter 639 of the Acts
of 1950, as amended.17
16.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
17.Editor's Note: Original Section 6.09 of the Code of Ordinances, Emergency Medical
Services Commission, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 7-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-8
1:23

ARTICLE IV
Engineering Department
§ 7-9. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Engineering which shall be responsible for
the management of all the professional engineering-related activities of the
City and for the supervision and coordination of all activities of all City
agencies in relation to any engineering matter.
§ 7-10. Scope of activities.
The Department of Engineering shall be responsible for and shall include
the following functions:
§ 7-11. Operating offices.
The Department of Engineering shall consist of the following offices:
A. Refuse collection and disposal.
Preparation of technical plans and specifications for contracts for the
performance of municipal functions by private entities.
B.
Representation of the City of Beverly on the Board of the Southern
Essex Sewerage District.
C.
Representation of the City of Beverly on the Board of the Salem-Beverly
Water Supply District.
D.
Maintain plans and records of all public water, sewer, drain and road
layouts in the City of Beverly.
E.
F. Engineering services.
Management and maintenance of the interment records of the eight
City cemeteries.
G.
Supervision, inspection and approval of all public works and related
work performed by private entities under contract.
H.
Office of Engineering Services.
The Office of Engineering Services shall be responsible for the
engineering-related functions and activities of the City, including
geographic information systems and computer assisted design.
(1)
The Office of Engineering Services shall be responsible for the
planning and design of all assigned public works improvement
projects and the documentation of all such projects.
(2)
A.
Office of Contract Supervision. The Office of Contract Supervision shall
be responsible for the oversight of all construction projects performed
for the City by outside entities, including water mains, sewers and
B.
§ 7-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-11
1:25
drains, and paving and reconstruction of streets, sidewalks, and
curbings and the documentation of all such projects.
Office of Cemetery Operations. The Office of Cemetery Operations shall
be responsible for the care and management of all public cemeteries
and burying grounds in the City of Beverly.
C.
§ 7-11 BEVERLY CODE § 7-11
1:26
ARTICLE V
Fire Department18
§ 7-12. Establishment.
There shall be a Fire Department which shall be responsible for the
coordination of all the fire protection services of the City and for the
supervision and coordination of all activities of all City agencies in relation
to any fire safety programs, fire suppression and extinguishing fires and
emergency management and medical services.
§ 7-13. Scope of activities.
The Fire Department shall be responsible for and shall include the following
functions:
§ 7-14. Operating offices.
The Fire Department shall consist of the following offices:
A. Fire.
B. Emergency management.
C. Emergency medical service/ambulance.
Fire Office. The Fire Office shall be responsible for providing fire
protection services in the City, including fire safety programs, fire
suppression and extinguishing fires. The functions of the Fire Office
shall include but are not limited to those enumerated below:
Fire extinguishment: take all necessary steps for the
extinguishment of fires within the City, including utilization of all
necessary personnel and equipment therefor, the destruction of any
building or structure and the removal of any obstruction for the
purpose of checking or extinguishing any such fire.
(1)
Public alarm boxes: establish the location, relocation or removal of
all public fire alarm boxes.
(2)
Civil order: assist in the reestablishment of order in the event of
civil disturbance, disaster or riot or any other declared emergency.
(3)
Training: provide for and administer a program for the training of
firefighters.
(4)
Records: maintain a record of all fires which occur within the City
requiring the services of the Fire Department.
(5)
A.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-14
1:27
§ 7-15. Fire Inspector.19
§ 7-16. Forest Warden.20
Intergovernmental contracts: carry out the terms and provisions
of all fire service contracts entered into with other governmental
subdivisions.
(6)
Investigations: investigate the causes of all fires and provide for
written reports of all suspected arsons.
(7)
Inspections: inspect all buildings and structures as provided for by
the state fire code, and for the issuance and renewal of certificates
of occupancy.
(8)
(9) Other services: provide rescue and ambulance service.
Establishment. There shall be a Fire Inspector as provided in Charter
Section 5-8.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Fire Chief shall appoint a Fire
Inspector for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Fire Inspector shall be responsible
for the enforcement of the fire prevention law, General Laws Chapter
148, and the Fire Prevention Code, 527 Code of Massachusetts
Regulations, and shall coordinate all such activity between the Fire
Department, the Fire Chief, the Department of Municipal Inspections
and the Director of Municipal Inspections.
C.
Establishment. There shall be a Forest Warden as provided in MGL c.
48, § 8.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Fire Chief shall serve, by virtue of
office, as Forest Warden.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Fire Chief, when acting as Forest
Warden, may appoint and may discharge deputies to assist in the duties
of Forest Warden; and if in their judgment there is any danger from a
forest fire, the Forest Warden or the deputies may employ assistance or
require any person in the City between the ages of 18 and 50 to aid in
the extinguishment or prevention of forest fires.
The Forest Warden may arrest without warrant any person found
in the act of setting, maintaining or increasing a fire in violation of
MGL c. 48, § 13.
(1)
The Fire Chief, acting as Forest Warden, shall have all of the
powers, duties, and responsibilities assigned to Forest Wardens by
MGL c. 48, §§ 8 through 28C.
(2)
C.
19.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
20.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 7-14 BEVERLY CODE § 7-16
1:28
ARTICLE VI
Health Department21
§ 7-17. Purpose.
It is the mission of the Board of Health and its staff to serve as a resource
intended to prevent, promote, protect and meet the multitude of healthrelated
needs of the community.
§ 7-18. Administration; duties.
The Health Department shall be under the charge of the Board of Health.
The Board of Health is responsible for directing and administering a
program of health-related services for the City and its residents. The Health
Department is responsible for enforcing numerous state sanitary and
environmental codes as mandated by state law. MGL c. 111, § 31, provides
the Board of Health with the authority to make reasonable health
regulations. In addition to the mandated state regulations, the Health
Department is responsible for the enforcement of local regulations. A
variety of inspections are conducted to determine compliance with said
codes and regulations.
21.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-36, Health, Board of.
§ 7-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-18
1:29

ARTICLE VII
Human Resources Department
§ 7-19. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Human Resources (as provided in Section
5-7 of the Charter) which shall be responsible for all personnel and
employee-related functions and activities of the City and for the supervision
and coordination of all activities of all City agencies in relation to any
personnel or employee-related function or activity.
§ 7-20. Scope of activities.
The Department of Human Resources shall be responsible for and shall
include the following functions:
Study, establish and coordinate uniform personnel practices and
procedures for City departments.
A.
Provide advice and assistance to individual employees on all personnel
matters.
B.
Develop and administer a recruitment and placement program
designed to fill vacant positions in the City with the best qualified
persons.
C.
Provide advice and assistance to the Mayor, department heads,
supervisors and elected and appointed officials on all personnel
matters, including position classifications, pay administration,
recruitment and placement, employee relations, performance
evaluation, disciplinary action, employee grievances and employee
training.
D.
Develop a position classification system, which shall include the
assignment and utilization of personnel in all departments; make
recommendations to such departments for changes which may be
necessary to effect the proper classification and assignment of
personnel in such duties which will permit the City to receive maximum
benefits from the skills and capabilities of such personnel.
E.
Administer the position classification program providing for the
classification of all positions, other than those filled by popular
elections, into groups and classes doing substantially similar work or
having substantially equal responsibilities so as to ensure the payment
of equitable compensation.
F.
Provide advice and assistance to supervisory personnel of all levels in
planning, developing and conducting training programs.
G.
Standardize forms and records to be used in the City's personnel
administration program other than those forms and records whose
format is regulated by statute or by state agency or agencies
H.
§ 7-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-20
1:31
authorized, by law, to exercise oversight over specific elements of
personnel management.
Provide guidance to appointing authorities on civil service law, furnish
information regarding civil service examinations, render assistance to
all departments in civil service matters, and perform liaison duties
between City departments and the Office of Personnel Administration
of the commonwealth.
I.
Assist and participate (to the extent requested by the Mayor) in the
negotiation, implementation, and administration of the City's collective
bargaining agreements.
J.
Recommend to the Mayor and City Council the enactment of such
ordinances as are considered necessary to implement and administer
the City's personnel administration program.
K.
Maintain a centralized, secure location for the individual personnel
records of all City employees. Said records shall contain all the vital
statistics and other pertinent data for each and every person employed
by the City. It shall be the duty of each department head and every other
supervisory person to provide to the Personnel Director such records
and reports as the Personnel Director may require.
L.
Study, develop, establish and coordinate an occupational safety
program for the City as required by state and federal laws.
M.
Implement and coordinate an Affirmative Action and Equal Employment
Program for the City.
N.
§ 7-20 BEVERLY CODE § 7-20
1:32
ARTICLE VIII
Law Department
§ 7-21. Establishment.
There shall be a Law Department which shall be responsible for all of the
legal affairs of the City and for the supervision and coordination of all
activities of all City agencies to ensure, insofar as it is possible so to do, that
City agencies act, at all times, in conformity with law.
§ 7-22. Scope of activities.
The Law Department shall be responsible for the coordination of all legal
and law-related activities of the City government and shall include, but is
not limited to, the following functions:
Advise officers: advise the Mayor, the City Council or its committees,
and the heads of all departments, agencies, boards, and commissions
on all matters relating to their official powers, duties and functions.
A.
Review ordinances: be responsible for the review of all ordinances and
resolutions as requested by the Mayor or the City Council. The Law
Department shall advise the City Council as to the form and sufficiency
of all ordinances prior to their adoption.
B.
Give opinions: render legal opinions upon any question of law submitted
in writing by the Mayor, the City Council, or the heads of all
departments, agencies, boards, or commissions.
C.
Attend Council meetings: An attorney assigned to the Law Department
shall, as requested by the presiding officer of the City Council, attend
any meetings of the City Council and any meetings of committees of the
City Council.
D.
Prepare legal instruments: prepare or review and approve all contracts,
deeds, documents and instruments prior to the execution thereof by or
on behalf of the City, its departments and agencies.
E.
Prosecute offenders and defend officials: prepare, when authorized
by the Mayor, all charges and complaints on behalf of the City, and
all departments, agencies, boards, or commissions of the City, and
appear in the appropriate court in the prosecution of every person
charged with the violation of a City ordinance or of any regulations
adopted under authority of the Charter or ordinances, or by virtue of its
authority; appear on behalf of the City and all departments, agencies,
boards, or commissions of the City in defending every action brought
against it or them in connection with the official business of the City.
F.
Appeals: conduct and prosecute appeals from orders, decisions or
judgments affecting any interest of the City as the City Solicitor may, in
the exercise of discretion, determine to be necessary or desirable.
G.
§ 7-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-22
1:33
Settlement of claims: have the power to adjust, settle, compromise
or submit to arbitration any action, causes of action, accounts, debts,
claims, demands, disputes and matters of favor of or against the City
or in which the City is concerned as debtor or creditor, now existing
or which may hereafter arise, not involving or requiring payment to
exceed $5,000, and with the permission of the Mayor may do likewise
in matters not involving or requiring payment to exceed $10,000,
provided the money to settle claims generally has been appropriated
and is available therefor.
H.
§ 7-22 BEVERLY CODE § 7-22
1:34
ARTICLE IX
Municipal Finance Department
§ 7-23. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Municipal Finance (as provided in Section
5-4 of the Charter) which shall be responsible for the management of
the fiscal and financial affairs of the City, and for the supervision and
coordination of all activities of all City agencies in relation to any fiscal or
financial matter.
§ 7-24. Scope of activities.
The Department of Municipal Finance shall be responsible for and shall
include the following functions:
§ 7-25. Operating offices.
The Department of Municipal Finance shall consist of the following offices:
Coordination of all financial services and activities of the City
government.
A.
Maintenance of all accounting records and other financial statements
for all offices and agencies of the City government.
B.
C. Payment of all financial obligations on behalf of the City.
D. Receipt of all funds due to the City from any source.
E. Maintenance of all property valuation records and systems.
Rendering of advice, assistance and guidance to all other City offices
and agencies in any matter relating to financial or fiscal affairs.
F.
Monitoring throughout the fiscal year of the expenditure of funds by
every office and agency of the City, including the periodic reporting on
the status of all accounts with recommendations concerning fiscal and
financial policies to be implemented by such offices and agencies.
G.
Coordination, with the Director of Purchasing and Contracts
Administration, of all financial transactions associated with the
procurement of all goods, supplies and materials by City governmental
offices and agencies with the central procurement procedures
established by the Mayor pursuant to Section 3-2, third paragraph, and
Section 5-4(1) of the Charter.
H.
Office of Collections.
The Office of Collections shall be headed by a City Collector
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the review of the City Council as
provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, who shall serve for a term
not to exceed three years.
(1)
A.
§ 7-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-25
1:35
The City Collector shall collect all accounts due to the City from
any source. The City Collector shall, upon receipt of a tax list and
warrant from the Board of Assessors, collect the taxes and make
a return thereon to the Board of Assessors. The City Collector
shall give to the City Treasurer an account of all funds received
by the Office of Collections and shall pay over and account to
the City Treasurer all money received by said office. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, the City Collector shall have all
of the powers, duties and responsibilities which are granted to city
collectors by the General Laws.
(2)
Office of Treasury Management.
The Office of Treasury Management shall be headed by a City
Treasurer appointed by the Mayor, subject to the review of the City
Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, who shall serve
for a term not to exceed three years.
(1)
The City Treasurer shall receive and take charge of all money
belonging to the City. The City Treasurer shall, according to the
order of the authorized officers of the City, pay out and make all
disbursements of funds on behalf of the City. Except as otherwise
provided in this section, the City Treasurer shall have all of the
other powers, duties and responsibilities which are given to city
treasurers by General Law.
(2)
B.
Data Processing and Management Information Systems Office. The
Office of Data Processing and Management Information Systems shall
be headed by a Director of Information Technology who shall be
appointed by the Director of Finance, subject to the consent of the
Mayor. The coordination of all of the management information systems
for the City shall be accomplished through the Office of Data Processing
and Management-Information Systems.
C.
Accounting Office.
Accountant. The Office of Accounting shall be headed by a City
Accountant appointed by the Mayor, subject to the review of the
City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, who shall
serve for a term not to exceed three years.
(1)
Responsibilities. The Office of Accounting shall be responsible for
the following:
The maintenance of accounts for all financial transactions of
the City.
(a)
The pre-audit of all purchase orders, receipts and
disbursements.
(b)
(c) The preparation of payrolls.
(2)
D.
§ 7-25 BEVERLY CODE § 7-25
1:36
The preparation of warrants for the payment of all bills of the
City.
(d)
The preparation of periodic reports on the status of
departmental receipts and expenditures.
(e)
The maintenance of a complete set of books and financial
records.
(f)
(g) The maintenance of central grant and contract files.
A duty to notify the appropriate head of the spending agency
and the Mayor and City Council whenever it appears that
a liability has been incurred which will cause the available
balance in a particular account to be exceeded.
(h)
The Office of Accounting shall examine the books and accounts
of all offices and agencies entrusted with the custody or
expenditure of money. The Office of Accounting shall provide
the Budget/Management Analyst appointed by the City Council
with free access to all of its books, accounts, bills, vouchers
and other records of financial transactions as may be
necessary for the performance of the auditing and oversight
functions of such officer. The Office of Accounting shall at
least once in each fiscal year verify the cash balances of all
City offices and agencies by actual count of the cash and by
reconciliation of bank balances. The Office of Accounting shall
prepare all warrants for the expenditure of City funds before
any payment is made by the Office of Treasury Management.
Except as otherwise provided in this section, the City
Accountant shall have all of the other powers, duties and
responsibilities which are given to city accountants by General
Law, including the authorization to report matters of fraud,
waste, improper or illegal activity to the Mayor.
(i)
Assessor's office. [Amended 1-26-2005 by Ord. No. 335]
Chief Assessor. The Office of Assessing shall be under the
management and control of a Chief Assessor who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to review of the City Council as
provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, for a term not to exceed
three years.
(1)
Responsibilities. The Office of Assessing shall be responsible for
the following:
(a) Establishing the valuation of all real and personal property.
(b) Maintaining records substantiating all assessments made.
Preparing and issuing commitments for the collection of
property taxes and motor vehicle excise taxes by the Office of
Collections.
(c)
(2)
E.
§ 7-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-25
1:37
Acting on abatement and exemption applications filed with it
and representing the City in proceedings before the Appellate
Tax Board.
(d)
Tax agreements for affordable housing.
Intent and purpose. Having determined that it is desirable for
the City of Beverly to have an adequate stock of affordable
housing and that the City of Beverly should encourage the
development of affordable housing for its citizens, it is hereby
declared to be the policy of the City of Beverly that, in
appropriate circumstances, the City of Beverly may enter into
agreements with developers of affordable housing for the
payment of outstanding property taxes, as authorized under
the provisions of MGL c. 58, § 8C, as it may be amended from
time to time.
(a)
Authority to negotiate tax agreements; approval by the City
Council.
The Mayor is authorized to negotiate agreements for the
payment of outstanding property taxes by persons or
entities seeking to develop affordable housing on the
parcels for which such taxes are owed. Such agreements
shall comply in all respects with the requirements
established in MGL c. 58, § 8C, as it may be amended from
time to time.
[1]
Any such agreement shall be subject to approval by the
City Council.
[2]
(b)
Delegation of authority. The Mayor may delegate the authority
granted hereunder to any one or more of the following: the
Director of Municipal Finance of the City of Beverly or the
Chief Assessor. Such delegation of authority shall be in writing,
with notice to the City Council, and shall remain in effect until
it is revoked in writing by the Mayor.
(c)
(3)
Parking Clerk. The Parking Clerk shall be appointed by the Director of
Finance, subject to the consent of the Mayor, and shall be responsible
for the collection of fines and penalties imposed under the parking
regulations of the City.
F.
§ 7-25 BEVERLY CODE § 7-25
1:38
ARTICLE X
Municipal Inspections Department
§ 7-26. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Municipal Inspections (as provided in
Section 5-8 of the Charter) which shall be responsible for the coordination
and management of the inspection-related activities of the City and for the
supervision and coordination of all activities of all City agencies in relation
to any inspection service.
§ 7-27. Scope of activities.
The Department of Municipal Inspections shall be responsible for and shall
include the following functions:
§ 7-28. Coordination of inspections.22
It is the intention of this article that all inspections performed by or under
the authority of the Director of Municipal Inspections, Conservation
Commission, Fire Chief, Board of Health, Historic Districts Commission,
Gas/Plumbing Inspector, Sealer of Weights and Measures, Zoning
Enforcement Officer and every other local inspection as may otherwise
be authorized is to be coordinated through the Municipal Inspections
Coordination of all inspection functions carried out by any municipal
agency or by any officer or employee of the City.
A.
Maintenance in a central place of all records relating to inspections,
having a common index.
B.
Coordination of enforcement actions for violations of any provision
of state statute, Code of Massachusetts Regulations provision, City
ordinance or a rule or regulation of the City pertaining to buildings
or structures, municipal inspections or any other inspection which is
under the jurisdiction of the Department of Municipal Inspections.
C.
Put in place a system designed to lead to the development of a single
application process which would indicate all inspections which might
be necessary for a particular project and provide for a consolidated,
coordinated review and processing of each such application.
D.
The rendering of advice, assistance and guidance to all other City
offices and agencies in any matter relating to City inspection services
and City buildings and structures.
E.
The rendering of advice, assistance and guidance to all members of the
public relating to City inspection services, and the development of "user
friendly" systems for the convenience of the public.
F.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-28
1:39
Department. All personnel performing such inspection services shall
continue to serve as employees and members of the department or agency
to which they have traditionally been assigned, but all such personnel
performing inspection services shall, when in the performance of those
functions, be subject to the administrative direction and control of the
Director of Municipal Inspections.
§ 7-29. Operating offices.
The Department of Municipal Inspections shall consist of the following
offices:
Building Code Office. The Building Code Office shall be headed by a
Director of Municipal Inspections appointed by the Mayor, subject to
the review of the Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter,
for a term not to exceed three years. The Building Code Office shall
be responsible for the enforcement of the Building Code of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts in the City of Beverly.
A.
Gas/Plumbing Office. The Gas/Plumbing Office shall be headed by a
Gas/Plumbing Inspector who shall be appointed by the Director of
Municipal Inspections, subject to the approval of the Mayor. The Gas/
Plumbing Office shall be responsible for the enforcement of the
provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations applicable to
plumbing and gas fitting and gas appliances.23
B.
Electrical Office. The Electrical Office shall be headed by an Inspector
of Wires appointed by the Director of Municipal Inspections, subject to
the approval of the Mayor. The Electrical Office shall be responsible
for the enforcement of the provisions of the Code of Massachusetts
Regulations applicable to electrical wires and electrical fixtures.
[Amended 9-6-2012 by Ord. No. 13124]
C.
Sanitary Office. The Sanitary Office shall be headed by a Director of
Public Health, who shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
review of the Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, for a
term not to exceed three years. The Sanitary Office shall be responsible
for enforcement of all provisions of the Code of Massachusetts
Regulations promulgated by the Department of Public Health of the
Commonwealth (the so-called "State Sanitary Code") and all rules and
regulations promulgated by the Board of Health of the City of Beverly.
D.
Weights and Measures Office. The Weights and Measures Office shall
be headed by a Sealer of Weights and Measures, appointed by the
Director of Municipal Inspections, subject to the consent of the Mayor.
The Weights and Measures Office shall be responsible for the inspection
E.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-28 BEVERLY CODE § 7-29
1:40
and sealing of all scales and measuring devices used in the City of
Beverly.
Zoning Enforcement Office. The Zoning Enforcement Office shall be
headed by a Zoning Enforcement Officer, who shall be the Director
of Municipal Inspections. The Zoning Enforcement Office shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 300,
Zoning, of the Code of the City of Beverly as provided in MGL c. 40A,
§ 7.
F.
Historic Districts Commission. The Historic Districts Commission shall
be responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 168,
Article I, Historic Districts, of the Code of the City of Beverly as
provided in MGL c. 40, § 8D.25
G.
Conservation Commission. The Conservation Commission shall be
responsible for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 287,
Wetlands Protection, of the Code of the City of Beverly and the
enforcement of orders issued by the Conservation Commission as
provided in MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A, and in 310 CMR.26
H.
Fire Safety Office. The Fire Safety Office shall be headed by the Fire
Chief or by a fire safety officer appointed by the Fire Chief, subject to
the approval of the Mayor. The Fire Safety Office shall be responsible
for the enforcement of the provisions of Chapter 148 of the General
Laws and 527 CMR in the City of Beverly.27
I.
25.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-37, Historic Districts Commission.
26.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-23, Conservation Commission.
27.Editor's Note: Original Section 6.17 of the Code of Ordinances, Parking Clerk Office, which
immediately followed this section, is now included in Art. IX, § 7-23F, of this chapter.
§ 7-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-29
1:41

ARTICLE XI
Planning and Development Department
§ 7-30. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Planning and Development (as provided in
Section 5-5 of the Charter) which shall be responsible for the coordination
of all of the planning and development-related activities of the City and
for the supervision and coordination of all activities of all City agencies in
relation to any planning and development-related activities conducted by
any such agency of the City.
§ 7-31. Purpose.
The Planning Department shall administer governmental and municipal
functions and responsibilities in the field of City planning, and coordinate
efforts directed toward the future development of the City to assure its
continued improvement consistent with its physical, social and economic
conditions and resources.
§ 7-32. Director and staff.28
The Planning Department shall consist of a Planning Director as the head
thereof, and such subordinate officers and employees as the City Council,
with the advice of the Mayor, shall determine are necessary for the proper
administration of the Department. All appointments, including that of the
Planning Director, shall be made by the Mayor, subject to the confirmation
of the City Council. All positions, except that of the Planning Director, shall
be subject to the provisions of Chapter 31 of the General Laws.
§ 7-33. Scope of activities.
The Department of Planning and Development shall be responsible for the
coordination of all planning and development-related activities of the City
government and shall include the following agencies and functions:
A. Planning Board.
B. Board of Appeals.
C. Conservation Commission.
D. Historic District Commission.
E. Industrial Development Finance Authority.
F. Design Review Board.
G. Parking and Traffic Commission.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-33
1:43
§ 7-34. Operating offices.
The Department of Planning and Development shall consist of the following
offices, whose duties and powers shall be set forth by ordinance:
H. Economic and Community Development Council.
I. Community Development Office.
J. Airport Commission.
K. Beverly Harbor Management Authority.
Planning Office. The Planning Office shall make careful studies of the
resources, possibilities and needs of the City and shall make careful
plans for the development of the City. The Planning Office shall include
a Planning Board. The Planning Board shall have the power to regulate
the development of land within the City, as authorized by MGL c. 41,
§§ 81A through 81GG, by the adoption, administration and enforcement
of rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall report to the City
Council its recommendations for all amendments and revisions of
Chapter 300, Zoning, of the City Code as is provided in MGL c. 40A,
§ 5. The Planning Board shall be a special permit granting agency as
specifically provided in Chapter 300, Zoning, and as provided in MGL c.
40A, § 9.29
A.
Zoning Appeals Office. The Zoning Appeals Office shall consist of a
Board of Appeals as may be provided for by ordinance and in Chapter
300, Zoning. The Board of Appeals hears and decides individual cases
brought by persons seeking land use relief; all as provided for in
MGL c. 40A, §§ 7 through 17, and Chapter 300, Zoning. The Board
of Appeals shall be a special permit granting agency for certain uses
which are specifically provided in Chapter 300, Zoning, and as provided
in MGL c. 40A, § 9. The Board of Appeals acts on matters of subdivision
control under the applicable sections of MGL c. 41, §§ 81Y, 81Z, 81AA,
and 81BB, and decides on comprehensive permits pursuant to the
provisions of MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 through 23.30
B.
Conservation Office. The Conservation Office shall consist of a
Conservation Commission of seven members as shall be provided for by
ordinance. The purpose of the Conservation Commission is to protect,
promote and enhance the quantity and quality of the natural resources
within the City, especially wetlands, wildlife and water resources,
through planning, acquisition, land management, regulation, scientific
research and public education. The Conservation Commission may
conduct researches into its local land areas, and shall seek to
coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for similar
C.
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III). See also Ch. 15, § 15-45, Planning Board.
30.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III). See also ch. 15, § 15-12, Appeals, Zoning Board of.
§ 7-33 BEVERLY CODE § 7-34
1:44
purposes. The Conservation Commission is an advisory and regulatory
committee of the City. The Conservation Commission may receive gifts,
bequests, or devises of personal property or interests in real property in
the name of the City, subject to approval of the Mayor. The Conservation
Commission may receive monetary gifts for development of a
Conservation Fund, and expend the same, subject to the General Laws
and the approval of the Mayor. The Conservation Commission is
responsible for the implementation of the provisions of MGL c. 131,
§§ 40 and 40A, and Chapter 287, Wetlands Protection, of the City Code,
in protecting riverfront areas, floodplains, sea coasts, water bodies and
other wetlands and inland wetlands within the City, and of the wetlands
protection and aquifer protection provisions of the general ordinances
of the City (if any). The Conservation Commission is responsible, with
the Parks and Recreation Commission, for development and adoption
of the City's Open Space and Recreation Plan. The Conservation
Commission may adopt policies and promulgate land management
plans for properties of the City reserved for conservation purposes.
Historic Districts Office. The Historic Districts Office shall consist of an
Historic Districts Commission to consist of not less than five members
nor more than seven members as provided for by ordinance.31
The Historic Districts Office shall seek to preserve, protect, and
develop the historical and archaeological assets of the City. The
Historic Districts Office may conduct research for places of historic
and archaeological value, and shall cooperate with the State
Archaeologist in conducting such research. The Historic Districts
Office shall seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies
organized for similar purposes and may, subject to appropriation
and approval by the Mayor, advertise, prepare, print and distribute
books, maps, charts, plans and pamphlets which it deems
necessary for its work.
(1)
The Historic Districts Office, for the purpose of protecting and
preserving such places, may make such recommendations as it
deems necessary to the Mayor and City Council, and, subject to
the approval of the City Council, to the Massachusetts Historical
Commission, that any such place be certified as an historical or
archaeological landmark.
(2)
The Historic Districts Office may hold hearings, may recommend
to the Mayor execution of contracts with individuals, organizations
and institutions or services furthering the objectives of their
program, may recommend to the Mayor execution of contracts with
local or regional associations for cooperative endeavors furthering
their program, and may, with the approval of the Mayor, accept
gifts, contributions and bequests of funds from individuals,
foundations and from federal, state or other governmental bodies
(3)
D.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-34
1:45
for the purpose of furthering its programs. The Historic Districts
Office may recommend to the Mayor the acquisition of property by
gift, purchase, grant, bequest, devise, lease or otherwise of a fee or
lesser interest in real or personal property of significant historical
value.
Office of Community Development. The Economic Development Office
shall include an Office of Community Development. The Office of
Community Development shall formulate, under the auspices of the
Mayor, a community and economic development policy. The Office of
Community Development shall provide a vehicle for coordination and
communication between all development agencies and officials and
the Mayor's office in order to ensure a timely governmental response
to development issues, opportunities and problems. The Office of
Economic Development shall include an Industrial Development
Finance Authority as provided for by ordinance.32
E.
F. There shall be a Design Review Board as provided for by ordinance.33
There shall be an Airport Office headed by an Airport Commission as
provided for by ordinance.34
G.
There shall be a Parking and Traffic Office as provided for by
ordinance.35
H.
There shall be a Harbor Management Authority as provided in Chapter
221 of the Acts of 1987 and as provided for by ordinance.36
I.
32.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-39, Industrial Development Finance Authority.
33.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-27, Design Review Board; and Ch. 300, Zoning,
§ 300-22.
34.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-11, Airport Commission.
35.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-43, Parking and Traffic Commission.
36.Editor's Note: See also Ch. 15, § 15-34, Harbor Management Authority.
§ 7-34 BEVERLY CODE § 7-34
1:46
ARTICLE XII
Police Protection Department
§ 7-35. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Police Protection which shall be responsible
for the coordination of all the police-related activities of the City and for the
supervision and coordination of all activities of all City agencies in relation
to any police safety matter.
§ 7-36. Scope of activities.
The Department of Police Protection shall be responsible for and shall
include the following functions:
§ 7-37. Operating offices.
The Department of Police Protection shall consist of the following offices:
A. Police Office.
B. Animal Control Office.
C. Harbor Office.
Police Office.
The Police Office shall be responsible for maintaining, keeping
and preserving the public peace and order. It shall be responsible
for programs of crime prevention, crime detection and for traffic
safety and enforcement of rules and regulations governing the
operation of motor vehicles and the use of ways by pedestrians. The
functions of the Police Office shall include but are not limited to
those enumerated below.
(1)
The Police Office shall be responsible for the following specific
functions:
Crime prevention: preserve the public peace, prevent crime,
and detect and arrest offenders.
(a)
Traffic enforcement: administer and enforce laws regulating,
directing, controlling and restricting the movement of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic, and the general use of the
streets by vehicles and the public.
(b)
Training: operate a training program to maintain and improve
the competence and efficiency of the members of the
Department.
(c)
Incident report preparation: prepare reports on injuries to
persons and property occurring by accident or otherwise on
(d)
(2)
A.
§ 7-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-37
1:47
the streets, in alleys and other public places within the City as
required by law.
Weapons disposition: provide a procedure for the destruction
or other disposition of all weapons or other articles used in
the commission of crime or coming into the custody of the
department; provided that where such weapon or article may
be used as evidence in either a civil or criminal proceeding, it
shall in no way be disposed of except upon a written order of a
court of law.
(e)
Lost property: provide a procedure for the sale of unclaimed,
lost or stolen articles coming into the custody of the
Department.
(f)
Prosecution: The Chief of Police shall cause proceedings to
be instituted for the prosecution of violations of laws or
ordinances, and attend to the trial of the same; and each
member of the Police Department shall enforce laws of the
commonwealth and the laws and ordinances of the City and
discharge such other duties as may be required of him.
(g)
Investigation of accidents: Upon the happening of any
accident, wherein the City may become a party or subject to
any liability whatsoever, the Chief of Police or ranking officer
shall forthwith cause a thorough investigation to be made.
He shall see that all available witnesses are interviewed,
measurements taken, plans made by the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
and photographs of the locus taken by a competent
photographer, if in his opinion such steps are necessary to
protect the City's interest. All data in reference to such
accident shall be filed with the permanent records of the
Department for reference, and for the use of the City Solicitor.
(h)
Animal Control Office. The Animal Control Office shall be headed by
the Animal Inspector as provided for by ordinance. In addition to the
powers and duties provided by ordinance, the person appointed as the
Animal Inspector shall also exercise the powers and perform the duties
of Inspector of Animals, as provided by ordinance. The Animal Control
Office shall be responsible for the enforcement of all laws relating to
dogs, including but not limited to MGL c. 140, §§ 136A to 174E, and all
ordinances of the City further regulating animals. The office shall also
be responsible for the inspection of animals as required by Chapter 129
of the General Laws and, in particular, for the regular inspection of neat
cattle, sheep and swine and all other domestic animals.37
B.
Harbor Office. The Harbor Office shall be headed by a Harbormaster as
provided for by ordinance.38
C.
37.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-37 BEVERLY CODE § 7-38
1:48
§ 7-38. Clerical assistants.
There shall be two clerical assistants assigned to the Police Department who
may be classified as Clerk-Typists, Senior Clerk-Typists, or Principal Clerks,
as the case may be, whose duties shall consist of clerical work only.
§ 7-39. Motor equipment repairman.
There shall be one motor equipment repairman assigned to the Police
Department, from the Public Services Department, whose duties shall
consist of repairs and the maintenance of Police Department equipment,
and Fire Department equipment, when necessary.
§ 7-40. Confidential Secretary. [Amended by Ord. No. 331]
§ 7-41. Appointments by Chief of Police.40
All members of the Police Department, except the Chief of Police, shall be
appointed by the Chief of Police.
§ 7-42. Suspension and removal.
There shall be within the Police Department the position of Confidential
Secretary to the Chief of Police. The duties of this secretary shall be
prescribed by the Chief of Police. The Chief of Police shall appoint
the Confidential Secretary, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
The duties and responsibilities may include, but not be limited to, the
following:
(1) Confidential management of reports and information.
(2) Inter-department liaison for the Chief.
(3) Liaison with other City, state and federal offices.
(4) Preparation of confidential reports, letters and records.
Typing and composition of correspondence; maintenance and
responsibility for confidential files.
(5)
(6) Management of office operations for the Office of the Chief.
(7) Other duties as prescribed by the Chief.
A.
B. This position shall not be subject to MGL Chapter 31 (civil service).39
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III). See Ch. 58, § 58-23, Harbormaster.
39.Editor's Note: Original Section 6.04(c)(iii), which immediately followed this section,
regarding the salary for this position, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. III).
40.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-42
1:49
§ 7-43. Special officers.41
§ 7-44. School traffic supervisors.42
The Chief of Police may appoint, subject to confirmation of the City Council,
special officers to serve as school traffic supervisors at the request of the
School Committee to handle school traffic. The duties of the school traffic
supervisors shall be to control the flow of traffic by stopping, starting and
directing such traffic. Any operator of any motor vehicle not obeying the
hand signals of the school traffic supervisors on active duty shall have his
registration number taken and turned in to the Chief of Police or head of the
Traffic Division within the Police Department.
Any neglect of or refusal to perform duty or any disorderly conduct or
disobedience or any violation of the rules or regulations of the Police
Department shall be proper cause for suspension, reduction in rank or
removal from the Department.
A.
Any such misconduct shall be reported forthwith in writing by the
Chief of Police to the Mayor, which report shall contain the name of
the offending person and a statement of his misconduct. The Mayor
may thereupon suspend such person and may, after a hearing by him
in accordance with the laws relating to civil service, reinstate such
person or continue such suspension for a definite period or reduce in
rank or remove such person from the Police Department. Subject to the
provisions of the laws relating to civil service, any member suspended
from duty shall not act as a member of the Department or be entitled
to any compensation until reinstated by the Mayor, and in all cases of
removal from office or Department the name of the person removed,
with a statement of the reasons therefor, shall be entered upon the
records of the Department.
B.
There shall be appointed annually by the Chief of Police, subject to
confirmation by the City Council, such number, as the Chief of Police
may deem proper, of special officers with all the powers of regular
patrol officers. Authority vested in special officers shall be confined
solely to the property of their employers. All special officers shall be
subject to the authority of the Chief of Police.
A.
Special officers shall hold office until their successors are appointed
and qualified, unless previously removed from office by the Chief of
Police.
B.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
42.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-42 BEVERLY CODE § 7-44
1:50
ARTICLE XIII
Public Services Department
§ 7-45. Establishment.
There shall be a Department of Public Services which shall be responsible
for the management of all the public-services-related activities of the City
and for the supervision and coordination of all activities of all City agencies
in relation to any public services matter.
§ 7-46. Scope of activities.
The Department of Public Services shall be responsible for and shall include
(but is not limited to) the following functions:
§ 7-47. Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works.
Highways, including maintenance and repair, sweeping, snow and ice
removal and control of all public streets, roads, ways, bridges and
sidewalks and storm-drain facilities of the City.
A.
Forestry, including Tree Warden and Superintendent of Shade Tree
Management and Pest Control as provided for by ordinance.
B.
Garage, including maintenance and ordinary repair of all motor
vehicles and equipment belonging to the City, excluding only School
Department and Fire Department vehicles and equipment.
C.
D. Cemetery maintenance and operation.
Grounds maintenance and landscaping, including all park and
playground maintenance.
E.
Maintenance and repair of all equipment and fixtures relative to the
water/sewer systems in the City.
F.
Appointment; term of office. There shall be a Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works appointed by the Mayor,
subject to the review of the Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the
Charter, to serve for a term not to exceed three years. The Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works shall serve
until a successor is appointed and qualified.
A.
Qualifications. The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works shall be a person especially fitted by education,
training and experience to perform the duties of the office and shall
have had at least five years of progressively responsible experience in
public works administration.
B.
C. Powers and duties.
§ 7-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-47
1:51
§ 7-48. Operating offices.
The Department of Public Services shall consist of the following offices:
§ 7-49. Staff.
The Public Services Department shall consist of permanent full-time
employees and one permanent part-time employee (Clerk of the Cemetery
Division of the Public Services Department, to be funded by the Cemetery
Board of Managers). Temporary laborers are to be hired at the discretion of
the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall be responsible to the Mayor for the effective
operation of the Department of Public Services.
(1)
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall be responsible for management of all projects
generated externally from public services, but involving more than
one line division of the Department and for the supervision of all
matters relating to the Department's scope of activities.
(2)
Office of Labor Services. The Office of Labor Services shall be
responsible for the labor-related functions and activities of the City,
except water and sewers for which separate provision is made. The
Office of Labor Services shall be responsible for the planning, design
and construction of all assigned public works improvement projects.
A.
Office of Garage and Motor Vehicle Maintenance. The Office of Garage
and Motor Vehicle Maintenance shall be responsible for the
maintenance and repair of all equipment and vehicles belonging to the
Department and of all other City equipment and vehicles which are
assigned to it for maintenance and repair.
B.
Water/Sewers Office. The Office of Water and Sewers shall be
responsible for the operation, maintenance and emergency repair of
all equipment and fixtures belonging to the Office, including the pump
station.
C.
Forestry and Grounds Office. The Forestry and Grounds Office shall be
responsible for all of the services of a Tree Warden as described in MGL
Chapter 87 and for all of the services of a Superintendent of Shade
Tree Management and Pest Control as described in MGL Chapter 132.
The Forestry and Grounds Office shall be responsible for the care and
maintenance of all landscaped areas of the City, including the grounds
around buildings, parks, playgrounds, public beaches and landings and
such other landscaped areas as may from time to time be assigned to
its care.
D.
§ 7-47 BEVERLY CODE § 7-50
1:52
§ 7-50. Municipal garage.
There shall be established a division within the Department of Public
Services to be known as the "municipal garage." All departmental motor
vehicles of the City, including snowplows, with the exception of vehicles
controlled by the School Department, shall be sent to the municipal garage
for all repairs and inspections.
§ 7-51. Expenditures.
All the expenditures in this Department shall be in conformance with
appropriations voted by the City Council.
§ 7-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-51
1:53

ARTICLE XIV
Purchasing Department43
§ 7-52. Establishment.
There shall be a Purchasing Department which shall be responsible for
all procurements of services and supplies for all offices and agencies of
the City government in conformity with the procedures and standards
established by Chapter 30B of the General Laws, and which shall oversee
the administration of all design and construction contracts for public
projects.
§ 7-53. Scope of activities.
The Purchasing Department shall be responsible for and shall include the
following functions:
Study, establish and coordinate uniform procurement practices and
procedures for City departments.
A.
Provide advice and assistance to individual employees on all
procurement matters.
B.
Function as the agent for the Mayor in interfacing with department
heads, supervisors and elected and appointed officials on all
procurement matters, including both goods and services.
C.
Develop a set of guidelines to govern the disposition of surplus material
and outdated, worn out or obsolete materials.
D.
Administer designer selection in accordance with the provisions of MGL
Chapter 7 and guidelines promulgated by the Division of Capital Asset
Management and Maintenance, including development of designer
selection criteria and evaluation standards, advertising and other
search techniques, proposal opening, proposal evaluation, award
recommendations and contract execution.
E.
Administer construction bidding in accordance with the provisions of
MGL Chapters 30 and 149 and with guidelines promulgated by the
Division of Capital Asset Management and Maintenance, including
coordination with the project designer of bid advertising, bid opening
and contract awards.
F.
Administer all contracts for construction to assure compliance with all
legal requirements.
G.
Develop and maintain a "Buy Recycled" policy to be followed by all
departments and agencies of the City and provide advice and assistance
to supervisory personnel in implementation of that policy; provide a
H.
43.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 7-52 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-53
1:55
system to track and monitor the implementation of the "Buy Recycled"
policy to assure continuing eligibility for any available grant programs.
Standardize forms and records to be used in the City's procurement and
contract administration programs other than those forms and records
whose format is regulated by statute or by state agency or agencies
authorized, by law, to exercise oversight over specific elements of
procurements.
I.
Recommend to the Mayor and City Council the enactment of such
ordinances as are considered necessary to implement and administer
the City's procurements and contract administration programs.
J.
§ 7-53 BEVERLY CODE § 7-53
1:56
Chapter 15
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, COUNCILS, COMMITTEES AND
AUTHORITIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agencies — See Ch. 7. Elective offices — See Ch. 26.
§ 7-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-53
1:57

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 15-1. Oaths of office.
§ 15-2. Purpose; term of committee membership.
§ 15-3. Committees and ad hoc committees.
Persons required to take oath of office. Every person who is elected
or appointed to serve in a City office or as a member of a multiplemember
body shall be required to take an oath of office in the presence
of the City Clerk, before entering upon the duties of the office, which
oath shall be subscribed by the person taking it and shall be filed and
preserved in the office of the City Clerk.
A.
Form of oath.
Commonwealth of
Massachusetts
County of Essex, ss. ) 20XX
City of Beverly
I, _________________________, do solemnly swear that I will support the
Constitution of the United States, the Constitution of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, and the Charter and Ordinances
of the City of Beverly; that I will faithfully, honestly and impartially
discharge my duties as _________________________ during my service
therein, so help me God.
(signature)
Subscribed and sworn to before me this _____ day of _______________,
20XX.
(signature)
City Clerk
B.
This chapter of the City Code describes all City agencies comprised of
multiple-member bodies and City officers and the operating divisions
of the departments of the City government which may be established
from time to time by the Mayor, all pursuant to Charter Section 5-1.
This chapter further delineates the manner and time of appointment
and terms of appointment generally, and authority, responsibilities and
interrelationships among all City agencies.
A.
B. Committee membership shall be on an annual fiscal basis.
§ 15-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-3
1:59
§ 15-4. Appointment, terms of office, removal and vacancies.
§ 15-5. Annual reports.
All multiple-member bodies shall prepare annual reports of their activities
and submit same to the Mayor for inclusion in the annual report of the City,
on or before the fourth Friday in July. The annual report shall describe fiscalyear
activities for the year ending each June 30.
§ 15-6. Internal organization.
Additional City agencies and committees may be established by the
City Council by amendment to this chapter. Ordinances establishing
City agencies shall specify the following: membership, term of office,
authority and responsibilities, and may provide for the
interrelationships among the City Council and the other City agencies.
A.
The Beverly City Council may from time to time, based upon passage
by a majority vote of its membership, establish ad hoc committees to
assist the City Council in carrying out the Council's responsibilities. Ad
hoc committees shall be limited to a particular subject area and serve
only in that capacity for a specific period of time.
B.
The Mayor, in like manner, may, from time to time, establish ad hoc
committees to assist the Mayor in examining any matter which would
assist the Mayor in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the
office.
C.
Pursuant to Beverly Home Rule Charter Section 3-3, all members of
all City agencies and City of Beverly representatives to regional
governmental boards and committees shall be appointed by the Mayor
unless the law establishing such committee provides otherwise.
A.
Appointments made by the Mayor shall be subject to review by the City
Council in the manner provided in Charter Section 2-10.
B.
The terms of office of the members of all multiple-member bodies
shall be staggered so that approximately 1/3 of the membership, as
nearly as is possible, shall expire each year. The term of office shall be
designated at the time of the appointment. Numbers of members for
multiple-member bodies will vary. The Mayor shall annually evaluate all
members subject to reappointment.
C.
Members may be removed, subject to a hearing by the City Council,
pursuant to Charter Section 3-4. Any vacancy which occurs shall be
filled by the Mayor for the remainder of the unexpired term, subject to
Charter Section 2-10.
D.
Each multiple-member body shall, at a minimum, annually elect from
its membership a chair, vice-chair and clerk. Multiple-member bodies
may further elect a treasurer and such other officer or officers as are
deemed necessary or as required by statute. The annual election shall
A.
§ 15-3 BEVERLY CODE § 15-6
1:60
occur in July of each year, or as near after appointment of new members
as may be practical. The Mayor, the City Council and the City Clerk
shall be notified of the officers of the multiple-member body upon their
election.
The chair shall preside over all meetings of the multiple-member body,
and shall be the official representative of the multiple-member body in
all proceedings before the Mayor, the City Council, and other officials
of the City. The vice-chair shall perform the chair's functions in the
absence of the chair. The clerk shall be responsible for the certification
of the board's meeting minutes, observance of the Public Records
Law,44 and maintenance of other records of the board.
B.
In order that newly appointed members of multiple-member bodies
might have the opportunity to become acquainted with the type and
variety of matters which are likely to come before the multiple-member
body during the term of appointment, the chair of each multiplemember
body shall, forthwith upon receipt of notice of the appointment
of a new member, provide such member with copies of the minutes of
meetings of the body for the two prior years and copies of all laws,
ordinances, rules or regulations governing or otherwise applicable to
the office. The chair shall, within 30 days following receipt of notice
of the appointment, meet with the new member and provide such
orientation to the duties of the office as may be deemed necessary or
desirable.
C.
Time and place of meetings. The Clerk of each multiple-member body
shall be responsible for notifying the City Clerk, the Mayor, and the
City Council, on or before January 1, of the regularly scheduled board
meeting times and dates for the ensuing calendar year. The notification
shall also include a location for each regular meeting. This shall not
prevent boards from calling special meetings in addition to those
regularly scheduled, provided that, in all instances, standards of the
Open Meeting Law (MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25) are followed. The
City Clerk shall ensure posting of all meeting schedules consistent with
the Open Meeting Law. No multiple-member body shall schedule a
regular meeting which conflicts with a regularly scheduled meeting of
the City Council.
D.
Authority to establish subcommittees. Each multiple-member body may,
by a majority vote of its membership, establish subcommittees for the
purpose of addressing a particular issue or issues. A report of their
activities shall regularly be made to the full multiple-member body.
Each subcommittee so established shall observe laws relevant to the
keeping of public records, the Open Meeting Law, and any other laws
as prescribed by the Charter, by ordinance or by law.
E.
44.Editor's Note: See MGL c. 66.
§ 15-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-7
1:61
§ 15-7. References to state statutes.
The references to state statutes which are contained in the sections which
follow describing the powers, duties, and responsibilities of the offices and
agencies therein enumerated are provided for the purpose of describing the
scope of authority which may be exercised by the City in respect to each
particular matter. No such enumeration shall in any way be construed to
limit the ability of the City to reorganize itself and to redistribute powers,
duties and responsibilities to and among various officers and under various
titles authorized by MGL c. 43B, § 20, and Article 5 of the Charter.
§ 15-8. Eligibility for service.
§ 15-9. Supplementary administrative assignments.
Whenever the Mayor determines that the needs of the City so require,
the Mayor may assign, on a temporary basis, to any City agency duties in
addition to those duties detailed for the agency in this chapter, provided
such additional duties are reasonably related to the regular duties of such
City agency.
City employees. No permanent full-time municipal employee of the City
is eligible to be appointed to a multiple-member body of the City unless
otherwise authorized by ordinance. This limitation shall not apply to ad
hoc committees as further defined herein.
A.
Residency requirement for other City offices. All members of all
multiple-member bodies shall be residents and registered voters of the
City, except for the Airport Commission which may have two members
from the Town of Danvers as provided by this chapter. If any duly
appointed member of a multiple-member body shall no longer reside
and be registered to vote in the City, then he or she shall immediately
notify the Mayor and that position shall be considered vacated
immediately. This provision may be waived by a two-thirds vote of the
City Council when acting on a recommendation made by the Mayor, but
only for the duration of the unexpired term.
B.
§ 15-7 BEVERLY CODE § 15-9
1:62
ARTICLE II
Specific Multiple-Member Bodies
§ 15-10. Aging, Council on.
§ 15-11. Airport Commission.
Composition; term of office. There shall be a Council on Aging
consisting of nine members. The members of the Council on Aging shall
annually elect one of the nine members appointed by the Mayor to act
as Chair. The term of each member shall be for three years, staggered
so that three members are appointed each year.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Council on Aging shall coordinate
and conduct programs dealing with problems for the aging and promote
facilities for the health, education, welfare and recreation of the aging.
It shall annually submit a budget to the Mayor and City Council for
their approval. It shall make an annual report on or before the first
day of February to the Mayor and City Council, and shall make such
other reports as from time to time may be requested. The Council on
Aging shall be an advocate for the needs of the elderly people residing
in the City. The Council on Aging shall conduct surveys of the elderly
population to better determine their needs, problems and concerns.
The Council on Aging shall develop criteria for program and supportive
services development based upon an assessment of needs, and shall
participate in programs offered by the Commonwealth's Department of
Elder Affairs. The Council on Aging is an advisory committee of the City.
B.
Composition; terms of office. There shall be an Airport Commission
consisting of nine members. Members of such Commission shall not
have any affiliation or interests, directly or indirectly, with any
operating firm or lessee at the airport and aviation facilities. Two
members shall be residents of the Town of Danvers as shall be
recommended by the Town Manager of the Town of Danvers, who shall
recommend said members to the Mayor for appointment. In the event
that such recommendation fails to result in an appointment, additional
residents of Danvers shall be sought. The members of the Airport
Commission shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of the
City Council, for terms of three years each, or until their successors are
appointed and approved. Vacancies in the Commission shall be filled for
the unexpired term by the appointing authority. [Amended 1-6-2005
by Ord. No. 358; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013; 3-21-2016 by Ord.
No. 069]
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Airport Commission is responsible
for the custody, care, and maintenance of the Beverly Regional Airport
(also known as "John Mountan Field"), all other municipal aviation
facilities in the City as well as ensuring safe and efficient operation
under pertinent rules and regulations. The Commission operates under
the authority provided to airport commissions pursuant to General
B.
§ 15-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-11
1:63
§ 15-12. Appeals, Zoning Board of.
Laws Chapter 90, by the Charter, ordinances, and by any other state
and/or federal rules and regulations governing airports. [Amended
11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 465]
The Mayor shall appoint an Airport Manager who is the executive
officer of the Commission, who may, with the consent of the Mayor,
appoint an Assistant Airport Manager. The Airport Commission may,
consistent with state procurement regulations, and with the consent of
the Mayor, let or lease land areas at the airport for up to 20 years,
determine charges or rentals for property, facilities, installations,
landing fees and services, and determine the terms and conditions for
such charges. Subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council,
the Airport Commission may let or lease for longer periods.
C.
The Airport Commission, subject to the consent of the Mayor, is
authorized to expend any funds granted by the City, state or federal
government for airport purposes, and may make contracts for the
maintenance, operation, construction, enlargement, and improvement
of the airport pursuant to the laws of the commonwealth governing the
making of such contracts.
D.
The Airport Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the use
of the airport or for the safety of the public upon or beyond the limits
of the airport under its control. Such rules and regulations must be
approved by the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission and published
in the same manner that ordinances are required to be published.
E.
If the Airport Commission obtains an offer for a grant of federal funds,
it shall designate the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission as its
agent to receive federal funds and receipt therefor in its behalf, and,
subject to the consent of the Mayor, shall enter into an agreement with
the Massachusetts Aeronautics Commission prescribing the terms and
conditions of such agency in accordance with federal laws, rules and
regulations, and applicable laws of the commonwealth.
F.
The Airport Commission may invite bids for any contract involving
the acquisition, establishment, construction, enlargement, protection,
equipment, maintenance, or operation of its airport, and shall submit
every such proposed contract to the Massachusetts Aeronautics
Commission for approval. After approval has been given, the Airport
Commission may, subject to the consent of the Mayor, award such
contracts, subject to the availability of appropriations.
G.
Except as otherwise provided in this or any other ordinance of the City,
the Airport Commission assumes all other responsibilities and authority
granted pursuant to General Laws Chapter 90 and pertinent state and/
or federal regulations.
H.
§ 15-11 BEVERLY CODE § 15-12
1:64
§ 15-13. Assessors, Board of.
§ 15-14. Award to Municipal Employees Committee.
Composition. There shall be a Zoning Board of Appeals consisting of
five members and five associate members. (See Chapter 300, Zoning,
for specific provisions.45)46
A.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Zoning Board of Appeals hears and decides individual cases
brought by persons seeking land use relief; all as provided for in
MGL c. 40A, §§ 7 through 17, and Chapter 300, Zoning, of the City
Code. The Zoning Board of Appeals is an advisory and regulatory
committee of the City.
(1)
The Zoning Board of Appeals acts as a board of appeals on matters
of subdivision control under the applicable sections of MGL c.
41, §§ 81Y, 81Z, 81AA and 81BB; and decides on comprehensive
permits pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 40B, §§ 20 through
23.
(2)
B.
Composition. There shall be a Board of Assessors consisting of three
members, one of whom shall be Chief Assessor and Chairman of the
Board.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Board of Assessors shall annually
determine the valuation of all real and personal property subject to
taxation within the City. The Board of Assessors shall annually
determine the annual tax rate necessary to provide for the budget
approved by the City. The Board of Assessors hears and decides all
questions relating to the abatement of taxes levied by it. It has all of the
other powers, duties and responsibilities which are given to boards of
assessors by general laws.
B.
There is hereby created an Award to Municipal Employees Committee
consisting of five members, appointed yearly by the Mayor, subject to
confirmation by the City Council, whose duty shall be to gather, classify
and judge suggestions and make monetary awards to eligible City
employees who submit the most valuable suggestions for improving the
service of the municipality.
A.
The Committee shall be unpaid and shall operate under the following
conditions:
The Committee shall accept suggestions, in writing only, with the
signature of the employee affixed thereto.
(1)
B.
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning, Art. XIII, Board of Appeals.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 15-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-14
1:65
§ 15-15. Beverly Golf and Tennis Club Commission; Club parking
restrictions.
(2) The suggestions shall become the property of the City.
The Committee shall turn over all suggestions to the City Council
within three months after they have been received.
(3)
The Committee shall have the power to make rules and regulations
governing the awards and the amounts thereof, subject to the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 5.47
(4)
All municipal employees having attained their office by the
electorate shall be eligible to participate in this program.
(5)
Department heads and executive boards shall be disqualified from
entering suggestions relative to their own department only.
(6)
Composition. There shall be a Beverly Golf and Tennis Club Commission
consisting of nine members which shall have the custody, care and
management of the facility known as the "Beverly Golf and Tennis
Club." Members of such Commission shall not have any affiliation or
interest, directly or indirectly, other than an annual membership as may
be prescribed under the rules and regulations of the Commission, with
any operating firm, third-party vendor, or lessee of the Beverly Golf and
Tennis Club facilities. Its membership shall consist of seven members
from the public, one member of the Conservation Commission, and one
member of the Parks and Recreation Commission.
A.
Authority and responsibilities.
Such Commission shall make rules and regulations not otherwise
inconsistent with law, and may set and collect any fees which shall
be applied to a specific account established with and supervised by
the City Treasurer. All rules and regulations and the fee schedules
adopted shall be subject to the approval of the Mayor and City
Council.
(1)
The Commission shall let or lease the Beverly Golf and Tennis Club,
or any part thereof, with the approval of the Mayor and the City
Council. No modification or waiver of the term of any lease by the
Commission shall be effective without the approval of the Mayor
and the City Council.
(2)
Under no circumstances shall the Beverly Golf and Tennis Club
Commission hire any personnel.
(3)
The Beverly Golf and Tennis Club Commission shall make an annual
report on or before the first day of August to the Mayor and the
City Council, reflecting the financial operation of the previous fiscal
(4)
B.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 15-14 BEVERLY CODE § 15-15
1:66
§ 15-16. Beverly Housing Authority.
year, and shall make such other reports as from time to time may
be required.
There shall be no parking in areas properly posted and designated by
the Commission as "No parking" areas at the Beverly Golf and Tennis
Club.
C.
Composition. The Housing Authority shall be managed, controlled and
governed by five members, appointed as provided in this section, of
whom three shall constitute a quorum.
Four members of the Beverly Housing Authority shall be appointed
by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council, for terms
of three years each, such that the terms of each member expires in
a different year.
(1)
One member of the Beverly Housing Authority shall be appointed
by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community
Development (Department) for a term of three years which expires
in a different year than any member appointed by the Mayor.
(2)
One of the four members of the Beverly Housing Authority
appointed by the Mayor shall be a resident of the City and shall
be a representative of organized labor who shall be appointed
by the Mayor from a list of not fewer than two names nor more
than five names, representing different unions, submitted by the
Central Labor Council, AFL-CIO and the International Brotherhood
of Teamsters, Chauffeurs, Warehousemen and Helpers of America
of the City or of the district within which the City is included. If
no such list of names is submitted within 60 days after a vacancy
occurs, the Mayor may appoint any representative of organized
labor to the Authority.
(3)
One of the four members of the Beverly Housing Authority
appointed by the Mayor shall be a tenant in a building owned and
operated by or on behalf of the Beverly Housing Authority who
shall be appointed by the Mayor from lists of names submitted
by each duly recognized City-wide and project-wide tenants'
organization in the City. A tenants' organization may submit a list
which contains not fewer than two names nor more than five names
to the Mayor, who shall make the selection from among the names
so submitted; provided that, where no public housing units are
owned and operated by the Beverly Housing Authority and no such
units are owned and operated on behalf of the Beverly Housing
Authority, the Mayor shall appoint any tenant of the Beverly
Housing Authority from lists submitted in accordance with this
section. If no list of names is submitted within 60 days after a
vacancy occurs, the Mayor shall appoint any tenant to the
authority. The Mayor shall notify in writing tenants' organizations
(4)
A.
§ 15-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-16
1:67
§ 15-17. Beverly Waste Reduction Committee. [Amended 6-16-1998
by Ord. No. 144; 4-4-2002 by Ord. No. 41; 5-4-2006 by Ord. No. 83;
11-16-2015 by Ord. No. 480; 11-7-2016 by Ord. No. 236]
as specified herein not less than 90 days prior to the expiration of
the term of a tenant member. Whenever a vacancy occurs in the
term of a tenant member for any reason other than the expiration
of a term, the Mayor shall notify in writing the tenants'
organizations specified herein within 10 working days after the
vacancy occurs. The Mayor shall make an appointment within a
reasonable time after the expiration of 60 days after said notice.
Vacancies, other than by reason of expiration of terms, shall be
filled for the balance of the unexpired term, in the same manner as
the original appointment.
(5)
As soon as possible after the qualification of the members of the
Beverly Housing Authority, the City Clerk shall file a certificate of
such appointment with the Department, and a duplicate thereof,
in the office of the State Secretary. If the State Secretary finds
that the Beverly Housing Authority has been organized and the
members thereof appointed according to law, he shall issue to it a
certificate of organization, and such certificate shall be conclusive
evidence of the lawful organization of the Authority and of the
appointment of the members thereof.
(6)
Authority and responsibilities. The Beverly Housing Authority shall
make careful studies of the housing needs within the City, and shall
provide such programs to make available housing for families of low
income and for elderly persons of low income as it deems to be
necessary or desirable. The Beverly Housing Authority shall have all
of the powers, duties, authority and responsibilities as are afforded to
such entities under General Laws Chapter 121B.
B.
Appointment and term. The Beverly Waste Reduction Committee shall
consist of nine members, each appointed for a term of three years,
or until their successors are qualified. The membership shall include
persons interested in fostering decreased solid waste and increased
solid waste recycling in the City of Beverly. Ex officio, nonvoting
members shall include a representative of the City department
responsible for solid waste disposal and the Health Director.
A.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Beverly Waste Reduction Committee shall act in an advisory
and consulting capacity to the Mayor, City Council, and other
interested City departments, boards, committees or commissions
and to the citizens of the City, relative to any and all matters
concerning solid waste management except those matters
concerning hazardous wastes that are made the responsibility of
the Hazardous Waste Oversight Committee.
(1)
B.
§ 15-16 BEVERLY CODE § 15-17
1:68
§ 15-18. Building and Other Facilities Planning and Construction
Committee. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
There shall be a Building and Other Facilities Planning and Construction
Committee (Planning and Construction Committee) in accordance with
Charter Section 5-6.
§ 15-19. Cable Television Advisory Committee.
The Beverly Waste Reduction Committee shall identify ways of
increasing recycling and waste reduction.
(2)
The Beverly Waste Reduction Committee shall serve as a resource
for the general education of the public with respect to matters
concerning solid waste management, solid waste reduction, and
recycling.
(3)
The Beverly Waste Reduction Committee shall address itself to the
following matters dealing with solid waste management:
Assisting City officials in establishing a solid waste
management policy that aims to decrease waste disposal,
particularly by enforcing Massachusetts waste bans, and to
increase recycling.
(a)
Encouraging increased recycling and decreased waste disposal
by Beverly citizens, schools and businesses by utilizing
available funds as needed for educational materials.
(b)
Encouraging composting using household composters and the
City compost site.
(c)
Establishing a mechanism for periodic review of citizen
inquiries.
(d)
Reviewing monthly recycling and waste tonnage in order to
assess the effectiveness of education programs.
(e)
Requesting updates on solid waste management at schools and
other municipal public buildings on a regular basis.
(f)
Assisting in writing grants for funds for education, and the
purchasing of recycling bins and composters.
(g)
(4)
Meetings; chairperson. The Beverly Waste Reduction Committee shall
meet in the month of January of each year to elect a Chairperson
who will preside at the meetings of the Committee. The Beverly Waste
Reduction Committee shall meet no less often than bimonthly.
C.
Composition. There shall be a Cable Television Advisory Committee
(CTAC) consisting of nine members and three alternate members.
A.
§ 15-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-19
1:69
§ 15-20. Cemetery Commission.
Authority and responsibilities. The CTAC advises the Mayor on matters
relating to the licensing and supervision of a contract for cable services
in the City consistent with General Laws Chapter 166A. Consistent
with the cable contract, the CTAC may be designated by the Mayor to
exercise certain authority under the contract.
The CTAC acts as a sounding board for citizen complaints and
suggestions relating to the cable television services and Internet
and shall, under the direction of the Mayor, refer subscriber
complaints to the cable operator for appropriate resolution. The
CTAC meets not less than once each quarter for the purpose of
reviewing cable contract compliance and advising on other
licensing matters.
(1)
The CTAC shall also specifically address itself to the following
matters:
The continued review of the original contract, with the right
to "call for action" to negotiate with the licensee to address
discrepancies that occur.
(a)
The ongoing study of rules and regulations issued by the state
advisory commission, and briefings to keep up with changing
state of the art in the communications technologies.
(b)
Acting as liaison for the public, for cable TV programming
and public access in the City (studies, evaluations,
recommendations).
(c)
A commitment to advising and educating regarding all of the
above, for the Mayor and for the residents of the City.
(d)
The CTAC shall develop and submit to the City Council a
document, including a policy statement and specific
procedures for use of cable television, for coverage of political
campaigns for elections set by the City Council. The City
Council shall approve such document, return it to the
Committee for additional work, or amend it as the City Council
sees fit. Thereafter, an updated document will be submitted to
the City Council once a year on March 1.
(e)
On all matters pertaining to public issues under consideration
by City agencies, the CTAC shall see to it that coverage is fair
and unbiased.
(f)
(2)
B.
Composition. There shall be a Board of Managers of Public Cemeteries
(which shall be called the "Cemetery Commission") which shall consist
of five persons: one to be the Director of Engineering, Commissioner
of Public Services, Public Works, one to be the Finance Director or
a designee of the Finance Director, one to be a member of the
A.
§ 15-19 BEVERLY CODE § 15-20
1:70
Conservation Commission, to be designated by that body, one to be a
member of the Historic Districts Commission, to be designated by that
body, and one to be appointed in the month of February (in different
years) for a term of two years by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by
the City Council. One of the members of the Board of Managers shall
serve as clerk for the purpose of maintaining minutes of the Board's
proceedings and other tasks as may be required from time to time.
Authority and responsibilities.
Organizational meeting; record of proceedings. The Cemetery
Commission shall meet as frequently as its duties require, and, at
its first meeting of each year, it shall elect a Chairman and also
a Clerk. The Clerk shall keep a record of all proceedings of the
Board.
(1)
Powers and duties; rules and regulations. The Cemetery
Commission shall make all necessary rules and regulations
concerning the operation of public cemeteries. The Cemetery
Commission may lay out the public cemeteries and burial places of
the City into lots and may sell and convey to any persons, whether
residents of the City or otherwise, the exclusive right of burial
and of erecting tombs, monuments, or cenotaphs. The Cemetery
Commission will make recommendations to the Mayor relative to
the acquisition of lands for the expansion of public cemeteries, and
will be charged with the layout of existing cemetery properties
using available space to the maximum practicable extent. The
Cemetery Commission shall make an annual report to the City
Council.
(2)
Revenues; disposition of proceeds. Receipts for the delivery of
services shall be deposited with the general fund. Proceeds from
the sale of cemetery lots will be deposited in the "Sale of Lots
Fund" and the "Endowment Fund" according to the then current
schedule of rates. The Cemetery Commissioners will annually
appropriate transfers from these fund accounts for the care of
cemeteries.
(3)
Maintenance of cemeteries. The maintenance of cemeteries shall
be the sole responsibility of the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works.
(4)
B.
Endowment of lots; perpetual care. The cost of graves, perpetual care,
openings and any other related costs shall be determined by the Board
of Managers of the Cemetery Division of the Public Services
Department and a fee schedule shall be posted in the City Clerk's
office. Such sums shall be entered upon the City Treasurer-Collector's
books and shall be invested under the direction of the Commissioner
of Trust Funds in such manner as shall show the name of the person
from whom, and the lot or lots, grave or graves on account of which
the same was received. Such lot or lots, grave or graves shall be in
C.
§ 15-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-20
1:71
§ 15-21. Clean Energy Advisory Committee. [Amended 4-9-2008 by
Ord. No. 61]
condition acceptable to the Board of Managers of Public Cemeteries
before such donation shall be deposited. The Treasurer-Collector shall
keep a separate account of each deposit thus made and collect the
income thereof and credit the same on each account. Upon receipt of
money for the endowment of a lot or lots, grave or graves, the City
Treasurer-Collector shall make receipts in duplicate showing the name
or names of the person or persons making the deposit, the date of the
same, and designating the location and ownership of the lot or lots,
grave or graves to be endowed, one copy of which is to be given to
the person or persons making the deposit and one copy to the Clerk
of the Board of Managers of Public Cemeteries. It shall be the duty of
the Board of Managers to apply the income of all investments made
under the provisions of this section for the care and preservation of
each particular lot or grave for which a deposit has been made and so
invested. [Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 122]
Establishment; composition; term of office; vacancies. There is hereby
established a Clean Energy Advisory Committee consisting of seven
members, three of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor and four
of whom shall be appointed by the City Council. The Clean Energy
Advisory Committee shall also consist of three ex officio advisors having
no voting authority and shall include the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works, or his/her designee, the
Director of Building and Grounds or his/her designee and the Inspector
of Wires or his/her designee. Each of the appointees preferably shall
have demonstrated interest in the field of clean energy. All
appointments shall be for a term not to exceed three years. All
appointments shall be subject to review by the City Council.
A.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Clean Energy Advisory Committee shall act in an advisory
capacity to the Mayor, City Council, and other interested
departments, boards, commissions or committees and to the
citizens of Beverly relative to any and all matters concerning the
conservation of energy. It shall facilitate the adoption of renewable
energy sources and practices.
(1)
A majority of the appointed members presently named and serving
on the Committee shall constitute a quorum, and no meeting shall
be continued without a quorum present. A majority of the members
presently named and serving on the Committee shall be necessary
for the approval or disapproval of any recommendation.
(2)
The Committee shall adopt rules and regulations for keeping
accurate minutes of its meetings.
(3)
B.
§ 15-20 BEVERLY CODE § 15-21
1:72
§ 15-22. Community Preservation Committee. [Added 6-19-2013 by
Ord. No. 51]
The Committee shall appear before the City Council in the months
of March and October and present a verbal written annual report.
(4)
The Clean Energy Advisory Committee's functions shall include,
but are not limited to, the following:
Assist in developing a comprehensive City energy policy for
current and future use.
(a)
Identify funding sources and resources that could be used to
implement energy programs designed to conserve energy.
(b)
Facilitate the adoption of energy conservation in public
buildings, vehicles and equipment.
(c)
Research and provide information regarding municipal
strategies related to energy efficiency and sustainable
development.
(d)
(e) Educate the public in matters of clean energy.
(5)
Establishment. There is hereby established a Community Preservation
Committee, in accordance with Chapter 267 of the Acts of 2000, the
Massachusetts Community Preservation Act, MGL c. 44B, § 1 et seq., as
amended, which shall consist of nine members.
A.
Membership, appointing authority and terms.
The composition of the Committee, the appointment authority and
term of office for the Committee members shall be as follows:
One member of the Historic Districts Commission, acting as
the Historic Commission, as designated by the Commission, for
an initial term of three years and thereafter for a term of three
years.
(a)
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by
the Commission, for an initial term of two years and thereafter
for a term of three years.
(b)
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the
Board, for an initial term of one year and thereafter for a term
of three years.
(c)
One member of the Parks and Recreation Commission as
designated by the Commission, for an initial term of three
years and thereafter for a term of three years.
(d)
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by the
Authority, for an initial term of two years and thereafter for a
term of three years.
(e)
(1)
B.
§ 15-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-22
1:73
One member of the Open Space and Recreation Committee as
designated by the Committee, for an initial term of year and
thereafter for a term of three years. [Amended 6-18-2014 by
Ord. No. 126]
(f)
Three at-large members being residents of the City not
currently holding elected office, as appointed by the City
Council:
One member to be appointed for an initial term of three
years, and thereafter for a term of three years.
[1]
One member to be appointed for an initial term of two
years, and thereafter for a term of three years.
[2]
One member to be appointed for an initial term of one
year, and thereafter for a term of three years.
[3]
(g)
The at-large seats shall be open to any resident, and members may
include citizens who have expertise or demonstrated interest in
open space, recreation, historic preservation, affordable housing,
municipal finance or fiscal accounting practices. Preference will be
given to applicants who are not currently members of any of the six
boards, commissions and committees listed in Subsection B(1)(a)
through (f), inclusive. [Amended 6-18-2014 by Ord. No. 126]
(2)
If possible, Committee membership as a whole should be drawn
from all wards.
(3)
The commission, board or committee that has appointment
authority under this section shall appoint such representative(s)
within 45 days of the effective date of this section. The City Council
shall also appoint its representatives within 45 days of the effective
date of this section.
(4)
Any vacancy on the Community Preservation Committee shall be
filled by the commission, board or committee that designated the
member who creates the vacancy by designating another member
in accordance with the above for the unexpired term, and within 45
days of the date of vacancy.
(5)
The City Council shall also fill any vacancy in its appointments by
designating another member in accordance with the above for the
unexpired term, and within 45 days of the date of vacancy.
(6)
Should the City Council fail to make an appointment authorized by
Subsection B(4) or (6) above, the Mayor shall fill the position within
an additional 45 days.
(7)
Should any of the commissions, boards or committees that have
appointment authority under this section no longer be in existence
for whatever reason, the appointment authority for that
(8)
§ 15-22 BEVERLY CODE § 15-22
1:74
commission, board or committee shall become the responsibility of
the City Council.
All Committee members shall serve on the Committee without
compensation.
(9)
(10)Vacancies shall be publicly posted.
Duties.
The Community Preservation Committee shall study the needs,
possibilities, and resources of the City regarding community
preservation, including the consideration of regional projects for
community preservation, and shall develop and publish community
preservation guidelines within six months of the Committee's first
meeting. Development of the guidelines shall include a public
hearing.
The Committee shall consult with the public in addition to
existing municipal boards, including the City Council, the
Conservation Commission, the Historic Districts Commission,
the Planning Board, the Open Space and Recreation
Committee, the Parks and Recreation Commission and the
Housing Authority, or persons acting in those capacities or
performing like duties, in conducting such studies.
(a)
The Committee shall annually hold at least one public
informational hearing (and may hold more than one such
meeting in a given year) on the needs, possibilities and
resources of the City regarding community preservation,
notice of which shall be posted publicly and published for
each of two weeks preceding a hearing in a newspaper of
general circulation in the City and posted electronically on the
City's website. The Committee may, after proper appropriation,
incur expenses as permitted by state law using funds from the
Community Preservation Fund to pay such expenses.
(b)
(1)
The Community Preservation Committee shall make
recommendations to the City Council for the acquisition, creation
and preservation of open space; for the acquisition, preservation,
rehabilitation and restoration of historic resources; for the
acquisition, creation, preservation, rehabilitation and restoration
of land for recreational use; for the acquisition, creation,
preservation, and support of community housing; and for the
rehabilitation or restoration of open space and community housing
that is acquired or created with community preservation funds.
With respect to community housing, the Community Preservation
Committee shall recommend, wherever possible, the reuse of
existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously
developed sites. With respect to recreational use, the acquisition of
artificial turf for athletic fields shall be prohibited.
(2)
C.
§ 15-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-22
1:75
The Community Preservation Committee may include in its
recommendation(s) to the City Council a recommendation to set
aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are
consistent with community preservation but for which sufficient
revenues are not then available in the Community Preservation
Fund, or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes
that are consistent with community preservation.
The Community Preservation Committee may recommend the
issuance of general obligation bonds or notes, in accordance
with the provisions of MGL c. 44B, § 11, in anticipation of
revenues to be raised pursuant to MGL c. 44B, § 3, the
proceeds of which shall be deposited in the Community
Preservation Fund.
(a)
In every fiscal year, the Committee shall recommend that the
City Council either spend, or set aside for later spending,
not less than 10% of the annual revenues in the Community
Preservation Fund for each of the following: open space (not
including land for recreational use); historic resources; and
community housing.
(b)
(3)
Quorum requirements and cost estimates.
The Community Preservation Committee shall not meet or conduct
business without the presence of a quorum and shall keep a written
record of its proceedings. A majority of the members of the
Community Preservation Committee shall constitute a quorum.
(1)
When making a recommendation(s) to the City Council, the
Community Preservation Committee shall provide the Council with
estimates of cost for each recommendation.
(2)
D.
Rules and regulations.
The Committee shall annually elect one of its members to serve as
Chairperson and may elect such other officers, adopt procedural
rules and regulations and establish any subcommittee(s) as it
deems appropriate.
(1)
A Committee member may serve as Chairperson for two
consecutive years, after which she or he shall not be eligible to
be nominated for the same position for a third year. However, the
Committee may waive this provision by a two-thirds vote.
(2)
The Committee shall clearly define and make public its application
requirements and evaluation procedures.
(3)
By majority vote of the members of the Committee, the Committee
may adopt and promulgate rules and regulations for the conduct
of its business on any matter within the Committee's jurisdiction
under the Massachusetts Constitution, Massachusetts General or
(4)
E.
§ 15-22 BEVERLY CODE § 15-22
1:76
§ 15-23. Conservation Commission.
Special Laws, the Code of Massachusetts Regulations (CMR),
ordinance, or other legal right or authority granted to or conferred
upon the Committee.
The proposed rule or regulation shall be submitted to all
Committee members at least 48 hours prior to any vote to adopt
the same; provided, however, the Committee may make such
amendments to the proposed rules or regulations as it deems
appropriate at the meeting.
(5)
Upon approval of any rule or regulation by the Committee, a copy
of the same shall be filed with the City Clerk and publicly posted
and become effective as of the date of filing thereof unless the
specific vote of the Committee establishes a later effective date.
(6)
To enhance communication, minutes of each meeting shall be sent
to the City Clerk for distribution to the City Council and shall be
publicly posted.
(7)
Amendments to the Community Preservation Committee Ordinance.
The Community Preservation Committee shall from time to time review
the administration of this section and make recommendations as
needed for changes to this section and in administrative practice to
improve the operations of the Community Preservation Committee.
This section may be amended from time to time by the City Council,
provided that the amendments do not conflict with MGL Chapter 44B.
F.
Community Preservation Act surcharge. Applications for exemption
from the Community Preservation Act surcharge must be filed with the
Board of Assessors three months after actual (not preliminary) tax bills
are mailed for the fiscal year in the year in which the exemption is
sought. [Added 6-18-2014 by Ord. No. 126]
G.
Composition. There shall be a Conservation Commission consisting of
seven members.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The purpose of the Conservation
Commission is to protect, promote and enhance the quantity and
quality of the natural resources within the City, especially wetlands,
wildlife and water resources, through planning, acquisition, land
management, regulation, scientific research and public education. The
Commission may conduct research into its local land areas and shall
seek to coordinate the activities of unofficial bodies organized for
similar purposes.
B.
The Conservation Commission may receive gifts, bequests or devises
of personal property or interests in real property in the name of the
City, subject to approval of the Mayor. The Commission may receive
monetary gifts for development of a Conservation Fund, and expend the
same, subject to the General Laws and the approval of the Mayor.
C.
§ 15-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-23
1:77
§ 15-24. Contributory Retirement Board.
§ 15-25. Cultural Council.
§ 15-26. David S. Lynch Public Parks Fund, Trustees of.
The Conservation Commission is responsible for the implementation
and enforcement of the provisions of MGL c. 131, §§ 40 and 40A,
in protecting floodplains, sea coasts and other wetlands within the
City, in accordance with the General Laws and Chapter 287, Wetlands
Protection, of the City Code, and it shall have the powers, duties
and responsibilities given to Conservation Commissions by MGL c. 40,
§ 8C.48
D.
The Conservation Commission is responsible, with the Open Space and
Recreation Committee, for the development and adoption of the City's
Open Space and Recreation Plan, subject to City Council approval.
The Commission may adopt policies and promulgate land management
plans for properties of the City granted to or reserved for conservation
purposes.
E.
Composition. There shall be a Contributory Retirement Board which
shall consist of five members. The Director of Municipal Finance shall
serve, ex officio, as a member of the Board, one member shall be
appointed by the Mayor, two members shall be elected by the members
in or retired from service of such system from among their number, and
the fifth member, who shall not be an employee or retiree or official of
the City of Beverly, shall be chosen by the other members. The terms of
all members shall be for three years. [Note: See MGL c. 32, § 20(4)(b).]
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Contributory Retirement Board shall
have the powers and duties provided in Subdivision (5) of MGL c. 32,
§ 20, and shall be responsible for the management of the retirement
system for the City of Beverly, subject to the requirements of General
Laws Chapter 32 and to the oversight of the Commissioner of Public
Employee Retirement as provided in MGL c. 32, § 21, and otherwise.
B.
Composition. There shall be a Cultural Council, to consist of 11
members. Members shall have demonstrated scholarship or creativity
in, or distinguished service to, the arts, humanities, or interpretive
sciences.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Cultural Council decides the
distribution of arts lottery funds or other funds that may be available
to it, and may also conduct other activities to promote and encourage
the arts, humanities, or interpretive sciences. The Cultural Council
operates pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 10, § 58, as amended.
B.
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 15-23 BEVERLY CODE § 15-26
1:78
§ 15-27. Design Review Board.
David S. Lynch Public Parks Fund. The legacy bequeathed to the City
by the late David S. Lynch shall be known as the "David S. Lynch Public
Parks Fund."
A.
Composition; appointments; terms; compensation; officers; vacancies.
The David S. Lynch Public Parks Fund shall be administered by a board
of seven trustees, serving without compensation, one of whom shall be
the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works, of the City by virtue of his office, and one member of the Beverly
Improvement Society to be chosen annually by the Mayor from a list of
three members submitted by him to that body. The other five members
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City
Council, the original appointment being one member to serve until the
first day of October, 1959, and one member to serve until the first day
of October in each succeeding year up to 1963; thereafter, all such
appointments shall be for terms of five years. Vacancies may, in like
manner, be filled for the unexpired term. The Trustees shall annually
elect one of their members to act as Chairman.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Board of Trustees of the David S.
Lynch Public Parks Fund shall have the power to expend from the
income of such fund and, in addition thereto, $50,000 from the principal
for capital improvements only, the remainder to be left intact and only
the interest to be used, and in accordance with the terms of the will of
David S. Lynch, such sums of money as are voted from time to time by a
two-thirds majority vote of the entire board, subject to approval by the
Mayor and City Council. The Board of Trustees of the David S. Lynch
Public Parks Fund shall keep a record of its doings and at the close of
each municipal year shall make a report thereof to the Mayor and City
Council. The Commissioners of Trust Funds of the City shall have the
custody of, and invest and distribute in accordance with the lawful vote
of the Board of Trustees of the David S. Lynch Public Parks Fund, the
income and $50,000 of the principal of the David S. Lynch Public Parks
Fund.
C.
Composition. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation by the
City Council, a Design Review Board to consist of seven members:
one member shall be a representative from the planning staff, one
member from the Planning Board, one member from the Board of
Appeals, but not an associate member, one member from the Historic
Districts Commission, and the remaining three members shall include,
if possible, one architect, one architect or landscape architect or
graphic designer and one business or property owner from the City. The
members appointed by the Mayor shall serve for terms of three years,
such that the term of one member expires each year. Vacancies shall
be filled by appointment by the Mayor and confirmation by the City
Council for the unexpired term.
A.
B. Authority and responsibilities.49
§ 15-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-27
1:79
Purpose. The Design Review Board shall review items for which
building permits are sought and all proposals before the City
Council, Board of Appeals, or Planning Board when such permits or
proposals concern projects involving new construction or additions
amounting to a twenty-five-percent or greater expansion of existing
structures as set forth in Chapter 300, Zoning, of the City Code
in the Central Business (CC), Neighborhood Commercial (CN),
General Commercial (CG), Restricted Industrial (IR), General
Industrial (IG), and Waterfront District (WD) zones.
(1)
Additionally, the Design Review Board will review all projects
which involve Industrial Development Finance Authority loans, and
those projects involving special permits and zoning variances in the
CC, CN, CG, IR, IG, and WD Zones at the request of the Director
of Municipal Inspections, Director of Planning and Development,
Planning Board, Councilors, or Mayor. The Design Review Board
shall review any new construction or rehabilitation projects as
described in Chapter 300, Zoning, in any commercial, industrial, or
WD zoning district.
(2)
The Board shall also review all signs requiring a sign permit from
the Director of Municipal Inspections. The recommendations of the
Design Review Board will be made in order to help guide physical
changes, so that the changes shall carry out the design objectives
of the Waterfront Revitalization Phase II Report (pp. 4, 5, and 6) of
the Harbor Management Authority as may be amended from time
to time, the building treatment recommendations of the Downtown
Revitalization Plan (pp. 103-124), and the general guidelines of the
Beverly Sign Ordinance.50
(3)
The Board shall review any other projects referenced in Chapter
300, Zoning, § 300-22, of the City Code.
(4)
Recommendation procedure. The Design Review Board shall, in cases
where the Planning Board, Zoning Board of Appeals, or City Council
is involved, formally notify such multiple-member body of a
recommendation at least 14 days before a decision (vote or other
action) is to be made. A representative from the planning staff may,
in appropriate cases, act as spokesman for the Design Review Board
and forward such recommendation to the appropriate board. In cases
of building improvements or sign proposals under the Design Review
Board's jurisdiction where no Planning Board or Zoning Board of
Appeals action is necessary, a representative from the Planning
Department shall formally notify the Director of Municipal Inspections
of a recommendation before the applicant in question may obtain the
necessary permits. In such cases, the Director of Municipal Inspections
shall be notified of a Design Review Board recommendation within 14
C.
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning, Art. XI.
§ 15-27 BEVERLY CODE § 15-27
1:80
§ 15-28. Disabilities, Commission on. [Amended 11-21-1988 by Ord.
No. 431]
§ 15-29. Economic and Community Development Council. [Amended
12-6-1993 by Ord. No. 548; 2-9-2005 by Ord. No. 12; 10-6-2014 by
Ord. No. 177]
days of building permit application and shall deny the building permit
unless the Design Review Board approves.
Composition. There is hereby established a Commission on Disabilities
to consist of seven members, all of whom shall be residents of the City,
and one such member shall be a City employee in the Department of
Municipal Inspections.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Commission on Disabilities shall act
in an advisory and consulting capacity to the Mayor, City Council, City
departments and other interested organizations, relative to any and all
matters concerning physically and mentally handicapped individuals.
Except as otherwise provided in the Charter or by ordinance, it shall
have the powers, duties and responsibilities given to a Commission on
Disabilities by MGL c. 40, § 8J.
B.
Composition. There is hereby established an Economic and Community
Development Council to consist of 17 members. The members shall be
appointed as follows:
Ex officio (to serve by virtue of their office): the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works (or
designee), the Director of Planning and Development (or designee),
and the Economic Development Planner.
(1)
Appointed by the Mayor and coterminous with the Mayor: a
member at large with industrial experience, a member at large
with financial investment experience, a member at large with
publishing and media experience, a member at large with arts,
culture or entertainment experience, a member at large with
hospitality experience, a member at large with high technology or
life science experience, a member at large with higher education
experience, a member at large with health-care experience, a
member at large with housing development experience, and three
members from the community, and a representative of the
Chamber of Commerce.
(2)
The City Council shall elect, by a majority vote, a member from its
own number.
(3)
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The mission of the Economic and
Community Development Council (ECDC) is to enhance the City's
economic infrastructure by facilitating investments that build capacity,
create jobs, generate economic opportunity and ultimately improve
B.
§ 15-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-29
1:81
§ 15-30. Emergency Management Department.51
§ 15-31. Emergency Planning Committee. [Amended 10-3-1988 by
Ord. No. 259]
quality of life. The Council shall advise the Mayor in the development
of an economic development and community development policy for
the City of Beverly and in the creation and implementation of strategic
planning initiatives that will effectuate said policy. In order to ensure
the City's economic development goals are achieved, the ECDC will
advise the Mayor on the development and implementation of specific
economic development programs, support development projects
aligned with City goals and objectives, advocate for changes to
regulations and procedures, and develop methods to attract and retain
business.
Staff. The Director of Planning and Development shall provide staff
assistance to the Economic and Community Development Council, as
requested by that body.
C.
Establishment, composition. There is hereby established an Emergency
Management Department comprised of six members. Such department
shall consist of the Director of Emergency Management, a
representative of the Board of Health, a representative of the American
Red Cross, a representative of the Beverly Hospital, a physician, and a
registered nurse (with either medical or rescue experience).
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Emergency Management
Department has the duty to oversee the City's emergency management
services program and to make continuous recommendations to the
Mayor and the City Council.52
B.
Establishment. There is hereby established an Emergency Planning
Committee. Such Committee shall serve without pay and shall consist
of the Director of Civil Defense, such other department heads and
such other persons as the authority appointing the Director may deem
necessary. Such member of the Committee as the appointing authority
shall designate shall serve as Chairman of the Committee. The
Committee shall be responsible for establishing and maintaining an
emergency operations plan for the City.
A.
Emergency operations plan.
The emergency operations plan will include, but not be limited
to: hazardous materials, hurricanes, floods, earthquakes, tornadoes
and other potential incidents that threaten the City.
(1)
B.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
52.Editor's Note: Original § 7.22 of the Code of Ordinances, Emergency Medical Services
Commission, which immediately followed this section, as amended, was repealed at time
of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 15-29 BEVERLY CODE § 15-31
1:82
§ 15-32. Financial Forecasting Committee.53
See Chapter 26, Elective Offices, § 26-18.
§ 15-33. Harbor Management Authority.
The emergency operations plan will include, but not be limited to:
A description of problems which are likely to occur, including
locations and technical data related to those problems and
locations.
(a)
A description of manpower and equipment which will be
required to deal with those problems, the locations, telephone
numbers, etc., and a complete resources file on officials of
other governmental, military and volunteer organizations.
(b)
The designation, for each emergency individuality, of a
command center and operations chief, whose authority will
only be subject to the Mayor.
(c)
(d) Separate, written general operations for each department.
(2)
Termination. This section shall remain in force during the effective
period of Chapter 639 of the Acts of 1950 and any act in amendment or
continuation thereof or substitution therefor.
C.
References to state law. All references to Chapter 639 of the Acts
of 1950, as now in force, shall be applicable to any act or acts in
amendment or continuation of or substitution for Chapter 639 of the
Acts of 1950.
D.
Composition. There is hereby established in the City of Beverly a
Harbor Management Authority which shall consist of 11 persons, nine
of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor subject to confirmation by
the City Council and two of whom shall be members of the City Council
appointed by majority vote of said Council.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Authority is hereby authorized and
empowered:
To review and comment on all proposed waterfront development
projects within the Waterfront District zoning district.
(1)
To implement a comprehensive master plan for Beverly Harbor, to
be called the "Beverly Harbor Management Plan."
(2)
To work with the Harbormaster in enforcing the rules and
regulations of the Beverly Harbor.
(3)
B.
53.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 15-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-33
1:83
To research, publicize and assist in the complementation of rules
and regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection
promulgated under the provisions of Chapter 91 of the General
Laws and the licensing procedures of the Army Corps of Engineers.
(4)
To provide for the orderly placement or arrangement of existing
and future moorings in the harbor in cooperation with the
Harbormaster.
(5)
To act as liaison between the City of Beverly and the Army Corps of
Engineers, Division of Wetlands and Waterways of the Department
of Environmental Protection, and the Massachusetts Office of
Coastal Zone Management; to work directly with the Army Corps of
Engineers in determining the future of the federal channel project.
(6)
To review and make recommendations on proposed zoning changes
for land bordering the Beverly Harbor.
(7)
(8) To meet at least once a month.
To apply for, receive, and administer grants or subsidized funding
from any state and federal agency, and to utilize all accepted
financial policies to raise revenues for the planning, construction,
or financing of any project on the harbor or for the hiring of staff or
office and support materials.
(9)
(10)To prepare an annual budget.
To expend, without further appropriation, within the limit of its
budget moneys received from licensing or permit fees and leasing
activities.
(11)
To administer the operation of the public pier facility and all future
public facilities on the Beverly Harbor.
(12)
Geographic jurisdiction. The geographic jurisdiction of the Harbor
Management Authority is as follows:
All areas of the tidal zones, not land areas, but only the tidal
zones known as "Trust lands" by the Department of Environmental
Protection, in that part of the City zoned Waterfront District; and
all other tidal zones where moorings or piers exist.
(1)
The federal channel, within Beverly Harbor, as determined by the
Army Corps of Engineers.
(2)
All current and future mooring areas within the oceanic
boundaries, shown on United States Geographic Survey maps, of
the City of Beverly.
(3)
C.
Review by City Council; minutes. The City Council may revoke any and
all acts of the Authority by a two-thirds vote taken within 30 days of
D.
§ 15-33 BEVERLY CODE § 15-33
1:84
§ 15-34. Hazardous Waste Oversight Committee.
such act. The Authority shall transmit to the Clerk of the City Council
the minutes of each meeting within seven days.
Composition.
There shall be a Hazardous Waste Oversight Committee to consist
of three members. The membership shall include one chemist, one
attorney, and one member of the general public, knowledgeable in
hazardous substances.
(1)
The Mayor shall designate the Fire Chief or the Public Health
Officer to be the municipal coordinator as set forth in MGL Chapter
111F, Hazardous Substances Disclosure by Employers.
(2)
A.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Hazardous Waste Oversight Committee shall act in an advisory
and technical consulting capacity to the Mayor, City Council, Board
of Health, Fire Department and other interested City departments,
boards, committees or commissions and to the citizens of the City,
relative to any and all matters concerning hazardous or toxic
substances and the use or disposal thereof, and the ultimate effect
such chemical constituents shall have upon the environment of the
City.
(1)
The Committee shall address itself to the following matters dealing
with hazardous or toxic substances:
(a) Implement the state Right to Know Law, MGL Chapter 111F.
(b) Employer MSDS reporting.
(c) Answer citizen "right to know" inquiries.
Establish committee hazardous waste and toxic substances
policy.
(d)
Oversee work performed by environmental consultants
retained to implement Chapter 111F.
(e)
(f) Review monthly bills for services rendered.
General supervision and guidance provided for environmental
consultants.
(g)
(h) Establish monthly mechanism of reviewing citizen inquires.
(i) Technical review of specific environmental issues.
(j) Review anticipated changes of Chapter 111F.
(2)
B.
§ 15-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-34
1:85
§ 15-35. Health, Board of.
§ 15-36. Historic Districts Commission.
Oversee, with technical support and guidance, all issues
dealing with hazardous waste and toxic substances within the
City.
(k)
Work as the technical oversight committee with the Board
of Health on issues dealing with hazardous waste and toxic
substances.
(l)
Be a resource committee for the City to review and make
advisory recommendations to the Mayor and City Council
relative to hazardous waste incidents within the community.
(m)
Be a technical resource committee for the Fire Department
when it is involved with hazardous waste or toxic substance
incidents.
(n)
Composition. There shall be a Board of Health consisting of three
persons. One member of the Board of Health shall be a physician.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. Except as otherwise provided in the
Charter or by ordinance, the Board of Health shall have and may
exercise all of the powers, duties and responsibilities given to local
health authorities by General Laws Chapter 111 and by all applicable
provisions of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations. It may make all
regulations which it may deem necessary in regard to the removal and
abatement of filth, rubbish, nuisances and causes of disease.
B.
Records. A full record shall be kept of all votes and acts of the Board of
Health, which record may be examined at any time by the Mayor or by
any committee of the City Council.
C.
Establishment; powers and duties; composition.
In accordance with the Historic Districts Act, MGL Chapter 40C, as
amended, there is hereby established the Beverly Historic Districts
Commission, which shall have all powers and duties of an historic
district commission under the General Laws.
(1)
All members and alternate members of the Commission shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City
Council. The Commission shall consist of not less than five
members nor more than seven members and up to three alternate
members, including one member, where possible, from two
nominees submitted by the Beverly Historical Society; one member,
where possible, from two nominees, one of whom shall be
submitted by the Massachusetts Chapter of the American Institute
of Architects and one of whom shall be submitted by the Boston
Society of Landscape Architects; and one member, where possible,
(2)
A.
§ 15-34 BEVERLY CODE § 15-36
1:86
from two nominees submitted by the Greater Salem Board of
Realtors. The Commission shall include one or more residents of or
owners of property in an historic district to be administered by the
Commission.
When the Commission is first established, two members shall be
appointed for a term of one year, two shall be appointed for a
term of two years, and three shall be appointed for a term of three
years and their successors shall be appointed in like manner for
terms of three years. When the Commission is first established,
one alternate member shall be appointed in like manner for a term
of one year, one alternate member shall be appointed for a term
of two years and one alternate member for a term of three years
and their successors shall be appointed in like manner for terms
of three years. All vacancies shall be filled in like manner for the
unexpired terms.
(3)
(4) All members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
The Commission shall elect annually a Chairman and Vice
Chairman from its own number and a Secretary from within or
without its number.
(5)
Meetings; quorum; time for action. Meetings of the Historic Districts
Commission shall be held at the call of the Chairman and shall be called
at the request of two members of the Commission and in such other
manner as the Commission shall determine in its rules. A majority of
the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum. When taking
action under the provisions of the fourth paragraph of Section 11 of
the Historic District Act (MGL c. 40C, § 11), the Commission shall make
its determination within 60 days after the filing of the application for
a certificate of appropriateness, or such further time as the applicant
may in writing allow.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. Except as otherwise provided by the
Charter or by ordinance, the Historic Districts Commission shall have
and may exercise all powers and duties of an historic district
commission as provided in General Laws Chapter 40C.
C.
Adoption of rules and regulations; employment of technical personnel.
The Historic Districts Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for
the conduct of its business not inconsistent with the provision of the
Historic Districts Act, MGL Chapter 40C, as amended. The Historic
Districts Commission may, subject to appropriation, and with the
consent of the Mayor, employ clerical and technical assistants and
consultants and incur other expenses appropriate to carrying on its
work, and may accept money gifts and expend the same for such
purposes.
D.
Exclusions from Commission review. The following categories of
buildings or structures or exterior architectural features may be
E.
§ 15-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-36
1:87
§ 15-37. Human Rights Committee. [Added 10-19-2015 by Ord. No.
453]
constructed or altered within an historic district without review by the
Commission:
Temporary structures or signs; subject, however, to such conditions
as to duration of use, location, lighting, removal and similar
matters as the Commission may reasonably specify.
(1)
Terraces, walks, driveways, sidewalks and similar structures, or
any one or more of them, provided that any such structure is
substantially at grade level. This is not to be construed as to include
parking lots.
(2)
Storm doors and windows, screens, window air conditioners,
lighting fixtures, antennas, and similar appurtenances, or any one
or more of them.
(3)
(4) Colors for use on buildings and roofs.
Signs of not more than one square foot in area in connection
with use of a residence for a customary home occupation or for
professional purposes, provided only one such sign is displayed in
connection with each residence and, if illuminated, is illuminated
only indirectly; and one sign in connection with the nonresidential
use of each building or structure which is not more than 12 square
feet in area, consists of letters painted on wood without symbol
or trademark and, if illuminated, is illuminated only indirectly; or
either of them.
(5)
The reconstruction, substantially similar in exterior design, of a
building, structure or exterior architectural feature damaged or
destroyed by fire, storm or other disaster, provided such
reconstruction is begun within one year thereafter and carried
forward with due diligence.
(6)
Establishment; composition.
There is hereby established a Human Rights Committee. This
Committee shall consist of 11 members, with at least three
members who have demonstrated knowledge and/or experience
with addressing matters of human and civil rights. The Committee
shall also include one member from the City administration and one
member from the School Department. Members of the Committee
serve without compensation and shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the City Council, for a term of three
years and a maximum term limit of six consecutive years. The
members first appointed shall have staggered terms. The initial
appointments of fewer than three years, for purposes of staggering
the terms, shall not count towards the six-consecutive-year term
limit.
(1)
A.
§ 15-36 BEVERLY CODE § 15-37
1:88
§ 15-38. Industrial Development Finance Authority.
§ 15-39. Library Trustees, Board of.
The members of the Committee shall be citizens of Beverly and
shall, so far as practicable, be so selected as to provide broad
representation from the fields of advocacy, business, education,
labor, law, law enforcement, public health and religion. Members
may be removed in accordance with the provisions of the City
Charter.
(2)
Purpose. The Committee shall actively seek to enhance equal justice,
inclusivity, and human rights for all members of our community.
The Committee serves as a resource to the City of Beverly and
the public. The Committee may provide education and support on
human rights, diversity, and inclusivity, with the goal of raising
awareness and sensitivity to matters of human and civil rights.
(1)
The Committee may provide the public with contact to agents of
the Massachusetts Commission Against Discrimination or other
appropriate federal, state, and local agencies.
(2)
(3) The Committee shall meet a minimum of four times each year.
The Committee may conduct ongoing campaigns and host free
public events each year to facilitate public education on diversity,
discrimination and inclusive community building as relevant to
Beverly.
(4)
(5) The Committee shall not operate as an adjudicatory body.
B.
Composition. There shall be an Industrial Development Finance
Authority consisting of five members as provided in MGL Chapter 40D.
The members of the Industrial Development Finance Authority shall be
appointed by the Mayor for terms of three years each. At least one
director shall be experienced in financial matters, one in real estate
matters, and one in municipal government.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Industrial Development Finance
Authority is responsible for coordinating and approving industrial
development projects for financing by means of tax-exempt industrial
development finance bonds. The Industrial Development Finance
Authority acts pursuant to the provisions of General Laws Chapter
40D. The City, acting by and through its Authority, and the Mayor,
is authorized and empowered to borrow money in furtherance of the
purposes of General Laws Chapter 40D, and to evidence the same by
the issuance of bonds.
B.
Composition. The custody, management and control of the public
library and reading rooms, and all property of the City relating thereto,
subject to the provisions of the Charter relating to trust funds, shall be
A.
§ 15-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-39
1:89
§ 15-40. Licensing Board.
vested in a board of trustees consisting of nine persons, residents of the
City, who shall serve without compensation.
Appointment; terms. The Mayor shall appoint annually in January,
subject to the confirmation of the City Council, three Trustees, whose
terms of office shall be for three years, but who shall, however, continue
to serve thereafter until their successors are appointed and confirmed.
B.
Chairman; Secretary. The Board of Trustees shall organize annually
immediately after the qualification of the Trustees newly appointed by
the choice of a Chairman and Secretary from its own number, and
shall from time to time prescribe regulations for the government of the
library.
C.
Authority and responsibilities.
Appropriations and donations. All money appropriated by the City
Council for the support and maintenance of the library, and all
money or property that the City or library may receive by donation
from any source or by devise or bequest on behalf of the library,
shall be expended under the direction of the Board of Library
Trustees for its support and maintenance, in accordance with the
conditions of each donation, devise or bequest accepted by the City.
(1)
Report to City Council. The Board of Library Trustees shall,
annually, make a written report to the Mayor of its doings for
the preceding year, and shall include therein a statement of all
of the property of the City in its care and custody, and of all
devises, bequests and donations which have been made to or are
being held by the City in behalf of the library, together with such
recommendations as may be deemed proper.
(2)
D.
Employee vacations. Notwithstanding the provisions of any other
ordinance to the contrary, the Board of Trustees is empowered to
determine the vacation period of its employees.
E.
Composition. The Mayor shall appoint three persons to serve as a
licensing authority for the City pursuant to the provisions of MGL c.
138, § 4, and MGL c. 140, § 1. The members of the Licensing Board
shall be persons who have been resident in the City for at least two
years prior to the date of their appointment, and who are not engaged,
directly or indirectly, in the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages.
One member shall be appointed from each of the two leading political
parties and the third member may also be appointed from one of said
political parties. The terms of office of members shall be three years.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Licensing Board may grant licenses
relating to alcoholic beverages under Chapter 138 of the General Laws
and those licenses under Chapter 140 of the General Laws which are
not, by the provisions of said chapter, placed within the jurisdiction of
B.
§ 15-39 BEVERLY CODE § 15-40
1:90
§ 15-41. Open Space and Recreation Committee. [Amended
4-21-1999 by Ord. No. 41]
another municipal officer or agency, and shall have all the powers and
duties of a licensing authority under said chapters. The Licensing Board
is an advisory and regulatory committee of the City.
Establishment; composition; term of office; vacancies. There is hereby
established the Beverly Open Space and Recreation Committee
consisting of 12 members, six of whom shall be appointed by the
Mayor and six of whom shall be appointed by the City Council. Of
the six members appointed by the Mayor, two will be at-large, one
shall be a member of the Conservation Commission, one shall be a
member of the Planning Board, one shall be a member of the Parks
and Recreation Commission, and one shall be a member of the Beverly
Harbor Management Authority. If a member of a particular board is
not available, the Mayor shall appoint a person with similar expertise.
The Mayor shall assign an employee of the Planning Department to the
Committee as resource person and liaison to City government. Of the
six members appointed by the City Council, one shall reside in Ward I,
one shall reside in Ward II, one shall reside in Ward III, one shall reside
in Ward IV, one shall reside in Ward V, and one shall reside in Ward
VI, and they shall be nominated by their respective Ward Councilor.
All members shall be residents of the City and shall not be in the
employ of the City of Beverly. Each of the Council appointees shall
have a demonstrated interest in preserving open space/recreation. All
appointments shall be for three-year terms. All appointments shall be
subject to review by the City Council. Vacancies shall be filled by the
appropriate appointing authority for the remainder of the unexpired
term. The appointing authority may remove a member for failure to
fulfill the duties and responsibilities of the office. The Committee shall
organize, annually, by electing a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and
Recording Secretary from its membership. [Amended 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 013]
A.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Open Space and Recreation Committee shall act as an advisory
committee to the Mayor, City Council, City departments, private
organizations and the general public on matters concerning open
space and recreation and shall have no budgetary powers.
(1)
A majority of the appointed members presently named and serving
on the Committee shall constitute a quorum, and no meeting shall
be continued without a quorum present. A majority of the members
presently named and serving on the Committee shall be necessary
for the approval or disapproval of any matter.
(2)
Upon its formation, a mission statement shall be formulated and
reviewed from time to time as the Committee shall deem proper.
(3)
B.
§ 15-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-41
1:91
§ 15-42. Parking and Traffic Commission.
The Committee shall adopt rules and regulations for keeping
accurate minutes and the conduct of its proceedings.
(4)
The Committee shall appear before the City Council in the month
of October and present an annual report. [Amended 10-16-2017
by Ord. No. 496]
(5)
The Committee's functions shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
Prepare and from time to time update a five-year open space
and recreation plan for current and future use.
(a)
(b) Prepare a continuing inventory of open space in the City.
Research and recommend financing alternatives for
acquisition and preservation of open space and the
development of recreational facilities, including the impact on
the City budget.
(c)
Set criteria for prioritizing open space acquisition, recreational
facility development, and redevelopment for current and future
use.
(d)
(e) Explore creative strategies to preserve open space.
Recommend any changes in state and local laws to facilitate
acquisition and preservation of open space.
(f)
The Open Space and Recreation Committee will structure adhoc
committees, as needed, to address specific objectives of
the Committee, and shall recruit, as needed, members to serve
in a nonvoting advisory capacity.
(g)
(6)
Composition. The Parking and Traffic Commission shall consist of nine
members to be appointed as follows: the Chief of Police or his or her
designee, the Chief of the Fire Department or his or her designee,
the Planning Director or his or her designee, the Commissioner Public
Services and Engineering or his or her designee, a representative from
the Beverly Chamber of Commerce, two residents appointed by the
Mayor and two residents appointed by the City Council. The Mayoral
and Council appointees shall include, if possible, a traffic engineer,
transportation engineer/planner, or parking and traffic consultant. The
terms of all members shall be for three years, so arranged that the
representatives of the Police and Fire Departments shall expire in one
year, the representatives of the Planning Department and the Beverly
Chamber of Commerce shall expire in another year, and the
representative of the Mayor's office and the citizens appointed by the
City Council shall expire in a third year. Vacancies shall be filled by
A.
§ 15-41 BEVERLY CODE § 15-42
1:92
§ 15-43. Parks and Recreation Commission.
the appropriate entity for the balance of the then-unexpired term.
[Amended 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 328]
Authority and responsibilities. [Amended 3-10-2005; by Ord. No. 44;
11-23-2007 by Ord. No. 224]
The Parking and Traffic Commission is established to control and
regulate the present municipal lots, both owned and rented by
the City (which control and regulation is subject to the approval
of the Mayor and City Council), and to monitor and make
recommendations regarding traffic flow and patterns within the
City of Beverly.
(1)
The Parking and Traffic Commission shall have the power to direct
funds from parking meter receipts into directional signage and
parking lot repairs, maintenance and beautification, subject to the
recommendation of the Mayor and the approval of the City Council.
(2)
The Parking and Traffic Commission shall study and make surveys
and recommendations to the Mayor, City Council, and municipal
boards and commissions pertaining to the development of new
parking areas, the impact of new development on traffic patterns,
and rules and regulations pertaining to parking and traffic,
including loading zones, etc.
(3)
B.
Established; appointment of members; compensation. There is hereby
established a Parks and Recreation Commission. This Commission shall
consist of nine members, serving without compensation, who shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to confirmation by the City Council.
[Amended 3-25-1998 by Ord. No. 91]
A.
Composition; terms; vacancies. The Parks and Recreation Commission
shall consist of four members who have a background in recreation,
two members who have a background in maintenance of parks and
playgrounds, and three members at large. The members first appointed
shall serve staggered terms, and their successors shall be appointed for
terms of four years each. [Amended 3-25-1998 by Ord. No. 91]
B.
Organization; rules and regulations for conduct of public parks and
recreation. Immediately after their appointment, the members of the
Parks and Recreation Commission shall meet and organize by electing
from their membership one Chairman and such other officers as may be
necessary. The Commission shall have the power to adopt bylaws, rules
and regulations for the proper conduct of public recreation, parks and
playgrounds, subject to such changes as the Mayor and City Council
may from time to time adopt.
C.
D. Powers and duties.
§ 15-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-43
1:93
§ 15-44. Planning Board.
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall provide, conduct and
supervise activities at public playgrounds, playfields, indoor
recreation centers and recreation areas and facilities, except Hurd
Stadium, which shall be the responsibility of the School
Department. It may conduct such activities on property under its
own control, on public properties with the consent of the
authorities thereof, and on private properties with the consent
of the owners. It shall have the power to conduct any form of
recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of
the people in a constructive and wholesome manner.
(1)
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have charge of capital
improvement programs of all parks, the Common, beaches and
playgrounds, including Cooney Field but excepting Hurd Stadium,
which shall be the responsibility of the School Department.
(2)
The Parks and Recreation Commission shall have the care, control
and charge of all parks, playgrounds and public domain, including
the Common and Soldiers' Monuments lot, except Hurd Stadium,
which shall be the responsibility of the School Department. The
Commission may furthermore, subject to appropriations and orders
first made by the City Council, take land within the City limits in
fee or otherwise by gift, purchase, or by right of eminent domain,
or by lease, and maintain the same as a public playground. All
proceedings in reference to such taking of land for parks or
playgrounds, and with reference to damages connected with the
same, shall be in accordance with the provisions of law.
(3)
Administrator and other personnel. The Parks and Recreation
Commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone
to act as Administrator of Parks and Recreation who shall be trained
and properly qualified for the work, and such other personnel as the
Commission deems proper The Administrator shall be a resident or
shall become a resident within one year.
E.
Submission of annual budget. The Parks and Recreation Commission
shall annually submit a budget to the Mayor and City Council for their
approval.
F.
Reports. The Parks and Recreation Commission shall make an annual
report on or before the first day of February to the Mayor and the City
Council, and shall make such other reports as from time to time may be
requested.
G.
Composition. There shall be a Planning Board to consist of nine
members.
A.
B. Authority and responsibilities.
§ 15-43 BEVERLY CODE § 15-44
1:94
In general. The duties of the Planning Board shall be such as
are stated in MGL c. 41, §§ 70 to 72, and in MGL c. 41, §§ 81A
through 81GG. The Planning Board shall also further consider and
advise upon municipal improvements either at the request of other
officials of the City or upon its own initiative. The Board shall
meet at regular intervals. It may also hold public meetings. It shall
at times have access to all public documents or information in
the possession of any City official or department. It shall examine
the plans for the exterior of any public building, monument or
similar feature, and for the development and treatment of the
grounds about the same before the adoption thereof, and may
make such recommendations thereof as it may deem needful. It
may make investigations and studies relative to new street and
park developments. It may provide for public lectures and other
educational work in connection with its recommendations. The
Board may incur expenses necessary to carry on its work within the
amount of its annual appropriations.
(1)
Annual reports. The Planning Board shall make a report to the
City annually, giving information regarding the conditions of the
City and any plans or proposals for the development of the City
and estimates of the cost thereof. Such report shall be sent to the
Mayor not later than January 15 in each year.
(2)
Reports of Planning Board required on certain subjects. All plans
for laying out, extending, discontinuing or changing the limits of
any way, street, public park or square, every purchase of land
for the site of any public building, and all plans for the location,
erection or alteration of public buildings shall be submitted to the
Planning Board for its opinion at least two weeks in advance of
action by the Mayor or the City Council.54
(3)
Appointment; terms. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation
by the City Council, a Planning Board to consist of nine members.
Annually, the Mayor shall appoint, as the terms of the present members
expire, subject to confirmation by the City Council, three members of
the Planning Board, who shall hold office for terms of three years from
the time of their appointment.
C.
Vacancies. Vacancies occurring in the Planning Board shall be filled
by appointment by the Mayor for the unexpired term, subject to
confirmation by the City Council.
D.
Duties; meetings. The duties of the Planning Board shall be such as are
stated in MGL c. 41, §§ 70 to 72, and further to consider and advise
upon municipal improvements either at the request of other officials
of the City or upon its own initiative. The Board shall meet at regular
intervals. It may also hold public meetings. It shall at times have access
E.
54.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (b)(iv), Subdivisions of land, which immediately
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
§ 15-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-44
1:95
to all public documents or information in the possession of any City
official or department. It shall examine the plans for the exterior of any
public building, monument or similar feature, and for the development
and treatment of the grounds about the same before the adoption
thereof, and may make such recommendations thereof as it may deem
needful. It may make investigations and studies relative to new street
and park developments. It may provide for public lectures and other
educational work in connection with its recommendations. The Board
may incur expenses necessary to the carrying on of its work within the
amount of its annual appropriations.
Service without compensation. The members of the Planning Board
shall serve without compensation.
F.
Report. The Planning Board shall make a report to the City annually,
giving information regarding the conditions of the City and any plans
or proposals for the development of the City and estimates of the cost
thereof. Such report shall be sent to the Mayor not later than January
15 in each year, and a copy thereof shall be filed with the Division of
Planning of the Department of Commerce.55
G.
Requirement for acceptance of subdivisions. No subdivision shall be
accepted by the Planning Board until after approval of the drainage
system by the Director of Engineering and the Board of Health.
H.
Earth removal. Chapter 300, Zoning, § 300-21, Removal of sod, loam
and gravel, shall apply to all earth removal activities in the City, except
those undertaken on public land and except as otherwise limited
herein. No permit from the Board of Appeals shall be necessary for
the removal of any soil, sod, loam, sand, gravel, or other mineral
matter which is to be removed in compliance with the requirements
of a residential, commercial or industrial subdivision plan approved
by the Planning Board. Excavation of soils is subject to the Sediment
Control and Materials Management Ordinance as well as the drainage
alteration permit.
I.
Width and grade of streets. No street or way shall be laid out as a public
way by the City Council of a width less than 40 feet nor unless the same
is in condition for public travel at a grade established by the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works; provided,
however, that any street or way in actual use on September 9, 1908,
may be laid out as a public way by a vote of 2/3 of all the members of
the City Council.
J.
Plans to accompany petitions to lay out ways. Every petition for the
laying out of any way shall be accompanied by a suitable plan thereof
showing the location of the bound stones.
K.
55.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (h), Changes to be submitted to Board, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 15-44 BEVERLY CODE § 15-44
1:96
§ 15-45. Registrars of Voters, Board of.
§ 15-46. Stormwater Management Advisory Committee. [Amended
5-12-2008 by Ord. No. 86]
Conditions prerequisite to acceptance of streets. No street shall be
accepted unless the following conditions are complied with:
Sewer, water, gas and surface drainage shall be installed in the
proposed street and the same then shall be put in an acceptable
condition before the acceptance of the proposed street by the City.
If, in the opinion of the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works, it is not practicable to install sewer
or gas within a reasonable time, then the restriction as to sewer or
gas may be waived by the Director.
(1)
The developer or contractor shall construct five-foot sidewalks of
hot top material, and the sidewalks shall be six inches above the
gutter line.
(2)
The contractor or developer shall construct the necessary surface
drainage to take care of surface water under the direction of the
Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works.
(3)
Stone bounds shall be set in accordance with the rules and
regulations of subdivision control.
(4)
L.
Composition. There shall be a Board of Registrars of Voters consisting
of the City Clerk and three other persons. (See MGL Chapter 51.)
A.
Members of the Board of Registrars of Voters shall be appointed by
the Mayor for terms of three years each so that they represent the two
leading political parties, and in no case shall an appointment be made
so as to cause the Board of Registrars of Voters to have more than two
members, including the City Clerk, of the same political party. Every
such appointment shall be made from a list to be submitted by the City
committee of the political party from the members of which the position
is to be filled, containing the names of three enrolled members of such
party resident in the City, selected by a majority vote at a duly called
meeting of such committee.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Board of Registrars of Voters hold
voter registration sessions, certify the signatures on nomination papers
and petitions, hold hearings and decide disputes over signatures on
nomination papers, prepare an annual list of registered voters, and
perform all other duties as cited in General Laws Chapter 51.
C.
This section hereby establishes the Beverly Stormwater Management
Advisory Committee consisting of eight members made up of
representatives from the Engineering Department, Public Services
Department, Municipal Inspections Department, Conservation
A.
§ 15-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-46
1:97
§ 15-47. Trust Funds, Commissioners of.
§ 15-48. Veterans Advisory Committee. [Amended 1-3-2017 by Ord.
No. 280]
Commission, Planning Department, Board of Health, Parks and
Recreation Department and a citizen representative. The Mayor shall
appoint such members to the Committee. [Amended 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 013]
The Stormwater Management Advisory Committee shall advise the
Director of Engineering in establishing and evaluating rules and
regulations to further clarify and implement Chapter 249, Stormwater
Management, of the City Code as well as coordinating activities and
monitoring progress of the City's stormwater management plan.
Additionally, a Stormwater Coordinator, as appointed by the Mayor,
shall assist in coordinating the Committee's activities and the City's
stormwater program.
B.
Composition. There shall be a Board of Commissioners of Trust Funds
consisting of three members.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Board of Commissioners of Trust
Funds shall, so far as is consistent with the purposes of any trust,
manage and control all trust funds which are the property of the
City and may from time to time invest and reinvest the same and
shall distribute the income from such trusts in accordance with the
terms of each such trust. Except as may otherwise be provided by City
ordinance, the Board of Commissioners of Trust Funds shall have all of
the other powers, duties and responsibilities imposed upon trust fund
commissioners by General Laws and otherwise.
B.
It is the policy of the City of Beverly that trust fund management be
consistent with the legal requirements, including City ordinances, and
spirit of each respective trust document and, to the maximum extent
possible, realize the purposes the trusts were intended to achieve.
C.
Trust fund management will be conducted with the primary objectives
of:
Conformance to each trust document's specified purpose, legal
requirements, and administrative guidelines.
(1)
Adherence to the City of Beverly general ordinance providing for
the administration of city trusts.
(2)
(3) Preservation of capital.
(4) Maintenance of security of trust funds and investments.
D.
Establishment; composition. There is hereby established a Veterans
Advisory Committee. This Committee shall consist of 13 total members
A.
§ 15-46 BEVERLY CODE § 15-48
1:98
serving without compensation, who shall be appointed by the Mayor,
subject to confirmation by the City Council, for a term of three years.
Initial appointments of members shall be for staggered terms. At least
a majority of the total members shall at all times be veterans. The
Director of Veterans' Services shall serve, by virtue of office, as a
member of the Committee. The Veterans' Graves Officer appointed
by the Mayor according to § 58-45 shall also serve as a member of
the Committee. Members may be removed in accordance with the
provisions of the City Charter. Notwithstanding § 15-8, the Mayor may
appoint, subject to confirmation by a two-thirds vote of the City Council,
members who are not residents of the City of Beverly. Full-time
municipal employees are eligible to be appointed to the Veterans
Advisory Committee. [Amended 6-5-2017 by Ord. No. 401]
Authority and responsibilities.
The Veterans Advisory Committee shall act in an advisory capacity
to the Mayor, City Council, and other interested departments,
boards, commissions or committees and to the citizens of Beverly
relative to any and all matters concerning military veterans.
(1)
A majority of the appointed members presently named and serving
on the Committee shall constitute a quorum. A majority of the
members presently named and serving on the Committee shall be
necessary for the approval or disapproval of any recommendation.
(2)
The Committee shall, at its first meeting, vote to elect a Chair, Vice
Chair and Secretary of the Committee. The Committee shall adopt
rules and regulations for keeping accurate minutes of its meetings.
(3)
The Committee's functions shall include, but are not limited to, the
following:
The Committee shall serve as a resource to the City of Beverly
and the public. The Committee may provide education and
support to help raise awareness on veteran-related matters.
(a)
The Committee shall provide the public with contacts to agents
of federal, state and local agencies that provide services to
veterans and their families.
(b)
The Committee shall assist The City of Beverly's Director of
Veterans' Services in coordinating annual and ad hoc veteranrelated
community events, such as parades, remembrances or
other such events.
(c)
The Committee shall provide continuing oversight of the
condition of each of the several veterans memorials of the
City and shall from time to time, not less frequently than
annually, file a report with the Director of Veterans' Services
with recommendations as to any needed repairs, upkeep,
maintenance and improvements to such memorials as in its
(d)
(4)
B.
§ 15-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-48
1:99
§ 15-49. Youth Activities Commission.
judgment may be necessary or advisable. Whenever the
Committee believes an expenditure of funds in excess of
ordinary maintenance is required to be made, it shall submit
its report containing such recommendation in time to be
considered as part of the capital improvement plan.
Composition. There is hereby established a Youth Activities Commission
to consist of seven members, one of whom shall be a member of the
Parks and Recreation Commission.
A.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Youth Activities Commission shall establish and carry on, and
encourage others to establish and carry on, programs and activities
designed to aid and improve the welfare of youth in the City.
For such purposes, the Commission may conduct its activities on
property under its control, on other public property under the
control of other officers or boards, with the consent of such officers
or boards, or on private property, with the consent of the owners;
provided, however, that the Mayor and City Council approve the
use of any such property. The Commission shall submit a quarterly
progress report to the Mayor and City Council.
(1)
The Youth Activities Commission shall keep a record of its doings
and at the close of each municipal year shall make a report thereof
to the Mayor and City Council of its accounts and proceedings,
and of the condition of any buildings under its control, and an
account of its receipts for the calendar year. All receipts collected
by the Commission shall be paid to the City Treasurer weekly, to
be deposited in the general fund. The Commission shall cooperate
and coordinate its functions with any federal, state, municipal and
private agencies concerned with any of the foregoing.
(2)
Director and other employees. The Youth Activities Commission
shall, subject to the consent of the Mayor, appoint such full-time
and part-time assistants as the Commission, with the consent of the
Mayor, determines is in the best interest of the work of the Youth
Activities Commission, but such other employees shall only be paid
by the Commission from its own earned receipts accounts unless
otherwise specifically provided for at any other times.
(3)
B.
§ 15-48 BEVERLY CODE § 15-49
1:100
ARTICLE III
Additional Multiple-Member Bodies
§ 15-50. List of committees and commissions.
A. Beautification Committee.
B. Comprehensive Rezoning Committee: see website.
C. Financial Resources Committee: see website.
D. Homecoming Committee: see website.
Ordinance Review Committee: see website; see standing committee,
Public Services.
E.
F. Trash and Recycling Committee: see website.
G. Wenham Lake Advisory Committee: see website.56
56.Editor's Note: Original Section 7.48 of the Code of Ordinances, Beverly Charter
Commission, which immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
013.
§ 15-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 15-50
1:101
Chapter 26
ELECTIVE OFFICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agencies — See Ch. 7.
Boards, commissions, councils, committees
and authorities — See Ch. 15.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 58.
School Committee — See Ch. 72.
§ 15-50 BEVERLY CODE § 15-50
1:102
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 26-1. Enumeration of elective offices.
The offices to be filled by the voters shall be a Mayor, a City Council, a
School Committee and such other representatives to regional authorities,
districts, or committees as may be established by law or interlocal
agreement.
§ 26-2. Eligibility for elective office.
Any voter shall be eligible to hold any elective City office, but no person
shall simultaneously hold more than one elective City office.
§ 26-3. Preliminary and regular elections.
A preliminary election is held for the nomination of candidates on the sixth
Tuesday preceding every regular City election. The regular City election is
held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November of each
odd-numbered year.
§ 26-4. Terms of office.
The terms of office of all elective City officers shall be two years beginning
on the first Monday in January following the election and continuing until
their successors are qualified.
§ 26-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-4
1:103

ARTICLE II
City Council
§ 26-5. Composition, term and authority.
There shall be nine members of the Beverly City Council, one Councilor
elected from each ward into which the City is divided and three Council
members elected at large. The Beverly City Council shall exercise all of the
legislative powers of the City. The term of office for all City Councillors shall
be for two years each, beginning on the first Monday of January in the year
following their election, and until their successors have been qualified.
§ 26-6. Eligibility; vacancies.
Any voter shall be eligible to hold the office of Councillor-at-Large. A Ward
Councillor shall at the time of election be a voter of the ward from which
elected; provided, however, if any Ward Councilor shall move his or her
principal residence during the first 18 months of the term of office to
another ward in the City, such office shall be deemed vacant and the balance
of the unexpired term shall be filled in the manner provided in Section 2-11
of the Home Rule Charter. If such move occurs after the first 18 months of
the term of office, such Councillor may continue to serve for the balance
of the term for which elected. If a Councillor-at-Large or a Ward Councillor
moves from the City during the term for which elected, such office shall
immediately be deemed vacant and filled in the manner provided in Section
2-11 of the Charter.
§ 26-7. Organization.
Council President.
After the oath of office has been administered to the City
Councillors present, as provided in Section 8-11 of the Charter,
the Councillors shall organize, with the member elected at large
receiving the highest number of votes at the preceding biennial
City election as President, as provided in Charter Section 2-2. The
President shall be sworn by the City Clerk or, in the case of the
absence of the City Clerk, by any person qualified to take oaths or
affirmations.
(1)
The Council President shall preside at all meetings of the City
Council, regulate its proceedings, and shall decide all questions
of order. The Council President shall appoint all members of all
committees of the City Council, whether special or standing. The
Council President shall have the same powers to vote upon all
measures coming before the City Council as any other member of
the City Council. The Council President shall perform such other
duties consistent with the office as may be provided by Charter, by
ordinance or by other vote of the City Council.
(2)
A.
§ 26-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-7
1:105
§ 26-8. General powers and duties.
Except as otherwise provided by law or by the Charter, all powers of the
City of Beverly shall be vested in the City Council, which shall provide for
their exercise and for the performance of all duties and obligations imposed
on the City by law.
§ 26-9. Filling of vacancies.
If a vacancy in the office of City Councillor occurs, it shall be filled in the
manner provided in Section 2-11 of the Home Rule Charter.
§ 26-10. Exercise of powers.
Except as otherwise provided by the laws of the commonwealth or the
Charter, the legislative powers of the City Council may be exercised in a
manner determined by the City Council.
§ 26-11. Ordinances, orders and resolves.
§ 26-12. Standing committees.
Council Vice President. As soon as practicable after the Councillorselect
have been qualified, the members shall elect from among their
members a Vice President who shall act as President during the
absence or disability of the Council President. The powers of an Acting
Council President shall be limited to only those powers which are
indispensably essential to perform the duties of Acting Council
President during the absence or disability of the Council President.
B.
Ordinances.
Style of enactment. The enacting style of ordinances shall be "Be it
ordained by the City Council of the City of Beverly, as follows."
(1)
Recording. All ordinances shall be recorded by the City Clerk in the
order in which they are passed to be ordained, in a book which shall
be kept in the office of the City Clerk, subject to public inspection.
(2)
A.
Orders and resolves. Whenever the City Council expresses anything by
way of command, the form of expression shall be "Ordered"; and when
such Council expresses opinions, principles, facts or purposes, the form
shall be "Resolved."
B.
Established. There shall be three standing committees of the City
Council: a Standing Committee on Finance and Property, a Standing
Committee on Public Services; and a Standing Committee on Legal
Affairs and Ordinances.
A.
Appointment of members. Each of the three committees enumerated in
Subsection A shall consist of three members of the City Council who
shall be appointed by the President of the City Council to serve during
B.
§ 26-7 BEVERLY CODE § 26-12
1:106
the term for which elected. Each member of the City Council shall be
appointed to one of the committees so established. In the event of the
prolonged inability of any one member to attend meetings of a standing
committee, the President of the City Council may appoint an alternate
member to serve on the committee until the regular member can attend
such meetings.
Assignment of matters to standing committees. The President shall
refer all new business, communications, petitions and orders to the
standing committees as follows:
The Committee on Finance and Property shall review:57
Budget review and transfers, policy oversight and review,
capital improvement planning, and other matters relating to
the Department of Municipal Finance, the purchasing function,
the Human Resources Department, and management
information systems.
(a)
Matters relating to trust funds, appropriations, transfers of
funds, authorization to spend funds, loans, options, pensions,
salaries, audits, taxes, revaluation, users' fees, betterment
assessments, contracts, acceptance of grants, overall
operating budget review, utility petitions and other matters
affecting the finances of the City.
(b)
Every measure involving but not limited to an appropriation,
grant, salary, pension, loan, the levying of a tax, user charges,
the assessment of a betterment, the sale or lease of City
property, an option or contract, or any expenditure of money,
unless the subject matter has already been acted on by the
Committee on Finance and Property, which shall be referred to
the Committee on Finance and Property before it is presented
to the full Council, whose duty it shall be to report on its
relation to the finances of the City, but no new provisions
shall be added to such measure by said Committee unless
directly connected with a financial feature of the measure
as drafted. Any measure, upon recommendation of another
committee having jurisdiction of the same, may be considered
by the Committee on Finance and Property in advance of the
presentation thereof to the Council.
(c)
All budget transfers or appropriations shall, ordinarily, be
referred only to the Finance and Property Committee;
provided, however, if the Chairperson of the Committee on
Public Service or the Chairperson of the Committee on Legal
Affairs requests that the item by jointly referred, by notification
to the Clerk's office, such requests shall be honored.
(d)
(1)
C.
57.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-12
1:107
Policy oversight and other matters related to the Economic
and Community Development Council, the Community
Development Block Grant Program, and the Building and Other
Facilities, Planning and Construction Committee.
(e)
The Committee on Public Services shall:
Have policy oversight and review, capital improvement
programming, and other matters relating to the Human
Resources Department, the Department of Community
Services, including the public library, the Recreation
Department, Veterans Services, the Board of Health, cemetery
management and operations, the Beverly public schools, and
the Beverly Housing Authority.58
(a)
Have policy oversight and review of the Library Board of
Trustees, Parks and Recreation Commission, Board of
Registrars of Voters, Beverly Youth Activities Commission,
Council on Aging, Cultural Council, Commission on
Disabilities, Airport Commission, Beverly Golf and Tennis Club,
Harbor Management Authority and other boards or
commissions related to public services.59
(b)
Review matters relating to the inter-relationship of the School
Committee, Beverly public schools, and other areas of City
government; intergovernmental relations; maintenance of
public grounds; housing services; elder services; children's
services and services for persons with special needs.
(c)
Have policy oversight and review and other matters relating
to the Fire Department, Police Department, and emergency
management and utility petitions.60
(d)
Have policy oversight and review and other matters related
to the Department of Public Services, including the Water and
Sewer Division; Engineering Department; Hazardous Waste
Oversight Committee; Design Review Board.
(e)
Matters relating to street acceptance, layout, relocation and
discontinuance of public ways.
(f)
(2)
The Committee on Legal Affairs shall:
Review and make recommendations regarding all claims and
legal settlements referred to the Council by the City Solicitor.
(a)
(3)
58.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-12 BEVERLY CODE § 26-12
1:108
§ 26-13. Investigations, reports and expenditures by standing
committees.
The three standing committees of the City Council shall investigate and
report to the City Council on all matters within their respective jurisdictions
which shall be referred to them by the City Council. They may have charge
of the expenditure of special appropriations when so ordered by the City
Council.
§ 26-14. Salary and expenses of Council members.
The annual salary for each member of the City Council shall be $11,733.
The annual salary for the President of the City Council shall be $12,333.
Have ongoing oversight and review of all ordinances in the
City, recommending changes as appropriate and drafting new
ordinances and amendments as necessary.
(b)
Review matters relating to the legal status of items previously
passed by another committee.
(c)
Have policy oversight and review of the City Clerk, Clerk of the
Council, Clerk of Committees and Rules of the Council.
(d)
Review matters relating to zone change petitions; sign permits;
lodging house and dormitory licenses; licensing of automobile
dealers; licensing of taxis, and all other licenses except those
under the jurisdiction of the Licensing Board.
(e)
Have policy oversight and review of the Department of
Planning and Development, Planning Board, Zoning Board of
Appeals, Historic Districts Commission, Conservation
Commission, Law Department, and Licensing Board.61
(f)
Review matters relating to the Zoning Map, comprehensive
planning, open space planning and maintenance of
conservation land, ward and precinct boundaries.
(g)
Review oversight of the ordinance review committees and the
Charter review committees as established by Charter, and
matters relating to Home Rule Charter petitions.
(h)
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 26-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-14
1:109

ARTICLE III
Annual Budget Review
§ 26-15. Procedure.
§ 26-16. Power to inspect books and require financial information.
The Committee on Finance and Property shall have the power to call upon
any agency of the City government to submit for inspection by it the
agency's books and vouchers, and to furnish any information pertaining to
the financial conduct of the departments. The Budget/Management Analyst
employed by the City Council shall have the same power and authority.
§ 26-17. Audit of accounts.
The Committee on Finance and Property shall, upon receiving the
proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year from the Mayor, cause
a notice to be published in a local newspaper stating the date, time
and place, not less than seven days nor more than 14 days following
such publication, at which it will hold a public hearing on the proposed
budget as submitted by the Mayor.
A.
The Committee on Finance and Property shall in open public sessions
consider the recommendations of the Mayor. The Committee may
require the Mayor, or any City officer or City employee, to appear
before it to provide such information as the Committee may deem
needed in its review of the proposed budget.
B.
The Committee on Finance and Property shall submit its
recommendations to the City Council in a form which provides the full
Council with all relevant information on which to base its action on the
appropriations to be made for the ensuing fiscal year.
C.
The Committee on Finance and Property shall, at the close of each
financial year, be responsible for the selection of a certified public
accountant or firm of such accountants to perform the audit required
by Charter Section 6-9. The Committee shall supervise the work of such
accountant, or accountants, and shall provide for public dissemination
of the report filed by the accountant or firm of accountants. The Mayor
shall annually provide in the City budget the sum of money as may be
required to fund this audit. The sum necessary shall be determined by
majority vote of the City Council.
A.
From time to time throughout the year, as often as it shall deem it
expedient, the Committee shall examine and audit the accounts of the
Department of Municipal Finance; and for that purpose shall have
access to all books and vouchers in possession of this department. The
Committee shall not only compare such accounts with the vouchers
therefor, but shall also ascertain by actual proof, as shown by the books,
whether all moneys due the City have been collected and accounted
for; the Committee shall also examine all notes and securities in the
B.
§ 26-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-17
1:111
§ 26-18. Financial Forecasting Committee. [Amended 10-8-2008 by
Ord. No. 171]
City Treasurer's hands, or in the hands of the Board of Commissioners
of Trust Funds belonging to the City, and make report thereof to the
City Council. All departments or officers charged with the collection
or disbursement of money shall keep their books and accounts in such
manner as shall be approved by the Standing Committee on Finance
and Property. The Committee may authorize the Budget/Management
Analyst to perform this function for it.
Establishment and composition. There is hereby established a Financial
Forecasting Committee. Such Committee shall be composed of nine
members: two members of the City Council and a citizen, appointed
by the City Council President; two ward School Committee members
and a citizen, appointed by the School Committee President; and a
citizen, who shall not be an elected official, appointed by the Mayor; the
Finance Director, and the School Department Business Manager. The
City Council Budget/Management Analyst shall be appointed as an exofficio
member. [Amended 3-6-2013 by Ord. No. 21]
A.
Term of appointment; vacancies. Each member shall serve for a term
of two years, or until a successor is appointed. The term of each
Committee member who is an elected official shall terminate on
December 31 of each successive even-numbered year. The term of
each Committee member appointed as a citizen representative shall
terminate on December 31 of each successive odd-numbered year. In
the event of a vacancy during a member's term, a successor shall
be selected in the same manner as the departing member for the
remainder of the unexpired term.
B.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Committee shall consider financial goals and objectives,
conduct long-range financial planning, evaluate the City budget
process, explore ways to acquire revenue, and advise City officials
on these matters. Each official and employee of the City shall
cooperate with the Committee in the discharge of its duties.
(1)
By the end of each calendar year, the Committee shall file a report
of its activities, projections, conclusions and recommendations with
the City Clerk, the School Committee, the City Council and the
Mayor.
(2)
C.
§ 26-17 BEVERLY CODE § 26-18
1:112
Chapter 33
FUNDS
§ 26-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 26-18
1:113

ARTICLE I
Affordable Housing Trust Fund
[Adopted 2-6-2017 by Ord. No. 30162]
§ 33-1. Established.
The Beverly Affordable Housing Trust Fund is hereby established.
§ 33-2. Purpose.
The Trustees of the Beverly Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall administer
an Affordable Housing Trust Fund to provide for the creation and
preservation of affordable housing within the City of Beverly for the benefit
of low- to moderate-income households and for the funding of community
housing, as defined in and in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 44B.
§ 33-3. Board of Trustees.
Composition. The Beverly Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall have a
Board of Trustees composed of five (5) Trustees. The Mayor shall serve
as one of the Trustees.
A.
Appointment of Trustees; terms, vacancies. The Mayor shall appoint
Trustees annually in January, subject to confirmation by the City
Council. The Trustees first appointed shall have staggered terms, with
two (2) of the appointed Trustees initially serving a one-year term,
and the remaining two (2) serving a two-year term. Thereafter, all
appointments and reappointments, with the exception of the Mayor's
term, shall be for a period of two (2) years. If a vacancy shall occur
among the Trustees, it shall be filled in the same manner as the original
appointment for the unexpired term.
B.
Service without compensation. The Trustees shall serve without
compensation.
C.
Removal. Trustees may be removed by the Mayor, subject to the
provisions of Section 3-4 of the Beverly City Charter.
D.
Authority and Responsibilities.
The specific authority and responsibilities of the Trustees, all of
which shall be carried on in furtherance of the purposes set forth
in MGL c. 44, § 55C, and in this article, are as follows:
To accept and receive property, whether real or personal, by
gift, grant, devise, or transfer from any person, firm,
corporation or other public or private entity, including without
limitation grants or funds or other property tendered to the
trust in connection with provisions of any zoning ordinance or
bylaw or any other ordinance or bylaw;
(a)
(1)
E.
62.Editor's Note: This ordinance also accepted the provisions of MGL c. 44, § 55C.
§ 33-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:115
To purchase and retain real or personal property, including
without restriction investments that yield a high rate of income
or no income;
(b)
To sell, lease, exchange, transfer or convey any personal,
mixed, or real property at public auction or by private contract
for such consideration and on such terms as to credit or
otherwise, and to make such contracts and enter into such
undertaking relative to trust property as the Board deems
advisable, notwithstanding the length of any such lease or
contract;
(c)
To execute, acknowledge and deliver deeds, assignments,
transfers, pledges, leases, covenants, contracts, promissory
notes, releases and other instruments sealed or unsealed,
necessary, proper or incident to any transaction in which the
Board engages for the accomplishment of the purposes of the
trust;
(d)
To employ advisors and agents, such as accountants,
appraisers and lawyers as the Board deems necessary;
(e)
To fund grant positions for municipal employees through
specified grants established by the trust, whose positions are
in furtherance of the purposes set forth in MGL c. 44, § 55C,
and in this article;
(f)
To pay reasonable compensation and expenses to all advisors
and agents and to apportion such compensation between
income and principal as the Board deems advisable;
(g)
To apportion receipts and charges between incomes and
principal as the Board deems advisable, to amortize premiums
and establish sinking funds for such purpose, and to create
reserves for depreciation depletion or otherwise;
(h)
To participate in any reorganization, recapitalization, merger
or similar transactions; and to give proxies or powers of
attorney with or without power of substitution to vote any
securities or certificates of interest; and to consent to any
contract, lease, mortgage, purchase or sale of property, by or
between any corporation and any other corporation or person;
(i)
To deposit any security with any protective reorganization
committee, and to delegate to such committee such powers
and authority with relation thereto as the Board may deem
proper and to pay, out of trust property, such portion of
expenses and compensation of such committee as the Board
may deem necessary and appropriate;
(j)
To carry property for accounting purposes other than
acquisition date values;
(k)
§ 33-3 BEVERLY CODE § 33-3
1:116
§ 33-4. Limitations.
§ 33-5. Meetings.
The trust shall meet at regular intervals.
§ 33-6. Report.
The Trustees shall keep a record of their doings and make a report thereof
to the City annually. The report shall include a description and source of
funds received and expended and the type of affordable housing programs
To borrow money on such terms and conditions and from such
sources as the Board deems advisable, to mortgage and pledge
trust assets as collateral;
(l)
(m) To make distributions or divisions of principal in kind;
To comprise, attribute, defend, enforce, release, settle or
otherwise adjust claims in favor of or against the trust,
including claims for taxes, and to accept any property, either
in total or partial satisfaction of any indebtedness or other
obligation, and subject to the provisions of this article, to
continue to hold the same for such period of time as the Board
may deem appropriate;
(n)
To manage or improve real property; and to abandon any
property which the Board determined not to be worth
retaining;
(o)
To hold all or part of the trust property uninvested for such
purposes and for such time as the Board may deem
appropriate;
(p)
To extend the time for payment of any obligation to the trust;
and
(q)
To create guidelines and principles for the Trustees as to
strategies for the investment and expenditure of trust funds.
(r)
The powers and duties enumerated above are intended to
encompass all powers and duties of the Trustees. Any action, power
or duty not enumerated above shall require prior approval of the
City Council.
(2)
The conveyance of any real property § 33-3E(a), (b), or (c) above, shall
require the approval of the Mayor and the City Council.
A.
Any debt incurred by the trust shall not constitute a pledge of the full
faith and credit of the City of Beverly, and all documents related to any
debt shall contain a statement that the holder of any such debt shall
have no recourse against the City of Beverly, with an acknowledgement
of said statement by the holder.
B.
§ 33-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-6
1:117
or properties assisted with the funding. Such report shall be sent to the
Mayor not later than January 15 in each year, and a copy thereof shall
be filed with the Department of Planning and Community Development.
The books and records of the trust shall also be audited annually by an
independent auditor in accordance with accepted accounting practice. The
audit of the trust may be done by the City's auditors. The Trustees shall also
provide the City Council with a copy of the trust's annual audit.
§ 33-7. Funding.
Notwithstanding any general or special law to the contrary, all moneys
paid to the trust in accordance with any zoning ordinance or bylaw or
private contributions shall be paid directly into the trust and need not be
appropriated or accepted and approved into the trust. General revenues
appropriated into the trust become trust property, and to be expended these
funds need not be further appropriated. All moneys remaining in the trust
at the end of any fiscal year, whether or not expended by the Board within
one year of the date they were appropriated into the trust, remain trust
property.
§ 33-8. Legal Status.
The trust is a public employer and the members of the Board are public
employees for purposes of Chapter 258 of the Massachusetts General
Laws.
A.
The trust shall be deemed a municipal agency and the Trustees shall be
deemed as special municipal employees for purposes of Chapter 268A
of the Massachusetts General Laws.
B.
The trust is exempt from Chapters 59 and 62 of the Massachusetts
General Laws, and from any other provisions concerning payment of
taxes based upon or measured by property or income imposed by the
commonwealth or any political subdivision thereof.
C.
The trust is a governmental body for purposes of Sections 23A, 23B and
23C of Chapter 39 of the Massachusetts General Laws.63
D.
The trust is a Board of the city for purposes of Massachusetts General
Law Chapter 30B and MGL c. 40, § 15A; but agreements and
conveyances between the trust and agencies, Boards, commissions,
authorities, departments and public instrumentalities of the City or
town shall be exempt from said Chapter 30B of the Massachusetts
General Laws.
E.
63.Editor's Note: MGL c. 39, §§ 23A, 23B and 23C, regarding open meetings of government
bodies, were repealed by L. 2009, c. 28, § 20. See now MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 through 25.
§ 33-6 BEVERLY CODE § 33-8
1:118
Chapter 58
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agencies — See Ch. 7.
Boards, commissions, councils, committees
and authorities — See Ch. 15.
Elective offices — See Ch. 26.
Personnel — See Ch. 69.
§ 33-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-8
1:119

ARTICLE I
City Council Appointments
[Adopted as Art. III of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 58-1. Budget/Management Analyst.
Establishment. There shall be a City Council Budget/Management
Analyst as provided in Beverly Home Rule Charter Section 2-8(a).
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Budget/Management Analyst shall be
elected by the members of the City Council to serve for a term of three
years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Budget/Management Analyst shall
from time to time throughout the year examine, or cause to be
examined, the books and accounts of all City agencies which are
entrusted with the receipt, custody or expenditure of money, including
original bills on which money has been paid from the City treasury,
the documentation submitted by the agency requesting payment of any
such bills supporting such payment, the warrants for the payments of
bills and the canceled checks on file in the office of the City Treasurer.
The Budget/Management Analyst shall at least once in every year verify,
or cause to be verified, the cash balance of each such City agency by the
actual count of the cash on hand and by reconciliation of bank balances.
The Budget/Management Analyst shall keep the City Council
President fully informed as to the results of this activity and, not
less frequently than quarterly, shall make a detailed report
summarizing the results of this overview to the City Council
Standing Committee on Finance and Property. All reports to the
full City Council shall be made through the City Council Standing
Committee on Finance and Property. [Amended 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 013]
(1)
The Budget/Management Analyst shall review each request which
is made to the City Council by the Mayor, as provided in Beverly
Home Rule Charter Section 6-7, for the transfer of funds or for a
supplementary appropriation, and shall make a report to the City
Council Standing Committee on Finance and Property, including a
recommendation as to the action to be taken by the City Council,
before the City Council acts on the matter. [Amended 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 013]
(2)
When the proposed capital improvement program is submitted to
the City Council by the Mayor, as required by Beverly Home Rule
Charter Section 6-8, the Budget/Management Analyst shall review
the proposed capital improvement program and shall, before the
same is submitted to the City Council for any action, make a report,
including specific recommendations for actions to be taken by the
City Council concerning the capital improvement program as seem
necessary, desirable or expedient.
(3)
C.
§ 58-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-1
1:121
§ 58-2. City Clerk.
When the proposed annual operating budget is submitted to the
City Council by the Mayor, as provided in Beverly Home Rule
Charter Section 6-3, the Budget/Management Analyst shall review
the proposed annual operating budget and shall, before the
proposed operating budget is submitted to the City Council for
any action, make a report, including recommendations of specific
actions to be taken by the City Council concerning the annual
operating budget and any part or parts thereof as seem necessary,
desirable or expedient.
(4)
The Budget/Management Analyst shall perform such other duties
as may from time to time be assigned to such office by the City
Council.
(5)
Establishment. There shall be a City Clerk as provided in Section 2-8(b)
of the Charter.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The City Clerk shall be elected by the City
Council for a term not to exceed two years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities.
In general. The City Clerk shall perform all the duties which are
now or may hereafter be required of the office by the laws of the
commonwealth, the Charter or ordinances of the City, and shall
have the care and custody of the City Seal and all City contracts.
(1)
Notification of election or appointment. The City Clerk shall notify
all individuals of their election or appointment to any City agency,
immediately after they shall have been chosen, by written notices
left at their respective places of residence.
(2)
Furnishing attested copies of orders or votes. The City Clerk shall
serve as Clerk of the City Council. When any vote or order is
passed by the City Council referring any matter of business to
a committee, or authorizing the performance of any special duty
by such committee, the City Clerk shall forthwith transmit to the
clerk of such committee or the Clerk of Committees an attested
copy of such vote or order. He shall also furnish to the Director
of Municipal Finance attested copies of all orders which relate to
the financial business of the City or have reference in any way to
finance, appropriation, bonds and accounts.
(3)
Furnishing copies of legal process to City Solicitor. The City Clerk,
immediately upon the service upon him of any legal process in
which the City may be interested, shall furnish the City Solicitor
with a copy thereof, or an abstract of so much thereof as will enable
the City Solicitor to reasonably protect the interests of the City.
(4)
C.
§ 58-1 BEVERLY CODE § 58-2
1:122
§ 58-3. Clerk of the Council.64
The City Council shall elect a Clerk of the Council in accordance with
Charter Section 2-8(c).
§ 58-4. Clerk of Committees.
Publication of notice of meetings in newspaper. It shall be the duty
of the City Clerk to cause notices of all committee meetings and of
all general meetings of the City Council to be published in one or
more newspapers in the City at least 48 weekday hours before any
such meeting is to be held.
(5)
Bond. The City Clerk shall give bond, with sufficient sureties, to be
approved in writing by the Mayor, for the faithful performance of
his duties.
(6)
Assistant City Clerk. The Office of Assistant City Clerk is hereby
established. The Assistant City Clerk shall be appointed by the City
Clerk and shall assist in the performance of the duties of the office.
The Assistant City Clerk shall discharge the duties of the City Clerk
when that officer is absent or unable to act, and also when there
is a vacancy in the Office of City Clerk. In the absence of the City
Clerk, the Assistant City Clerk may act as Clerk of the City Council.
(7)
A. Establishment. There shall be a Clerk of City Council Committees.
Appointment; term of office. The Clerk of City Council Committees shall
be elected by the members of the City Council for a term not to exceed
three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities; compensation. The Clerk of City Council
Committees shall act as clerk of all committees composed in whole
or in part of members of the City Council, and shall receive such
compensation as the City Council may from time to time determine.
C.
The Clerk of City Council Committees shall record in books kept for the
purpose all proceedings and transactions of the committees of the City
Council, and keep a calendar of all meetings of such committees, and
shall perform such other duties as shall be required of such Clerk, from
time to time, by such committees.
D.
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-4
1:123

ARTICLE II
Mayor
[Adopted as Art. V of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 58-5. Election; authority.
Pursuant to Charter Section 3-1, a Mayor shall be elected for a term of two
years by and from the voters at large and shall be the chief executive and
administrative officer of the City government.
§ 58-6. Powers and duties.65
The following are the powers and duties of the Mayor, subject to Section 3
of the City Charter; and nothing herein shall be deemed to amend or alter
Section 3 of the City Charter.
Annual report. The Mayor, within six weeks following the start of each
fiscal year, shall, as provided in Charter Section 3-6(a), prepare and
present to the Council an annual report of the City's affairs, including a
summary of reports of department heads, and such other reports as the
Council shall require.
A.
Budget report. The Mayor shall, in the manner provided in Sections
6-3, 6-4 and 6-5 of the Charter, assemble estimates of the financial
needs and resources of the City for each ensuing year, and shall prepare
a proposed operating budget within the financial power of the City,
embodying it in a budget document with proper supporting schedules
and analyses.
B.
The executive powers of the City shall be vested solely in the Mayor,
and may be exercised by the Mayor either personally or through the
several City agencies under the general supervision and control of
the Office of the Mayor. The Mayor shall cause the Charter, the laws,
the ordinances and other orders for the government of the City to be
enforced, and shall cause a record of all official acts of the executive
branch of the City to be kept.
C.
The Mayor shall exercise general supervision and direction over all
City agencies, unless otherwise provided by law, by the Charter or by
ordinance. Each City agency shall furnish to the Mayor, forthwith upon
request, any information, materials or otherwise as the Mayor may
request and as the needs of the office and the interest of the City may
require.
D.
Appointment to acting capacity. The Mayor may personally perform, or
may designate some other officer or employee to perform, the duties of
any office or position in the administrative service under the control of
the Mayor when the office or position is vacant or lacks administration
E.
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-6
1:125
§ 58-7. Interrelationships; staff.
due to the absence or disability of the incumbent in accordance with
the provisions of Section 3-5 of the Charter.
Investigations. The Mayor shall have the power, either personally or by
any officer or other person designated for the purpose, to investigate
and to examine or inquire into the affairs or operation of any
department, division, bureau, or office; and, subject to available funds,
shall have power to employ consultants and professional counsel to aid
in such investigations, examinations, or inquiries.
F.
Delegate duties. The Mayor shall have the power to direct any
department, division or bureau to perform work for any other
department, division or bureau.
G.
Coordinate departments. The Mayor shall be responsible for the
coordination of the administrative heads of each department of City
government and for the review and analysis of the operation and
administration of all departments, boards, and commissions.
H.
Reports. The Mayor shall have the power to require all City officers
to furnish any information connected with or related to their official
or assigned duties. Annually, at the request of the Mayor, all City
officers shall provide the Mayor with a comprehensive report analyzing
the conditions and operations of the City agency, shall recommend
measures, and shall project needs for the ensuing fiscal year.
I.
City Council. The Mayor shall meet with the City Council in a manner
convenient for the purpose of discussing those matters within the
purview of the City Council.
A.
Other officials. The Mayor shall interact on a regular basis with all of
the City agencies.
B.
C. Chief of staff to the Mayor.
D. Confidential Secretary to the Mayor.
Clerical and other employees of the Mayor. The Mayor shall employ
such persons and in such clerical, secretarial, administrative or other
positions as the Mayor may deem necessary or advisable and as are
within the total appropriation made for the Office of the Mayor as the
Mayor deems to be in the best interest of the City.
E.
§ 58-6 BEVERLY CODE § 58-7
1:126
ARTICLE III
Mayoral Appointments
[Adopted as Art. VIII, Secs. 8.01, 8.02, 8.04, 8.06, 8.08, 8.12-8.14,
8.16-8.21, 8.26-8.36, 8.38, 8.40, and 8.42, of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 58-8. "City officer" designation; limits on compensation.
[Amended 7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 132; 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 289]
§ 58-9. Airport Manager.
§ 58-10. Assessor, Chief.
Designation. The following positions shall be designated "City officers"
and shall be appointed by the Mayor (except for the City Clerk who is
appointed by the Council), subject to all provisions of the City Charter
relating to City officers.
A.
Limit on monetary compensation. City officers will not be entitled to
monetary compensation for any hours worked in excess of their normal
work week.
B.
A. Establishment. There shall be an Airport Manager.
Appointment; term of office. The Airport Manager, a person qualified by
general management experience and aeronautical knowledge to serve
as Airport Manager, shall be appointed by the Mayor for a term not to
exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Airport Manager, under the
direction of the Airport Commission, shall be responsible for the proper
maintenance and operation of the Beverly Regional Airport and of all
facilities relating to the airport. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
465]
C.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Chief Assessor.
Appointment; term of office. The Chief Assessor shall be appointed by
the Mayor, subject to the review of the City Council as provided in
Section 2-10 of the Charter, to serve for a term not to exceed three
years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Chief Assessor shall be Chairman
of the Board of Assessors and shall be responsible for its day-to-day
operation. The Chief Assessor shall periodically appraise real and
personal property within the City, perform field measurements and
inspections of residential and commercial buildings, including new
buildings, additions, major alterations, demolition and partial
construction, and inspect land affected by map changes, deed transfers,
subdivision approvals and modifications; using appropriate appraisal
techniques to prepare estimates of market values of property. The
C.
§ 58-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-10
1:127
§ 58-11. City Accountant.
Chief Assessor shall be responsible for maintaining all office records
of properties. The Chief Assessor shall be responsible for the proper
administration of the Office of Assessing and shall assure that all
statutory and assigned duties and responsibilities are properly
exercised and carried out.
Establishment. There shall be a City Accountant who shall be primarily
responsible for the functions provided in MGL c. 41, §§ 52, 56, 57 and
58.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall, subject to the review of
the City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, appoint a
person to perform the duties of City Accountant. The City Accountant
shall hold no other City office involving the receipt or disbursement of
money.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Mayor and City agencies authorized
to spend money shall approve and transmit to the City Accountant
all bills, drafts, orders and payrolls chargeable to the respective
appropriations of which they have the expenditure. The City Accountant
shall examine all such bills, drafts, orders and payrolls and, if found
correct, shall draw a warrant upon the treasury for the payment of the
same, and the Treasurer shall pay no money from the treasury except
upon such warrant prepared by the City Accountant and approved by
the Mayor. The City Accountant may disallow and refuse to approve for
payment any claim as fraudulent, unlawful or excessive, and in such
case the City Accountant shall file with the City Treasurer a written
statement of the reasons for such refusal.
The City Accountant shall keep a complete set of books and the
accounts shall be kept, so far as practicable, in conformity with the
classifications and forms prescribed by the Director of Accounts
in accordance with MGL c. 44, § 43. The City Accountant shall
transmit all contracts of the City to the City Clerk.66
(1)
Immediately upon the close of the calendar year, the City
Accountant shall compile statements in tabulated form showing
the amounts appropriated and the amounts expended from each
appropriation during the preceding fiscal year, the amounts
appropriated for the current fiscal year and the amounts expended
from such appropriations during the first six months of such year,
and the amounts estimated to be expended from such
appropriations during the second six months of such year, and
the estimates for the next ensuing fiscal year, and shall forthwith
furnish a copy thereof to the Mayor and to the City Council. The
(2)
C.
66.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-10 BEVERLY CODE § 58-11
1:128
§ 58-12. City Collector.
City Accountant shall also make an annual report to be published
as a City document.
All City agencies authorized by law to expend money shall furnish
to the City Accountant and to the Mayor, not less than 10 days
before the end of the calendar year, or not less than 90 days prior
to the date of the start of the annual City meeting, whichever is
later, detailed estimates of the amount necessary for the proper
maintenance of the departments under their jurisdiction for the
ensuing fiscal year, with explanatory statements, and an estimate
of amounts necessary for outlays or permanent improvements.
(3)
Establishment. There shall be a City Collector as provided in Section
5-4(2) of the Charter.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall, subject to the review of
the City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, appoint a
person to perform the duties of City Collector for a term not to exceed
three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities.
Bond. The City Collector shall give bond with a suitable fidelity
insurance company as surety. Such bond shall be kept in the
custody of the City Treasurer.
(1)
Account of receipts and payments; statement of receipts and
disbursements; information respecting accounts and finance. The
City Collector shall keep an accurate and true account of all money
and other funds received on behalf of the City and shall, on the first
day of each month, furnish the City Accountant and the Budget/
Management Analyst employed by the City Council pursuant to
Charter Section 2-8(a) with a statement in detail of all collections
and other receipts during the preceding month. The Collector shall
render such other services and furnish such other information
respecting the accounts, finances and payments as may be required
by the City Accountant, City Council Budget/Management Analyst,
or by the City Council.
(2)
Annual report to City. The City Collector shall annually render to
the Mayor a true account of all receipts and other official doings
during the preceding financial year. The City Collector shall
account to and including the 30th day of June during each year, and
the fiscal year shall end on that day.
(3)
Duties generally. The City Collector shall perform all duties which
are now or may hereafter be required of city collectors by the
laws of the commonwealth, by the Charter, or by the ordinances
of the City. The City Collector shall collect all taxes, charges and
fees, water rents and charges, sewer rents and assessments and all
(4)
C.
§ 58-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-12
1:129
§ 58-13. City Solicitor.
other moneys due the City except as may be otherwise specifically
prescribed, and shall pay the same to the City Treasurer not less
frequently than weekly.
Duplicate bills. Any head of a department or any officer or board issuing
bills to any person for money due to the City shall forthwith deliver to
the City Collector a duplicate thereof.
D.
Deputy Collectors.
The City Collector may appoint one or more Deputy Collectors, one
of whom shall serve in the office of the City Collector. All other
Deputy Collectors appointed shall serve without salary and shall
receive fees for the collection of taxes unless otherwise designated
by the Mayor and City Council.
(1)
The Deputy Collector serving in the office shall receive such salary
and give such bond as the Mayor and City Council may from time
to time determine.67
(2)
E.
Establishment. There shall be a City Solicitor who shall serve as the
chief legal officer of the City and who shall be the head of the Law
Department.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Law Department shall be headed by
a City Solicitor appointed by the Mayor, subject to the review of the
Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, for a term not to
exceed three years.
B.
Qualifications. The City Solicitor shall be a person especially fitted by
education, training and experience to perform the duties of the office.
At the time of appointment, the City Solicitor shall at least be an
attorney admitted to practice in all courts of the commonwealth and in
the federal district courts, and have at least three years of progressively
responsible experience in municipal, public or governmental law, or
trial practice experience.
C.
Powers and duties. The City Solicitor shall be responsible for all of the
legal affairs of the City and shall have the following specific powers and
duties:
The City Solicitor shall be responsible to the Mayor for the effective
operation of the Law Department and all of the law and legal
services related functions and activities of the City. The City
Solicitor shall, with the approval of the Mayor, appoint and
(1)
D.
67.Editor's Note: Original Section 8.09 of the Code of Ordinances, Civil Defense, Director of,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. III). Original Section 8.10, City Electrician, which also followed,
was repealed 9-6-2012 by Ord. No. 131. Original Section 8.11, City Physician, was repealed
at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 58-12 BEVERLY CODE § 58-13
1:130
discharge employees within the Law Department. The City Solicitor
shall perform personally or shall supervise the provision of all legal
services by the Law Department, and shall direct and assign all
personnel serving in said Department, whether as an employee or
as a consultant.
Keep records.
Suits: keep a complete record of all suits in which the City had
or has an interest, giving the names of the parties, the court
where brought, the nature of the action, the disposition of the
case, or its condition if pending, and the briefs of counsel.
(a)
Opinions and titles: keep a complete record of all written
opinions furnished by any member of the Law Department.
(b)
Title to real estate: keep a complete record of all real property
acquired by the City, and assure that all deeds and other
instruments of title are properly recorded in the Registry of
Deeds or Land Court as appropriate.
(c)
Deliver records to successor: deliver all records, documents
and property of every description in his possession, belonging
to his office or to the City, to his successor in office, who shall
give him duplicate receipts therefor, one of which he shall file
with the City Clerk.
(d)
(2)
Professional assistants. The City Solicitor may appoint, subject
to the consent of the Mayor, deputy assistants and such other
assistants as in his judgment are needed to carry on the legal
business of the City.
(3)
Special counsel. In case of special or unusual circumstances or
in any case where the City Solicitor by reason of interest cannot
represent the City, the Mayor, upon the request of the City Solicitor,
may appoint special counsel and fix his or her compensation.
(4)
Generally.
It shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to examine all titles
of real estate and draft all legal instruments and papers of
whatever nature which may be required by any ordinance or
order of the City Council, or by any committee thereof, or by
the School Committee.68
(a)
It shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to give a legal opinion
and professional advice on any subject relating to the affairs of
the City or the duties of any of its officers, when required by
the Mayor, City Council or any standing or special committee,
or by the School Committee, or any officer of the City
(b)
(5)
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-13
1:131
§ 58-14. City Treasurer.
government, and generally to perform those duties
appertaining to the office as the legal adviser and attorney of
the City.
It shall be the duty of the City Solicitor to commence and
prosecute all actions and suits begun by the City and to defend
all actions and suits brought against the City in any court or
tribunal in the commonwealth, and also to appear as counsel
in any other action, suit or prosecution which may involve
the rights and interests of the City, and to defend any of the
officers of the City in suits and prosecutions against them for
any official action or the performance of any official duty when
any estate, right, privilege, ordinance, act or direction of the
City government may be brought in question, and the City
Solicitor shall also appear as counsel before the Legislature of
the Commonwealth, or any committee thereof, whenever the
interest and welfare of the City may be directly or incidentally
affected.
(c)
Copies of opinions furnished to City Clerk. Whenever the City
Solicitor has rendered a written opinion to any board or officer
of the City, a copy thereof shall be sent to the City Clerk,
together with a copy of the communication to which the City
Solicitor's response is being made, and the City Clerk shall
thereupon cause the same to be filed for future reference.
(d)
Establishment. There shall be a City Treasurer as provided in Section
5-4(2) of the Charter.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall, subject to the review of
the City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, appoint a
City Treasurer to serve for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Powers and duties.
Bond. The City Treasurer shall give bond with a suitable fidelity
insurance company as surety in such sum as the Commissioner of
Corporations and Taxation may determine. Such bond shall be in
the custody of the Mayor.
(1)
Custodian of bonds. All other bonds of City officers or agents shall
be in the custody of the City Treasurer.
(2)
Receiving and holding money; no payment except on written order
of Mayor. The City Treasurer shall receive and hold all moneys
of the City. No money shall be paid or drawn out of the treasury,
except on written order of the Mayor addressed to the Treasurer,
designating the funds or appropriation from which such orders are
to be paid; nor shall any order be drawn in payment for services
(3)
C.
§ 58-13 BEVERLY CODE § 58-14
1:132
§ 58-15. City Treasurer, Assistant.
The Office of Assistant Treasurer is hereby established. The City Collector,
by virtue of office, shall serve as Assistant Treasurer and shall assist in the
performance of the duties of the Treasurer when that officer is absent or
unable to act, and also when there is a vacancy in the Office of Treasurer.
The Assistant Treasurer shall give such bond with a fidelity insurance
company as surety as the Department of Revenue of the commonwealth may
determine to be desirable.69
rendered or material furnished for any department beyond the sum
specifically appropriated therefor by the City Council.
Account of receipts and payments; statement of receipts and
disbursements; information respecting accounts and finances. The
City Treasurer shall keep an accurate and true account of all
receipts and payments on behalf of the City and shall, on the first
day of each month, furnish the City Accountant and the Budget/
Management Analyst employed by the City Council pursuant to
Charter Section 2-8(a) with a statement in detail of all collections,
receipts and disbursements during the preceding month. The
Treasurer shall render such other services and furnish such other
information respecting the accounts, finances and payments as
may be required by the City Accountant, City Council Budget/
Management Analyst, or committee of the City Council.
(4)
Funds received from sewer assessments. All sewer assessments
received and paid into the City treasury shall be kept by the
Treasurer separate and apart from all other funds and shall only
be appropriated and used from time to time to pay for the further
construction of sewers or the interest and principal on bonds, notes
or scrip heretofore issued or hereafter to be used for such purpose.
(5)
Annual report to City Council. The Treasurer shall annually render
to the Mayor a true account of all receipts, expenditures and other
official doings during the preceding financial year. The Treasurer
shall account to and including the 30th day of June during each
year, and the fiscal year shall end on that day.
(6)
Duties generally. The City Treasurer shall perform all duties which
are now or may hereafter be required of city treasurers by the laws
of the commonwealth, by the Charter, or by the ordinances of the
City.
(7)
Duplicate bills. Any head of a department or any officer or board issuing
bills to any person for money due to the City shall forthwith deliver to
the City Treasurer a duplicate thereof.
D.
69.Editor's Note: Original Section 8.15 of the Code of Ordinances, Clerk of Committees, City
Council, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 58-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-16
1:133
§ 58-16. Confidential Secretary/Administrative Assistant to the
Mayor.
§ 58-17. Constables.
Establishment. There shall be a Confidential Secretary/Administrative
Assistant to the Mayor.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Confidential Secretary/Administrative
Assistant to the Mayor shall be appointed by and responsible only to the
Mayor. The Confidential Secretary/Administrative Assistant shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Confidential Secretary/
Administrative Assistant to the Mayor shall have the following duties:
Organize and summarize information and prepare it for the
Mayor's review and action.
(1)
Meet with department heads regarding day-to-day business,
expediting administrative interaction between the Mayor's office
and City departments.
(2)
Serve as a liaison officer between the Mayor, the media, public
interest groups, businesses and residents.
(3)
Be familiar with all aspects of the City government and with the
functions and activities of the various offices and employees of the
City.
(4)
Be familiar with the various services rendered by the City to its
residents, in order that callers can be informed of the extent of
these services and of the schedule for their performance.
(5)
Review all correspondence received in the office of the Mayor, and
arrange for its routing and for assembling the materials needed by
the Mayor to respond to all such correspondence.
(6)
Answer all telephone calls placed to the office, respond in an
appropriate fashion and direct as appropriate.
(7)
C.
Establishment. There shall be one or more Constables as provided in
MGL c. 41, §§ 91 through 95.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the
review of the City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter,
one or more constables for a term not to exceed three years each.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. Constables may serve certain civil writs
and processes. They have the powers of sheriffs to require aid in the
execution of their duties. Constables take due notice of and prosecute
all violations of law, respecting the observance of the Lord's Day,
profane swearing and illegal gaming. Constables also serve all
C.
§ 58-16 BEVERLY CODE § 58-17
1:134
§ 58-18. Council on Aging Director.
§ 58-19. Emergency Management Director.
§ 58-20. Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works, Director of. [Amended 9-5-2008 by Ord. No. 174A; 4-6-2011
by Ord. No. 42]
processes directed to them by the City, for notification of City meetings,
or for other purposes.70
A. Establishment. There shall be a Director of the Council on Aging.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint some person
especially suited by education, training and experience to serve as
Director of the Council on Aging for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Director of the Council on Aging
shall assist the Council on Aging in coordinating and conducting
programs dealing with the problems of aging and shall promote
facilities for the health, education, welfare and recreation of the aging.
The Director shall be an advocate for the needs of the elderly people
residing in the City, and shall conduct surveys of the elderly population
to better determine their needs, problems and concerns.
C.
Establishment. There shall be a Director of Emergency Management to
administer the Department of Emergency Management as provided in
Chapter 639 of the Acts of 1950, as amended.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to the
review of the City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, a
Director of Emergency Management to serve for a term not to exceed
three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Director of Emergency Management
shall be responsible for preparing and carrying out all emergency
functions and services, including, but not limited to: police and firefighting
services; medical and other health services; rescue engineering
and air-raid warning services; evacuation of persons from stricken
areas; emergency welfare services; communications; radiological,
chemical and other special weapons of defense; emergency
transportation; existing or properly assigned functions of plant
protection; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other
functions. The Director shall have all other powers and duties given to
such directors by general laws, provisions of the Code of Massachusetts
Regulations, and City ordinances.
C.
70.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-20
1:135
Establishment. There shall be a Director of Engineering, Commissioner
of Public Services, Public Works. The Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works shall be a City officer.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall, subject to the review of
the City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Beverly Home Rule
Charter, appoint a Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works for a term of not more three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall be responsible for maintenance of the disposal
area, water pollution control facilities, public highways, bridges,
sidewalks, parking lots, parks, playgrounds, recreation and
conservation areas, cemeteries, City forests, and public buildings,
as well as the maintenance of all City-owned vehicles. The Director
of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
shall, with the approval of the Mayor, appoint division chiefs.
(1)
The Department of Public Services shall be under the direction
and control of the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works. The Director of Engineering, Commissioner
of Public Services, Public Works shall perform all duties and shall
have the powers formerly imposed and conferred upon the
Commissioner of Public Works, Superintendent of Highways and
Sewers, Tree Warden, Water Board, Superintendent of Waterworks,
Board of Park Commissioners and Surveyor of Highways.71
(2)
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall have charge and control of maintenance of the
public cemeteries and burial places within the City limits.
(3)
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall have charge of all specific repairs upon all
highways, streets and bridges.
(4)
The Department of Engineering shall be under the direction and
control of the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works.
(5)
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall be responsible to the Mayor for the effective
operation of the Department of Engineering and shall be
responsible for the management of all projects assigned to the
Department of Engineering, whether performed by City employees
or outside entities and for all personnel assigned to the
Department.
(6)
C.
71.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-20 BEVERLY CODE § 58-20
1:136
§ 58-21. Fire Chief.72
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Pubic Services,
Public Works shall be responsible for the coordination of all
activities of agencies within the Department with all activities of
the Salem and Beverly Water Supply Board and the South Essex
Sewerage District.
(7)
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall be responsible for the coordination and
oversight of the collection and disposal of solid waste and
recyclable materials.
(8)
Appointment; term of office. The Fire Chief shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the review of the Council as provided in Section 2-10
of the Charter, to serve for a term of not less than three years nor more
than five years.
A.
Qualifications. The Fire Chief shall be a person especially fitted by
education, training and experience to perform the duties of the office.
At the time of appointment, the Fire Chief shall hold at least a degree
in a field appropriately related to public safety and shall have had at
least five years of progressively responsible experience in fire safety
administration.
B.
C. The Fire Chief shall be a City officer and a public safety official.
Powers and duties. The Fire Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor for
the effective operation of the Fire Department and all of the firesafety
activities of the City. The Fire Chief shall supervise all activities of
the Fire Department, and shall coordinate the assignment of personnel
serving in the Department through the heads of the several offices
constituting the Department. The Fire Chief may serve,
notwithstanding any provision of this section which may appear to the
contrary, as the head of any other office within the Department or
may appoint the head of one office within the Department to serve in
addition as the head of another office within the Department, provided
such person so appointed or so serving possesses all of the
qualifications for the position which may be prescribed by law, by rule,
or otherwise.
D.
The Fire Chief shall have the specific powers and duties as set forth by
ordinance, including, but not limited to:
(1) Administering the affairs of the Fire Department.
General authority and control over all office staff and overseeing
the proper fulfillment of all tasks and duties assigned to the Fire
Department.
(2)
E.
72.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-21
1:137
§ 58-22. Gas/Plumbing Inspector.74
§ 58-23. Harbormaster.
Prescribing such rules and regulations as he deems necessary or
expedient for the proper operation of the Fire Office and to that end
keeping himself informed of the latest administrative practices;
subject to the civil service law and rules and any collective
bargaining agreements as may be applicable, taking all personnel
actions, including hiring, assigning and reassigning employees,
including supervisory personnel, within the Department and
supervising their performance.
(3)
Coordinating all emergency preparedness functions of the City
to be compatible with the functions of the federal and state
governments and adjacent political subdivisions.
(4)
Establishing policies for effective use of work force resources and
facilities to deal with any major natural disaster or nuclear
incident.
(5)
Providing for emergency functions to prevent and minimize the
effects of disasters on persons and providing for the emergency
repair of damage to public facilities resulting from enemy attack,
fire, flood, tornado, earthquake, or other natural causes.73
(6)
Establishment. There shall be Gas/Plumbing Inspector as provided in
MGL c. 142, § 11.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Gas/Plumbing Inspector shall, subject
to the consent of the Mayor, be appointed by the Director of Municipal
Inspections and shall hold office as provided in Section 5-8 of the
Charter for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Gas/Plumbing Inspector is
responsible to the Director of Municipal Inspections for the
enforcement of the rules and regulations adopted by the Board of State
Examiners of Plumbers and Gas Fitters. The Gas/Plumbing Inspector
shall have all other powers and duties given to gas/plumbing inspectors
by the general laws of the commonwealth, Code of Massachusetts
Regulations, and by City ordinances. The Gas/Plumbing Inspector shall
be responsible for the enforcement of all rules and regulations with
regard to the construction, alteration and repair of all plumbing in the
City (MGL c. 142, §§ 11 through 13, and c. 142, generally).
C.
73.Editor's Note: Original Sections 8.24, Fire Inspector, and 8.25, Forest Warden, of the Code
of Ordinances, which immediately followed this section, are now Ch. 7, §§ 7-15 and 7-16, of
the City Code.
74.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-21 BEVERLY CODE § 58-23
1:138
§ 58-24. Human Resources Director.
Establishment. There shall be a Harbormaster and such assistants as
may be deemed necessary.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Chief of Police, subject to the consent
of the Mayor, shall appoint a Harbormaster to serve for a term of
not more than three years. The Harbormaster shall be appointed as
a special officer on the City waters and City waterfront property. The
Harbormaster, subject to the consent of the Mayor, may appoint
Assistant Harbormasters for terms not to exceed three years.75
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Harbormaster and Assistant
Harbormasters shall be responsible for the operation of all vessels in
the harbor in conformity with MGL c. 102, §§ 17 through 28, and all City
ordinances adopted in relation to the harbor.
C.
Establishment. There shall be a Director of Human Resources as
provided in Section 5-7 of the Charter who shall be the head of the
Department of Human Resources (as provided in Section 5-7 of the
Charter), which shall be responsible for all personnel and employeerelated
functions and activities of the City and for the supervision and
coordination of all activities of all City agencies in relation to any
personnel or employee-related function or activity.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Director of Human Resources shall be
appointed by the Mayor, subject to review of the Council as provided in
Section 2-10 of the Charter, to serve for a term of not more than three
years.
B.
Qualifications. The Director of Human Resources shall be a person
especially fitted by education, training and experience to perform the
duties of the office. At the time of appointment, the Director of Human
Resources shall hold at least a degree in a field appropriately related
to business administration or public administration and shall have had
at least five years of progressively responsible experience in public or
governmental personnel or human services administration.76
C.
Powers and duties. The Director of Human Resources shall have the
following specific powers and duties:
Be responsible for all personnel and employee-related functions
and activities of the City government and its administration as
provided in Section 5-7 of the Charter.
(1)
Plan, administer and direct all phases of all municipal personnel
plans and collective bargaining agreements, including wage and
(2)
D.
75.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
76.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-24
1:139
§ 58-25. Information Technology Director.
§ 58-26. Keeper of the Lockup.
§ 58-27. Library Director.
salary administration, position classification, sick and vacation day
administration, accident prevention programs, employee grievance
procedures, physical examination processing, testing, review and
evaluation of work records and all other recordkeeping related to
City employees.
Develop new and revised personnel policies and practices to
maintain and keep current the existing high standards for
municipal personnel.
(3)
Review and evaluate all requests for new or additional personnel
made by City agencies and make recommendations to the Mayor.
(4)
Advise and assist all agency heads and employees in all aspects
of municipal personnel matters, including recruitment, promotion,
transfer, training, wages, insurance and other benefits of
employment.
(5)
Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations governing any subject
within the jurisdiction of the Department of Human Resources as
are necessary to implement the provisions of this section.
(6)
A. Establishment. There shall be a Director of Information Technology.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint a Director of
Information Technology for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Director of Information Technology
shall be responsible for the implementation, development and upkeep
of the electronic data processing, document storage, search and
retrieval system and other information technology systems and uses of
the City.
C.
Establishment. There shall be a Keeper of the Lockup, as provided in
MGL c. 40, § 35.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint a Keeper of the
Lockup for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Keeper of the Lockup shall have
the care and custody of the City lockup and of all persons who are
committed to the lockup, as provided in MGL c. 40, §§ 34 through 37,
inclusive.
C.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Library Director.
§ 58-24 BEVERLY CODE § 58-27
1:140
§ 58-28. Municipal Finance Director.
Appointment; term of office. The Library Director shall be appointed by
the Mayor for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Library Director shall be responsible
for overseeing the entire operation of the public library, including
management of the buildings and grounds; preserving, maintaining
and enlarging the books, periodicals, manuscripts, recordings, film,
videotape and other materials which constitute the collection;
supervising and directing all employees of the public library and being
involved in every other phase of the care and management of the public
library on behalf of the Board of Trustees and the public.
C.
Establishment. There shall be a Director of Municipal Finance, as
provided in Section 5-4 of the Charter, who shall be the head of the
Department of Municipal Finance (as provided in Section 5-4 of the
Charter), which shall be responsible for the management of the fiscal
and financial affairs of the City and for the supervision and coordination
of all activities of all City agencies in relation to any fiscal or financial
matter.
A.
Appointment; term of office. There shall be a Director of Finance
appointed by the Mayor, subject to the review of the Council as
provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, to serve for a term not to
exceed three years.
B.
Qualifications. The Director of Municipal Finance shall be a person
especially fitted by education, training, and experience to perform the
duties of the office. At the time of appointment, the Director of
Municipal Finance shall hold at least a bachelor's degree in a field
appropriately related to finance, including, but not limited to, business
administration or public administration, and shall have had at least five
years of progressively responsible experience in public or governmental
finance.77
C.
Powers and duties. The Director of Finance shall have the following
specific powers and duties:
The Director of Municipal Finance shall be responsible for the
performance of all the fiscal and financial activities of the City, as
provided in Section 5-4 of the Charter.
(1)
The Director of Municipal Finance shall assure that a full and
complete inventory of all City property is kept, including all such
property under the jurisdiction of the School Committee.
(2)
The Director of Municipal Finance shall be responsible for the
development, in draft form, of an annual operating budget and an
(3)
D.
77.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-28
1:141
§ 58-29. Municipal Inspections Director.
annual capital improvement plan to assist the Mayor in meeting
the financial responsibilities assigned to the Mayor by Article 6 of
the Charter, and for the oversight throughout each fiscal year of
the expenditure of all City funds pursuant to such budgets as are
adopted by the City.
The Director of Finance shall receive all requests made for the
expenditure of City funds from every City office and agency. The
Director of Finance shall assemble all such requests into a form
deemed to be best suited to show a complete financial plan for all
City funds and activities for the ensuing fiscal year. In making such
arrangement, the Director of Finance may, with the approval of the
Mayor, alter in any manner the requests made for appropriations
by any City office or agency, except the School Committee.
(4)
The proposed City operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year
shall be prepared by the Director of Finance within fiscal and
policy guidelines established by the Mayor. The proposed operating
budget prepared by the Director of Finance shall utilize modern
concepts of fiscal presentation so as to furnish a maximum amount
of information and the best financial controls, and shall show in
detail all estimated income from the proposed property tax levy and
from every other source, by category. The proposed City operating
budget as prepared by the Director of Finance shall show in
separate columns the amount appropriated in the prior fiscal year,
the amount requested by the spending agency, and the amount
recommended by the Mayor. The proposed budget submitted to
the City Council by the Mayor shall be based upon the material
prepared by the Director of Finance.
(5)
The Director of Municipal Finance shall adopt and promulgate
rules and regulations governing any subject within the jurisdiction
of the Department of Municipal Finance as are necessary to
implement the provisions of this section.
(6)
Establishment. There shall be a Director of Municipal Inspections,
as provided in Section 5-8 of the Charter, who shall be the head of
the Department of Municipal Inspections (as provided in Section 5-8
of the Charter), which shall be responsible for the coordination and
management of the inspection-related activities of the City, and for
the supervision and coordination of all activities of all City agencies in
relation to any inspection service as provided in MGL c. 143, § 3, and
780 CMR (Code of Massachusetts Regulations).
A.
Appointment; term of office. Subject to the review of the City Council
as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, the Director of Municipal
Inspections shall be appointed by the Mayor and shall hold office for a
term not to exceed three years and in conformity with the provisions of
B.
§ 58-28 BEVERLY CODE § 58-29
1:142
Section 5-8 of the Charter. The Director of Municipal Inspections shall
have at least the qualifications as are provided in MGL c. 143, § 3.78
The Director of Municipal Inspections shall be a person especially
fitted by education, training, and at least five years' experience in code
enforcement services to perform the duties of the office. At the time of
appointment, the Director of Municipal Inspections shall be qualified,
and state certified, to serve as the head of at least one of the divisions
within the department.
C.
Powers and duties.
The Director of Municipal Inspections shall be responsible to the
Mayor for the effective operation of the Department of Municipal
Inspections and all of the inspection-related activities of the
Department. The Director of Municipal Inspections shall, with the
approval of the Mayor, and in accordance with Sections 3-4 and
8-15 of the Charter, appoint and discharge employees permanently
assigned within the offices of municipal inspections, except for
those designated as City officers, who shall be appointed by the
Mayor, subject to the review of the Council. The Director of
Municipal Inspections shall supervise all activities of the
Department of Municipal Inspections and shall direct and assign all
personnel serving in said Department and shall direct and assign
other municipal personnel in the performance of inspection
services.
(1)
The Director of Municipal Inspections may serve, notwithstanding
any provision of this section which may appear to the contrary,
as the head of any other offices within the Department or may
appoint the head of one office within the Department to serve
in addition as the head of another office within the Department,
provided such person so appointed or so serving possesses all of
the qualifications for the position which may be prescribed by law,
by rule, or otherwise.
(2)
The Director of Municipal Inspections shall have such other
specific powers and duties as set forth by ordinance.
(3)
D.
Authority and responsibilities.
The Director of Municipal Inspections shall make inspections, issue
such permits and enforce such regulations and ordinances as may
be required by the City or as may be required by the provisions
of Chapter 143 of the General Laws or under the so-called State
Building Code and may for such purposes, at all reasonable times,
enter upon premises to carry out such lawful procedures.
(1)
E.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-29
1:143
§ 58-30. Parking Clerk.
§ 58-31. Parks, Recreation and Community Services, Director of.
[Amended 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 89]
The Director of Municipal Inspections shall serve as the Zoning
Enforcement Officer as provided in MGL c. 40A, § 7.79
(2)
Establishment. There shall be a Parking Clerk as provided in MGL c. 90,
§ 20A.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Director of Municipal Finance shall,
subject to the consent of the Mayor, appoint a Parking Clerk for a term
not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Parking Clerk shall report to the
Director of Municipal Finance and shall supervise and coordinate the
processing of parking notices in the City as provided in MGL c. 90,
§§ 20A through 20E.
C.
Appointment; term of office. There shall be a Director of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services, who shall be the head of the
Department of Community Services and the head of the Department
of Parks and Recreation. The Director of Parks, Recreation and
Community Services shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the
review of the Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, to
serve for a term not to exceed three years.
A.
Qualifications. At the time of appointment, the Director of Parks,
Recreation and Community Services shall hold at least a bachelor's
degree in a field appropriately related to business administration or
public administration and shall have had at least five years of
progressively responsible experience in public or governmental
administration.
B.
Powers and duties. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Community
Services shall be responsible to the Mayor for the effective operations
of the Department of Community Services and all of the community
services activities of the Department. The Director of Parks, Recreation
and Community Services shall also be responsible for the effective
operations of the Parks and Recreation Department. The Director of
Parks, Recreation and Community Services shall supervise all activities
of the Department of Community Services and the Parks and Recreation
Office and shall direct and assign all personnel serving in said
departments and shall direct and assign other municipal personnel in
the performance of community services related services or functions.
The duties of the Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services
shall include, but not be limited to:
C.
79.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-29 BEVERLY CODE § 58-31
1:144
§ 58-32. Planning and Development Director.
Provide coordination and direction to the agencies within the
department to ensure consistent administration and the efficient
delivery of services to citizens and taxpayers.
(1)
Meet regularly with the Mayor to develop goals and objectives for
each of the agencies within the department and to measure and
evaluate the performance of functions by the agencies.
(2)
Meet with all City agencies to explain the goals and objectives set
by the Mayor for each such agency.
(3)
Examine the level of services provided in other communities to
ensure the City of Beverly provides nothing less than an equivalent
service for its citizens.
(4)
Assist all City agencies in the development of annual operating
budgets and capital outlay requests.
(5)
Provide assistance to all City agencies in personnel-related
matters, including appointment, discharge, evaluation and
supervision.
(6)
Serve as liaison among all City agencies, the City Council and the
Mayor.
(7)
Be responsible for the coordination and supervision of the data
processing and management information systems for the City and
any of its governmental offices and agencies.
(8)
Provide, conduct and supervise activities at public playgrounds,
playfields, indoor recreation centers and recreation areas and
facilities, except Hurd Stadium, and such other places as may
from time to time be available to the City for the conduct of
such programs. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Community
Services, subject to policies adopted by the Parks and Recreation
Commission, may conduct such activities on property under the
control of the Parks and Recreation Commission, on other public
properties with the consent of the agency having authority over
such property, and on private properties with the consent of the
owners. The Director of Parks, Recreation and Community Services
shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural
activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a
constructive and wholesome manner.
(9)
Establishment. There shall be a Director of Planning and Development,
as provided in Section 5-5 of the Charter, who shall be the head of the
Department of Planning and Development (as provided in Section 5-5
of the Charter), which shall be responsible for the coordination of all
of the planning and development-related activities of the City and for
the supervision and coordination of all activities of all City agencies in
A.
§ 58-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-32
1:145
relation to any planning and development-related activities conducted
by any such agency of the City.
Appointment; term of office. The Director of Planning and Development
shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject to the review of the Council as
provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, for a term not to exceed three
years.80
B.
Qualifications. The Director of Planning and Development shall be a
person especially fitted by education, training and experience to
perform the duties of the office. Qualifications for appointment as
Director of Planning and Development shall include, but are not limited
to, a degree in a field appropriately related to municipal planning
and development, including, but not limited to, business administration
or public administration, and at least five years of progressively
responsible experience in public or governmental planning and
development.81
C.
Powers and duties. The Director of Planning and Development shall be
responsible to the Mayor for the effective operation of the Department
of Planning and Development and all of the planning and development
activities of the City. The Director of Planning and Development shall
supervise all activities of the Department of Planning and Development
and shall direct and assign all personnel serving in the Department, and
shall direct and assign other municipal personnel in the performance of
planning and development-related services or functions.
D.
Authority and responsibilities. The Director of Planning and
Development shall be responsible to the Mayor for the effective
operation of the Department of Planning and Development and all
of the planning and development activities of the City. The Director
of Planning and Development shall, with the approval of the Mayor,
appoint and discharge employees within the Department of Planning
and Development. The Director of Planning and Development shall
supervise all activities of the Department of Planning and Development
and shall direct and assign all personnel serving in the Department, and
shall direct and assign other municipal personnel in the performance of
planning and development-related services or functions.
E.
The Director of Planning and Development shall have the following
specific powers and duties:
Be responsible for the coordination of all planning and
development-related activities of the City.
(1)
Be responsible for the administration of the City agencies and
functions assigned to this department.
(2)
F.
80.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
81.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-32 BEVERLY CODE § 58-32
1:146
Be responsible for the coordination of all land acquisitions and
disposals, land management proposals, and all economic planning.
(3)
Be responsible for the preparation of a comprehensive or master
plan which shall set forth, in graphic and textual forms, policies to
govern the future development of the City.
(4)
Be responsible for the maintenance of a central records library for
all data, reports, records, statistics and planning and developmentrelated
materials as may be related to the City, whether written,
printed or otherwise reproduced and whether on magnetic tape for
audio or visual retrieval or stored in computer-related form.
(5)
Be responsible for oversight of the community development block
grants office to ensure applications made by the agency for funds
are consistent with and conformable to the comprehensive or
master plan and to monitor the administration of any grants
received for compliance with the City's plan and the grantor's
requirements and conditions.
(6)
Adopt and promulgate rules and regulations governing any subject
within the jurisdiction of the Department of Planning and
Development as are necessary to implement the provisions of this
section.
(7)
Plan, organize and direct the activities of professional, technical,
administrative and clerical personnel of the Department of
Planning and Development engaged in the compilation, analysis
and interpretation of data pertaining to municipal planning.
(8)
Initiate and conduct studies of the resources, possibilities and
needs of the City and its metropolitan area.
(9)
Prepare plans and recommendations for submission to the Mayor
and City Council:
For the use of land for residential, commercial, industrial,
recreational and other purposes.
(a)
(b) For controlling shifts of population.
For situating public and private ways, bridges, parks,
recreation facilities, public buildings, public utility services,
public housing projects, slum clearance and urban
development projects, public garages and off-street parking
facilities.
(c)
For affording further facilities for the housing, transportation,
employment, health, safety and general welfare of the
population;
(d)
(10)
§ 58-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-32
1:147
§ 58-33. Police Chief.
Act as technical adviser to the Mayor and City Council, Planning
Board, and other City agencies or officials on municipal planning
matters.
(11)
Publish and distribute such copies of plans or reports as the City
Council may authorize in connection with planning and
development problems and policies.
(12)
Prepare and submit annually a long-range capital improvement
program for the City, including data as to the cost of each project
recommended, relative priorities of projects from an urgency and
desirability standpoint, and the amounts that might be available
from borrowed funds, federal or state grants-in-aid or from the
annual tax levy, together with the estimated amounts returnable to
the City by betterment assessments.
(13)
(14)Prepare and administer the departmental budget.
Participate in the administration of the zoning, subdivision and
other related ordinances.
(15)
Confer with civic groups; prepare public relations programs;
participate in planning conferences; and speak to public
gatherings.
(16)
The Planning Director shall have full charge of the work of his
department and full supervision of the work of his planning and
office staff.82
(17)
The Planning Director shall participate and cooperate with the
Planning Board of the City in the fulfillment of the Board's
responsibilities under Chapter 41 of the General Laws, and shall
perform any and all functions of that Board as it lawfully delegates
to him.83
(18)
Establishment. There shall be a Police Chief, as provided in MGL c. 41,
§§ 96 through 99A, who shall be the head of the Police Department,
which shall be responsible for the coordination of all the police-related
activities of the City and for the supervision and coordination of all
activities of all City agencies in relation to any police safety matter.
A.
Appointment. The Police Chief shall be appointed by the Mayor, subject
to review of the Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, and
shall serve for a term of not less than three years nor more than five
years.
B.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
83.Editor's Note: Original Section 8.37 of the Code of Ordinances, Plumbing Inspector, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. III). See now § 58-22, Gas/Plumbing Inspector.
§ 58-32 BEVERLY CODE § 58-33
1:148
C. The Chief of Police shall be a City officer and public safety official.
Powers and duties.
The Police Chief shall be responsible to the Mayor and shall have
the following duties:
(a) Administer the affairs of the Police Department.
Have general authority and control over all departmental staff
and oversee the proper fulfillment of all tasks and duties
assigned to the Department.
(b)
Prescribe such rules and regulations as he deems necessary or
expedient for the proper operation of the Police Department
and to that end keep informed of the latest administrative
practices.
(c)
Subject to the civil service law and rules and any collective
bargaining agreements as may be applicable, take all
personnel actions, including hiring, assigning and reassigning
employees, including supervisory personnel, within the Police
Department, and shall supervise the performance of all
personnel assigned to the Department.
(d)
The Chief of Police shall be in immediate control of all City
property used by the Department, and of the police officers,
whom he shall assign to their respective duties and who shall
obey his orders.
(e)
The Police Chief and other police officers of the City shall
have all the powers and duties of constables, except serving
and executing civil process. They shall suppress and prevent
all disturbances and disorder. They may carry within the
commonwealth such weapons as the Chief of Police shall
determine. They may examine all persons abroad whom they
have reason to suspect of unlawful design, and may demand of
them their business abroad and whither they are going; may
disperse any assembly of three or more persons; and may enter
any building to suppress a riot or breach of peace therein.
Persons so suspected who do not give a satisfactory account of
themselves, persons so assembled who do not disperse when
ordered, and persons making, aiding and abetting in a riot or
disturbance may be arrested by the police, and may thereafter
be safely kept by imprisonment or otherwise unless released in
the manner provided by law, and taken before a district court
to be examined and prosecuted.
(f)
(1)
Responsibilities as to Department. The Chief of Police shall be
responsible for the discipline and efficiency of his department and,
subject to the approval of the Mayor, shall have the entire control
and management thereof, including all reserve and special officers
(2)
D.
§ 58-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-33
1:149
and animal control officers when engaged in the service of the
City. He shall make such rules and regulations for the proper
government of the Police Department and animal control officers as
he may from time to time deem expedient, subject to the approval
of the Mayor and the City Council, and not repugnant to the laws
of the commonwealth or any ordinance of the City. [Amended
10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 428A84]
Jurisdiction over traffic signals. The Chief of Police shall have
complete jurisdiction over all traffic signals in the City.
(3)
Vacancies. In case of a vacancy in the Office of Chief of Police, or in
the absence from duty of the Chief, the ranking officer of the Police
Department shall have all the power and perform all the duties of the
Chief of Police.
E.
Control and authority over Senior Captain's duties. The duties of the
Senior Captain of the Police Department shall be prescribed by the
Chief of Police, and the Senior Captain shall perform such duties under
the direction and control of the Chief of Police. The duties of the Senior
Captain may include but not be limited to the following:
Oversee the supervision of patrol functions by the watch
commanders on all shifts.
(1)
Assign working days and overtime for all Patrol Division officers of
rank.
(2)
Direct the investigation of complaints from and against personnel
in the Patrol Division.
(3)
Instruct and advise subordinate officers on police patrol
procedures.
(4)
(5) Supervise the carrying out of orders from the Chief.
Organize and conduct staff meetings for watch commanders and
patrol supervisors.
(6)
Actively seeks to resolve problems existing within the Patrol
Division.
(7)
Recommend means of improving Department operations to the
Chief.
(8)
(9) Recommend awarding commendations to deserving members.
Have charge of public relations and information for the
Department.85
(10)
F.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
85.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (e) of this section, regarding the Mayor's duty to
appoint the Deputy Chief from eligible Captains in the Department, which immediately
§ 58-33 BEVERLY CODE § 58-33
1:150
§ 58-34. Procurement Officer, Chief.
§ 58-35. Public Health Director.
§ 58-36. Purchasing Director.
Reports. On the first day of each month, and at all times when especially
required, the Chief of Police shall make a written report to the Mayor
of the doings of the Police Department, and shall annually in the month
of January make a written report to the City Council of the condition
of the Department and its doings for the preceding year, with such
recommendations as he may deem desirable.86
G.
Establishment. The Mayor shall be the Chief Procurement Officer for
the City as provided in the third paragraph of Section 3-2 of the
Charter. The Mayor may delegate all or any portion of the powers
of Chief Procurement Officer to a subordinate; provided, however, no
such delegation shall in any way absolve the Mayor from the ultimate
responsibility for all procurement activities.
A.
Deputies. The Mayor may appoint Deputy Procurement Officers for
such terms and under such conditions as the Mayor shall deem to be in
the best interests of the City.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Chief Procurement Officer shall be
responsible for the procurement of all supplies and services for the City
and for the disposal of all surplus supplies and other property, both real
and personal, belonging to the City as provided in MGL Chapter 30B.87
C.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Director of Public Health.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall, subject to the review of
the City Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, appoint a
Director of Public Health for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Powers and duties. The Director of Public Health is responsible for
planning, implementing and enforcing public health laws, codes,
regulations, board policies, rules and preventive health and
environmental programs. The Director exercises administrative and
technical supervision over all employees of the Health Department,
directs all activities of the Department in accordance with policies of
the Board of Health and public health laws and is responsible for the
conduct of programs designed to preserve and protect the public health
within the City.
C.
followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General
Provisions, Art. III).
86.Editor's Note: Original Subsection (g), Public nuisances, which immediately followed this
subsection, can now be found as Ch. 206, Nuisances, of the City Code.
87.Editor's Note: Original Section 8.41 of the Code of Ordinances, Public Services Director,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 58-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-36
1:151
Establishment. The shall be a Purchasing Director appointed by the
Mayor who may exercise such powers of the Mayor as Chief
Procurement Officer for the City as the Mayor may deem necessary,
desirable or expedient and who shall be the head of the Purchasing
Department.
A.
Qualifications. The Director of Purchasing shall be a person especially
fitted by education, training, and experience to perform the duties
of the office. At the time of appointment, the Director of Purchasing
shall hold at least a degree in a field appropriately related to business
administration or public administration and shall have had at least five
years of progressively responsible experience in public or governmental
purchasing administration.88
B.
Powers and duties. The duties of the Director of Purchasing shall
include, but are not to be deemed to be limited to, the following:
Be responsible to the Mayor for the effective operation of the
Purchasing Department, and all of the procurements and contract
administration related functions and activities of the City. The
Director of Purchasing shall supervise all activities of the
Purchasing Department and shall direct and assign all personnel
serving in said Department.89
(1)
Authorize and devise methods and procedures for all purchasing
procedures, including those not covered by ordinance or by statute;
procure all construction work and miscellaneous services; make
technical decisions using independent judgment and purchasing
knowledge.
(2)
Request and review price quotations on all materials, supplies
and equipment to be purchased by the City; award contracts to
successful bidders; and direct the issuance of purchase orders.
(3)
Conduct the bidding process, including writing or assisting City
agencies in preparing detailed specifications for items to be
purchased; direct the formal advertising of bid invitations; preside
at bid openings; analyze bids; award contracts in conformity with
ordinances and statutes; establish the amount for bid bonds, bid
deposits, performance bonds, and liability insurance for all
contracts.
(4)
Maintain records of all transactions, purchases, contracts,
equipment transfers or sales.
(5)
Develop and maintain working relationships with sources of supply;
interview sales representatives and maintain files for sources of
(6)
C.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-36 BEVERLY CODE § 58-36
1:152
supply for goods, price trends, and other new developments in the
field of purchasing and procurement.
(7) Dispose of surplus goods and materials by sale or otherwise.
Assist all City agencies in the preparation of all materials required
in the solicitation of bids, for construction or other services,
including interface with the Department of Labor and Industries of
the Commonwealth, publication in the Central Register, insurance,
bid deposit and advertising requirements, preparation of all bid
documents, contracts and other legal documents and by answering
all questions as may be posed by City agencies with respect to
these subjects.90
(8)
90.Editor's Note: Original § 8.43, Recreation Director, of the prior Code of Ordinances, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 3-17-2014 by Ord. No. 89.
§ 58-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-36
1:153

ARTICLE IV
Additional Appointments and Employees
[Adopted as Art. VIII, Secs. 8.03, 8.05, 8.07, 8.22, and 8.44-8.47, of
the Code of Ordinances]
§ 58-37. Animal Control Officer.
§ 58-38. Chief of Staff to the Mayor.
Establishment. There shall be an Animal Inspector as provided in MGL
c. 129, §§ 15 to 25.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint one or more
Animal Control Officers. Such nominees shall not be appointed until
approved by the Director of Animal Health of the Commonwealth as
required by MGL c. 129, § 15.
B.
Authority and responsibilities.
Each Animal Inspector shall comply with and enforce all orders and
regulations directed to him by the Director of Animal Health of the
Commonwealth (MGL c. 129, § 18) and shall also serve as Animal
Control Officer as provided in MGL c. 140, § 151 et seq.91
(1)
The Animal Inspector shall make regular and thorough inspections
of all domestic animals and shall be responsible for the
enforcement of all laws relating to the care, custody and control of
dogs in the City (MGL c. 140, §§ 136A through 174). The Animal
Inspector shall attend to all complaints or other matters pertaining
to dogs in the City found within the City limits. Such inspections
shall be made at such times and in such manner as the Animal
Control Officer shall from time to time order. The Animal Control
Officer shall also from time to time make inspections of all other
domestic animals within the limits of the City if he/she knows, or
has reason to suspect, that such animals are affected with or have
been exposed to any contagious disease, and shall immediately
inspect all domestic animals and any place where any such animals
are kept whenever directed so to do by the Director of Animal
Health of the Commonwealth (MGL c. 129, § 19).
(2)
C.
A. Establishment. There shall be a Chief of Staff to the Mayor.
Appointment; term of office. The Chief of Staff shall be appointed by
and responsible only to the Mayor. The Chief of Staff shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Chief of Staff shall have the
following duties:
C.
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-38
1:155
§ 58-39. City Arborist.
(1) Represent the Mayor as liaison with the City Council.
Represent the Mayor, acting only on his direction, at meetings of
regional agencies, state and federal agencies, community groups,
business interests and local trade and fraternal organizations, for
purposes of gathering information and/or articulating the Mayor's
point of view.
(2)
Organize and summarize information and prepare it for the
Mayor's review and action.
(3)
Meet with department heads regarding day-to-day business,
expediting administrative interaction between the Mayor's office
and City departments.
(4)
(5) Serve as a liaison officer between the City and its residents.
Be familiar with all aspects of the City government, and become
familiar with the functions of the activities of the various offices
and employees of the City.
(6)
Be familiar with the various services rendered by the City to its
residents, so that he can inform citizens of the extent of these
services and of the schedule for their performance.
(7)
Complete specified research assignments with close contact to the
Massachusetts Municipal Association and the National League of
Cities and Towns, comparing the City's problems with problems
and solutions of other communities in the state and nation.
(8)
Meet with the Mayor, boards and commissions in normal business
meetings to explain proposals or identify means to expedite action.
(9)
Work with the Clerk of Committees preparing orders and backup
material for executive department initiatives and with committees
to expedite support for committee deliberations.
(10)
Perform other services so as to support the Mayor's role as chief
executive of the City.
(11)
Powers and duties. The City Arborist, subject to the direction and
supervision of the Director of Public Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works, shall have the following general powers
and duties:
To direct, manage, supervise, and control the City's forestry
program, including the planting, removal, trimming, maintenance,
and protection of all trees and shrubs in or upon all public areas
of the City; to supervise Department of Parks and Recreation
personnel and private contractors in the planting, removal,
trimming, maintenance, and protection of said trees and shrubs.
(1)
A.
§ 58-38 BEVERLY CODE § 58-39
1:156
§ 58-40. Fence Viewers.92
§ 58-41. Shade Tree Management and Pest Control Superintendent.
(2) To cause the provisions of this section to be enforced.
To guard all trees and shrubs within the City against the spread of
plant diseases, insects or pests; to eliminate conditions which may
endanger the life, health, or safety of persons or property.
(3)
To use all available means of communication to inform the public
concerning the forestry program and tree and shrub care. The City
Arborist shall, upon request by the owner or occupant of private
property, examine and recommend the proper care or treatment of
trees or shrubs, to be effected by the owner at his expense. There
shall be no charge to the owner for the examination.
(4)
Such other powers and duties as are provided by Massachusetts
General Law Chapter 87 and by ordinances of the City of Beverly.
(5)
Authority to preserve and remove public trees and shrubs. The City
Arborist shall have the authority to plant, remove, maintain, and
protect all public trees and shrubs or cause such work to be done
as may be necessary to preserve the beauty of public areas, and to
protect life and property.
(6)
Interference prohibited. No person shall interfere with the City Arborist
or his/her authorized representative while engaged in the execution or
enforcement of this section.
B.
Establishment. There shall be two or more Fence Viewers, as provided
in MGL c. 49, §§ 1 through 21.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Director of Municipal Inspections
shall, subject to the consent of the Mayor, annually appoint two or more
Fence Viewers, to hold office for terms not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Fence Viewers shall be responsible
for the enforcement of MGL c. 49, §§ 1 through 21, and may determine
when a partition fence is required. They shall have all of the other
powers and duties given to fence viewers by general laws of the
commonwealth.
C.
Establishment. There shall be a Superintendent of Shade Tree
Management and Pest Control as provided in MGL c. 132, § 13.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works shall, with the consent
of the Mayor, appoint a Superintendent of Shade Tree Management and
Pest Control for a term not to exceed three years (MGL c. 132, § 13).
B.
92.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 58-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-41
1:157
§ 58-41.1. Veterans' Graves Officer. [Added 1-3-2017 by Ord. No.
28093]
The Mayor shall appoint a resident of Beverly, who shall be a veteran as
defined in MGL c. 4, § 7, Clause 43, as a Veterans' Graves Officer, for a term
to be determined by the Mayor but which shall not exceed five years. It shall
be the duty of such Veterans' Graves Officer to cause every veteran's grave
within Beverly to be suitably kept and cared for. Such care shall include
the clearing of weeds and other unseemly growth from said graves; the
repairing, replacement and general upkeep of fences around said graves;
the raising and repairing of sunken grave stones and markers; and other
similar services that may be necessary to restore and maintain such graves
and their surroundings in an orderly condition. If the cost of such care
and maintenance is not paid by private persons, or by the trustees of the
cemeteries where any such grave is situated, it shall be paid by the City.
§ 58-42. Veteran's Services Director.
§ 58-43. Weights and Measures Sealer.
Authority and responsibilities. The Superintendent of Shade Tree
Management and Pest Control shall be responsible for the suppression
of the public nuisances named in MGL c. 132, § 11, including gypsy and
brown tailed moths, tent caterpillars, cankerworms, oriental hag moths,
fall webworm, Japanese beetle, and other insects which destroy forest
and shade tree foliage (MGL c. 132, § 13; see c. 132, generally).
C.
Establishment. The Mayor shall, subject to the review of the City
Council as provided in Section 2-10 of the Charter, appoint a Veteran's
Services Director as provided in MGL c. 115, § 10, to serve for a term
not to exceed three years.
A.
Authority and responsibilities. The Veteran's Services Director shall
furnish information, advice and assistance to veterans relative to
employment, education, medical care, pensions, and other benefits to
which they are or may be entitled (MGL c. 115, §§ 10 through 14).
B.
The Veteran's Services Director shall also serve as the burial agent to
cause the body of any veteran to be properly interred or adult or child
dependent of a veteran to be properly interred as provided in MGL c.
115, § 7, and as veteran's graves officer be responsible to see that every
veteran's grave is suitably kept and cared for as provided in MGL c.
115, § 9.
C.
Establishment. There shall be a Sealer of Weights and Measures as
provided in MGL c. 98, §§ 34 through 56D.
A.
93.Editor's Note: This ordinance was adopted as § 58-45 but was renumbered to maintain the
alphabetical organization of this Article IV.
§ 58-41 BEVERLY CODE § 58-43
1:158
§ 58-44. Wood and Bark Measurers.
Appointment; term of office. The Director of Municipal Inspections
shall, subject to the consent of the Mayor, appoint a Sealer of Weights
and Measures for a term not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Sealer of Weights and Measures
shall test, adjust and seal all devices used for the weighing or
measuring of commodities and be responsible for the enforcement of all
laws relating to weights and measures.
C.
Establishment. There shall be one or more Measurers of Wood and Bark
as provided in MGL c. 94, §§ 296 to 303.
A.
Appointment; term of office. The Mayor shall appoint one or more
Measurers of Wood and Bark for terms not to exceed three years.
B.
Authority and responsibilities. The Measurers of Wood and Bark shall
be responsible for the enforcement of the laws relating to the sale of
wood and bark within the City as provided in MGL c. 94, §§ 296 to 303,
inclusive.
C.
§ 58-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 58-44
1:159
Chapter 69
PERSONNEL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boards, commissions, councils, committees
and authorities — See Ch. 15.
Elective offices — See Ch. 58.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 26.
§ 58-44 BEVERLY CODE § 58-44
1:160
ARTICLE I
Personnel Policies
[Adopted as Art. XXVI of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 69-1. Failure to qualify after notice of election or appointment.
[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
The failure of any officer of the City to qualify within 30 days from the
service of the notice of his election or appointment shall be deemed to be
a refusal to accept the office; and thereupon the vacancy shall be filled
without delay in accordance with the City Charter.
§ 69-2. Preemployment physical examination.
Any person seeking full-time employment from the City must take a
preemployment physical examination. Such examination shall be under
the direction of a physician designated by the City's Director of Human
Resources.
§ 69-3. Reinstatement of employees upon discharge from armed
service.
All City employees who enter the armed service of the United States shall
be returned to the same or a similar position to that which they held at the
time of their enlistment or induction, upon and after honorable discharge
from the armed service. Continuity of service shall not be broken by service
in the armed forces.
§ 69-4. Vacations.
All full-time City employees, not otherwise covered by bargaining unit
or individual employment contract, will have the following vacation
scheduled: [Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 289; 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 013]
For more than 30 weeks of service but less than five years, the
employee shall receive 10 days of vacation.
(1)
For five years or more of service but less than 10 years, the
employee shall receive 15 days of vacation.
(2)
For 10 years or more of service but less than 20 years, the
employee shall receive 20 days of vacation.
(3)
After 20 years of service, the employee shall receive 25 days of
vacation.
(4)
For employees defined as City officers in Chapter 1, § 1-1B, of the
City Code, service time shall be cumulative but not consecutive.
(5)
A.
On a seniority basis, employees shall receive two weeks of vacation by
choice; beyond this, vacations shall be by mutual consent of the parties.
B.
§ 69-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-4
1:161
§ 69-5. Mileage reimbursement. [Amended 6-15-1987 by Ord. No.
273; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013; 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 032]
A municipal employee may be reimbursed for the use of his/her personal
vehicle on City business at the rate of $0.20 per mile, and this rate shall
be adjusted annually on or about July 1 each year to equal the rate for
state employees' use of their private vehicles. The documentation necessary
to receive the reimbursement will be determined by the Finance Director-
Auditor.
§ 69-6. Payment of fees, charges or commissions. [Amended
6-20-1988 by Ord. No. 50]
Pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 108, all fees, charges or commissions allowed by
law to any officer of the City shall be paid into the City treasury and belong
to the City, and the City shall pay any such officer such compensation as the
City Council shall determine.
Should a holiday fall within an employee's vacation, he shall receive an
additional day of vacation.
C.
Upon termination of employment, the employee shall receive payment
equal to the amount of vacation pay he would have received had the
termination not occurred. If the termination is caused by death, such
payment shall be made to the employee's spouse or next of kin.
[Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 289; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
013]
D.
E. No employee shall be called back to work while on vacation.
Employees shall be allowed to carry over up to 10 vacation days from
one year to the next; provided, however, that they may only carry these
days forward for one year, and they must be used in the year following
that from which they are carried over.
F.
§ 69-4 BEVERLY CODE § 69-6
1:162
ARTICLE II
Classification and Pay Plan
[Adopted as Art. XXVII of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 69-7. Effect of adoption of article.
The adoption of this article shall neither reduce the salary or wage of any
officer or employee of the City, nor shall anything relating to City officials
or employees be construed in such manner as to be in conflict with the civil
service rules or collective bargaining agreements. Any officer or employee
who would have otherwise been entitled to higher pay by subsequent step
increments under a prior pay ordinance than he is entitled to under this
article shall receive the greater pay.
§ 69-8. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SICK LEAVE — That period of time for which a permanent full-time
employee, other than an employee of the School Department, is entitled
to receive compensation while unable to perform his duties because of
sickness or injury not arising out of and in the course of his employment by
the City.
§ 69-9. Sick leave.
Compensation for sickness or other disability shall be limited to two
days for each month of service in the preceding 12 months, but not
more than 20 days in any twelve-month period. Holidays and any other
days not included in the normal workweek shall not be included in the
computation of days allowed hereunder.
A.
Sick leave credit will begin the first day of the month in which the
employee is employed, but thereafter benefits hereunder shall be based
upon continuous service since the date of original employment. If such
service has not been continuous, such benefits shall be based upon
continuous service since the last hiring date after the expiration of such
12 months of service or employment.
B.
Any sick leave allowed under this section may be accumulated, but such
accumulation shall not exceed 200 days at any time.
C.
Upon retirement, employees will be paid 50% of the accrued sick days
accrued as severance pay. If termination is by demise, 50% of the
accrued sick leave shall be paid to the spouse, next of kin, to the
employee's estate, or to the employee's legally designated beneficiary.
D.
Each employee's sick leave credits shall be posted annually by January
15 of each calendar year.
E.
§ 69-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-9
1:163
§ 69-10. Notice of illness; fraudulent leave.
For purposes of this section, a day's pay shall be computed as 1/5 of an
employee's base pay per week, in grade.
F.
If a conflict exists between any current collective bargaining agreement
and this section, the provisions of the collective bargaining agreement
will apply.
G.
Notwithstanding Subsection D, any department head of the City who is
initially appointed or hired or after January 1, 1989, shall not be eligible
to receive or be paid accrued sick days as provided under Subsection
D, nor will their spouse, next of kin, estate, or legally designated
beneficiary be eligible for such severance pay. [Amended 12-19-1988
by Ord. No. 659]
H.
Conditions under which sick leave days shall not be granted. No person
shall be entitled to any compensation or benefits under this article for
any period of disability resulting in whole or in part from:
(1) The voluntary use of intoxicating liquor, drugs or narcotics.
(2) Self-inflicted injuries, other than accidental.
Injuries sustained while engaged in, resulting from or arising out of
the commission by him of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude.
(3)
Injuries sustained while engaged in, resulting from or arising out
of the violation of any lawful rule or regulation of the department
in which employed, or of the City or of the commonwealth.
(4)
Injuries sustained as a result of reckless, improper or vicious
conduct or illegal or immoral practices.
(5)
Injuries or sickness arising while dually employed by the City and
some other person or concern, unless ordered to or authorized by
the head of the department.
(6)
I.
Every employee, to be entitled to leave without loss of pay, shall notify
his department head of his absence and the cause thereof before the
expiration of the first hour of absence, or as soon thereafter as
practicable.
A.
When physician's certificate or written statement may be required;
availability for examination. For periods of absence for five consecutive
working days or more, the appointing authority or someone designated
by him may require evidence for the necessity of such absence in
the form of a physician's certificate or, if the cause of the absence is
such as not to require the services of a physician, a written statement,
signed by the employee, setting forth the reason for the absence. Where
such certificate or statement is requested, the employee shall not be
entitled to pay for his absence until such certificate or statement is
B.
§ 69-9 BEVERLY CODE § 69-10
1:164
§ 69-11. Confidential employees. [Amended 5-20-1996 by Ord. No.
186]
All employees with a confidential employee status, who due to that status
are excluded from all labor unions pursuant to MGL c. 150E, § 3, shall
receive the same cost-of-living raises negotiated by the union of which they
would be entitled to be a member if not for their confidential employee
status. Nothing in this section shall preclude said confidential employees
from receiving merit raises as may be recommended by their supervisor
and the Mayor and appropriated by the City Council from time to time.
Said confidential employees shall be entitled to the same employee benefits
enjoyed by all other employees under their union contracts, including but
not limited to vacation pay, sick leave benefits, personal and funeral leave,
longevity, health and welfare benefits, on-the-job injury and educational
benefits.
§ 69-12. Unclassified salaries. [Added 12-5-2016 by Ord. No. 197A]
The compensation of the officer(s) mentioned in this section shall be at the
following rates per annum, except as otherwise provided, payable in equal
weekly payments:
filed. All City employees on sick leave shall be available at all times for
examination by a physician designated by the City and at the request
of the department head or the Mayor. Any employee not complying
with the aforesaid shall be deemed ineligible for any further benefits.
[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
Fraudulently taking sick leave. Any person who feigns sickness, injury
or disability or who makes a false statement relative thereto shall be
subject to immediate suspension and, in any event, shall not be entitled
to the benefits of this article for a period of one year after such finding.
C.
Mayor:
(1) January 1, 2018: $105,000.
(2) January 1, 2019: $110,000.
(3) January 1, 2020: $115,000.
(4) January 1, 2021: $120,000.
A.
School Committee:
School Committee members: 1/2 of annual salary of City Council
members.
(1)
School Committee President: 1/2 of annual salary of City Council
President.
(2)
B.
§ 69-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 69-12
1:165
Biannual review. The annual salaries of the Mayor, City Council, and
School Committee shall be reviewed by the City Council in each evennumbered
year.
C.
§ 69-12 BEVERLY CODE § 69-12
1:166
Chapter 72
SCHOOL COMMITTEE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Agencies — See Ch. 7.
Boards, commissions, councils, committees
and authorities — See Ch. 15.
Elective offices — See Ch. 26.
Officers and employees — See Ch. 58.
§ 72-1. Composition and term.
There shall be a School Committee which shall consist of seven members.
Six of these members, to be known as "ward School Committee members,"
shall be nominated and elected by and from the voters of each ward, one
such ward School Committee member to be elected from each of the six
wards into which the City is divided, in accordance with Charter Section
7-5. The Mayor shall serve as the seventh member of the School Committee.
The term of office for all School Committee members shall be for two years
each, beginning on the first Monday of January in the year following their
election, and until their successors have been qualified.
§ 72-2. Powers and duties.
The School Committee shall have all powers which are conferred on
school committees by general laws and such additional powers and
duties as may be provided by the Charter, by ordinance, or otherwise
and not inconsistent with said grant of powers conferred by general
laws. The powers and duties of the School Committee shall include the
following:
To elect a Superintendent of the Schools who shall be charged with
the day-to-day administration of the school system, subject only to
policy guidelines and directives adopted by the School Committee.
(1)
To make all reasonable rules and regulations for the management
of the public school system and for conducting the business of the
School Committee as may be deemed necessary or desirable.
(2)
To adopt and administer an annual operating budget for the School
Department, subject to appropriation by the City Council.
(3)
A.
The School Committee shall have general charge and superintendence
of all school buildings and grounds, shall furnish all school buildings
with proper fixtures, furniture and equipment and shall provide
ordinary maintenance of all school buildings and grounds; provided,
however, the City Council may, by ordinance, provide for the
establishment of a central municipal maintenance department which
may include maintenance of school buildings and grounds. Whenever
B.
§ 69-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-2
1:167
§ 72-3. Cooperation with other boards and bodies.
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 105
AIRPORT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
the School Committee shall determine that additional classrooms are
necessary to meet the educational needs of the community, at least
one member of the School Committee, or designee of the School
Committee, shall serve on the agency, board or committee to which
the planning or construction of such new, remodeled or renovated
school building is delegated. The School Committee shall have general
charge and superintendence of the public schools for the purpose of
educating children in the City. The powers of the School Committee
include: to appoint a Superintendent of Schools, to adopt an annual
operating budget (subject to appropriation by the City Council) and
to make all reasonable rules and regulations, consistent with law, for
the administration and management of the public schools of the City.
The School Committee shall have all the powers and duties given to
school committees by the laws of the Commonwealth, the Charter, by
ordinance or other City Council vote.
City Council. The School Committee and the City Council shall meet at
least once during each calendar year to cooperatively discuss financial
and educational policy matters of the City. The School Committee Chair
and City Council President shall preside over each joint meeting.
A.
Other boards. The School Committee shall interact with any multiplemember
board within the City as necessary so as to ensure furtherance
of the Committee's responsibility to educate the children of the City.
B.
Building and Other Facilities Planning and Construction Committee.
The School Committee shall, annually, designate one of its members,
or some other person, to serve as a member of the Building and Other
Facilities Planning and Construction Committee established by Section
5-6 of the Charter.
C.
§ 72-2 BEVERLY CODE § 72-3
1:168
ARTICLE I
Parking Restrictions
[Adopted as amended 12-15-2003 by Ord. No. 329 (Art. IX of the
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 105-1. Time limit.
Parking after 8:00 p.m. at Beverly Airport is by authorization only as
permitted the Police Department or the Airport Commission.
§ 105-2. Authorized parking defined.94
"Authorized parking" shall mean parking within the marked spaces solely
for the purpose of access to and egress from motor vehicles by persons
utilizing the facilities of the lessees of Beverly Regional Airport, John
Mountan Field.
§ 105-3. Violations and penalties.
Offenders of this article shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $50.
94.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 105-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3
1:169
Chapter 109
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 159.
§ 109-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings described to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ALARM SYSTEM — An assembly of equipment and devices or a single
device such as a solid-state unit which plugs directly into a one-hundredten
volt, sixty-cycle arranged to signal the presence of a hazard requiring
urgent attention and to which police or fire persons are expected to
respond. The City municipal fire alarm system is specifically excluded from
the provisions of this chapter (A.C. line).
ALARM USER or USER — Any person on whose premises an alarm system
is maintained within the City, except for alarm systems on motor vehicles
or proprietary systems. Excluded from this definition and from the coverage
of this chapter are central station personnel and persons who use alarm
systems to alert or signal persons within the premises in which the alarm
system is located of an attempted unauthorized intrusion or holdup attempt.
If such a system, however, employs an audible signal emitting sounds or a
flashing light or beacon designed to signal persons outside the premises,
such system shall be within the definition of "alarm system," as that term is
used in this section, and shall be subject to this chapter.
AUTOMATIC DIALING DEVICE — An alarm system which automatically
sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a
prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the
emergency situation that the alarm system is designed to detect.
CENTRAL STATION — An office to which remote alarm and supervisory
signaling devices are connected where operators supervise circuits or
where guards are maintained continuously to investigate signals.
COMMUNICATIONS CONSOLE — The instrumentation on an alarm console
at the receiving terminal of a signal line which, through both visual and
audible signals, indicates activation of an alarm system at a particular
location, or which indicates line trouble.
DIRECT CONNECT — An alarm system which has the capability of
transmitting system signals to and receiving them at the Police Department
communication center and Fire Department communication center.
§ 105-3 BEVERLY CODE § 109-1
1:170
FALSE ALARM —
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Fire Department of the City or his
designated representative.
INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system to a voice-grade telephone
line, either directly or through a mechanical device that utilizes a standard
telephone, for the purpose of using the telephone line to transmit an
emergency message upon the activation of the alarm system.
POLICE CHIEF — The Chief of Police of the City or his designated
representative.
POLICE or POLICE DEPARTMENT; FIRE or FIRE DEPARTMENT — The City
Police Department or City Fire Department or any authorized agent thereof.
PUBLIC NUISANCE — Anything which annoys, injures or endangers the
comfort, repose, health or safety of any considerable number of persons or
of any community or neighborhood.
§ 109-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-20-1994 by Ord. No.
35]
The activation of an alarm system through mechanical failure,
malfunction, improper installation, or negligence of the user of an
alarm system or of his employees or agents.
A.
Any signal or oral communication transmitted to the Police or Fire
Department requesting, or requiring, or resulting in a response on the
part of the Police or Fire Department when in fact there has been
no unauthorized intrusion or attempted unauthorized intrusion into a
premises and no attempted robbery or burglary or fire at a premises.
B.
Excluded from this definition are activations of alarm systems caused
by power outages, hurricanes, tornadoes, earthquakes and similar
conditions.
C.
The following acts and omissions shall constitute violations of this
chapter punishable by fines of up to $50:95
Failure to obey an order of the Police Chief or Fire Chief to
discontinue use of an alarm system, after exhaustion of the right of
appeal.
(1)
Failure to disconnect an automatic dialing device from any
telephone numbers at the Police Department or Fire Department
within six months after the effective date of the ordinance from
which this chapter was derived.
(2)
Interconnection of an automatic dialing device to any telephone
numbers at the Police Department or Fire Department after the
(3)
A.
95.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 109-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-2
1:171
§ 109-3. Administrative rules.
The Police Chief or Fire Chief may promulgate such rules as may be
necessary for the implementation of this chapter in their respective
departments.
§ 109-4. Automatic dialing devices.
§ 109-5. Direct transmissions.
Any person using an automatic dialing device may have the device
interconnected to a telephone line transmitting directly to:
§ 109-6. Direct connections to Police Department.
effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter was
derived.
Failure to pay two or more consecutive fines assessed under this
chapter within 60 days from the date of the assessment.
(4)
(5) Failure to comply with the requirements of § 109-7.
Separate offenses. Each day during which the aforesaid violations
continue shall constitute a separate offense.
B.
Interconnection specifications. Automatic dialing devices may be
interconnected only to telex phone numbers at the Police Department
or Fire Department specifically designated to receive such calls by the
Police or Fire Department.
A.
Interconnection time requirement. By December 31, 1982, all dialers
shall be reprogrammed to interconnect as indicated in Subsection A
above.
B.
A. A central station;
B. An answering service; or
C. Any privately owned or privately operated facility or terminal.
Connection to communications console; existing systems. Alarm
systems may be connected to the communications console in the Police
Department. The existing alarm company is to remain until terminated
by the Chief of Police.
A.
Bids. In accordance with the normal bidding practices in effect in
the City, the City Council shall have the authority to request bids
from alarm companies in order to furnish, at no cost to the City, a
communications console and the necessary telephone lines which are
compatible to the receipt of alarm signals from alarm systems whose
lines are connected to the Police Department. Each of the bids shall set
forth the annual fee each alarm user will be required to pay the alarm
B.
§ 109-2 BEVERLY CODE § 109-6
1:172
§ 109-7. Control and curtailment of signals.
company for services rendered with respect to the communications
console. Such services shall be set forth in the form of a written
contract between the alarm company and each alarm user. The
provisions of this Subsection B relate solely to the aforementioned
communications console, connections to the console by alarm users,
and fees and charges related to the installation and maintenance of the
console. Any alarm user may contract with any alarm company of his
choice for the sale, installation, maintenance, and for servicing of the
alarm system to be installed on his premises.
Responsibilities of alarm user or alarm business contracting for
servicing alarm system. The alarm user, or the alarm business
contracting for servicing the alarm user's alarm system, shall be
responsible for obtaining the leased telephone line between the alarm
user's premises and the alarm receiving equipment at the Police
Department and for furnishing the appropriate interface equipment, if
required, in order to provide an input signal which is compatible with
the receiving equipment used to operate the communications console.
C.
False alarm regulations applicable to users having direct connection
systems; exceptions. The provisions of § 109-9 concerning false alarms
shall apply to all alarm users or persons having direct-connection
systems, except municipal, county or state agencies and religious
organizations.
D.
Submission of names of persons authorized to respond to alarm. Every
alarm user shall submit to the Police Chief or Fire Chief the names and
telephone numbers of at least two other persons who can be reached
at any time, day or night, and who are authorized to respond to an
emergency signal transmitted by an alarm system and who can open
the premises wherein the alarm system is installed.
A.
Test device. All alarm systems directly connected to the Police
Department may be equipped with a test device which will give a tensecond
delay or longer prior to alarm system activation in order to warn
the alarm user of an open alarm circuit.
B.
Automatic shut-off devices. All alarm systems installed after July 1,
1981, which use an audible horn or bell or siren-sounding alarm shall
be equipped with a device that will shut off such audible sound within
20 minutes or less after activation of the alarm system.
C.
Continuous signals constitute a nuisance. Any alarm system emitting a
continuous and uninterrupted signal for more than 30 minutes between
7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. which cannot be shut off or otherwise curtailed
due to the absence or unavailability of the alarm user or those persons
designated by him under Subsection A of this section and which
disturbs the peace, comfort, or repose of a community, a neighborhood
D.
§ 109-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-7
1:173
§ 109-8. Testing of equipment.
No alarm system designed to transmit emergency messages directly to
the Police or Fire Department shall be worked on, tested or demonstrated
without obtaining permission from the Police Chief or Fire Chief. Permission
is not required to test or demonstrate alarm devices not transmitting
emergency messages directly to the Police Department or Fire Department.
An unauthorized test constitutes a false alarm.
§ 109-9. False alarms.
or a considerable number of inhabitants of the area where the alarm
system is located shall constitute a public nuisance.
Upon receiving complaints regarding such a continuous and
uninterrupted signal, the Police Chief shall endeavor to contact the
alarm user, or those persons designated by the alarm user under
Subsection A of this section in an effort to abate the nuisance. The
Police Chief shall cause to be recorded the names and addresses of
all complainants and the time each complaint was made.
(1)
In the event that the Police Chief is unable to contact the alarm
user or those persons designated by the alarm user under
Subsection A of this section, or if the aforesaid persons cannot or
will not curtail the audible signal emitted by the alarm system,
and if the Police Chief is otherwise unable to abate the nuisance,
he may direct a police officer or a firefighter or a qualified alarm
technician to enter upon the property outside the home or building
in which the alarm system is located and take any reasonable
action necessary to abate the nuisance. If the entry upon property
outside the home or building in which the alarm system is located is
made in accordance with this section, the person so entering upon
such property shall:
Not conduct, engage in or undertake any search, seizure,
inspection or investigation while he is upon the property.
(a)
Not cause any unnecessary damage to the alarm system or to
any part of the home or building.
(b)
Leave the property immediately after the audible signal has
ceased.
(c)
(2)
After an entry upon property has been made in accordance with this
section, the Police Chief shall have the property secured, if necessary.
The reasonable costs and expenses of abating a nuisance in accordance
with this chapter may be assessed to the alarm user, such assessment
not to exceed $50.
E.
Actions of Police or Fire Chief generally. When emergency messages
are received by the Police or Fire Department that evidence false
alarms, the Police Chief or Fire Chief shall take action as may be
A.
§ 109-7 BEVERLY CODE § 109-9
1:174
appropriate under Subsections B, C, D and E of this section and, when
so required by the terms of such subsections, order that use of an alarm
system be discontinued.
Report. After the Police or Fire Department has recorded three
separate false alarms within the calendar year from an alarm system,
the Police Chief or Fire Chief shall notify the alarm user, in writing, in
person or by mail, of such fact and require the alarm user to submit,
within 15 days after receipt of such notice, a report describing efforts
to discover and eliminate the cause of the false alarms. If the user, on
the basis of absence from the City, or on any other reasonable basis,
requests an extension of time for filing the report, the Police Chief or
Fire Chief may extend the fifteen-day period for a reasonable time. If
the user fails to submit such a report within the times specified, the
Police Chief or Fire Chief shall order that use of the alarm system be
discontinued. Any such discontinuances shall be effectuated within 15
days from the date of receipt of the Police Chief's or Fire Chief's order.96
B.
Discontinuance of system for unsatisfactory report. In the event that
the Police Chief or Fire Chief determines that a report submitted in
accordance with Subsection B of this section is unsatisfactory, or that
the alarm user has failed to show by the report that he has taken or
will take reasonable steps to eliminate or reduce false alarms, then the
Police Chief or Fire Chief shall order that use of the alarm system be
discontinued. Any such discontinuance shall be effectuated within 15
days from the date of the Police Chief's or Fire Chief's order.
C.
Discontinuance of system for certain number of false alarms within a
year. If the Police or Fire Department records five false alarms within
the calendar year from an alarm system, the Police Chief or Fire Chief
may order that the user of the alarm system discontinue use of the
alarm system for the calendar year, but for not less than six months
from the date the alarm system was disconnected. In the event that
the Police Department or Fire Department records eight false alarms
within the calendar year from an alarm system, the Police Chief or Fire
Chief shall order that the user of the alarm system discontinue use of
the alarm system for the calendar year, but for not less than six months
from the date the alarm was disconnected.
D.
Fines. Any user of an alarm system which transmits false alarms shall
be assessed a fine of $25 for each false alarm in excess of three
occurring within the calendar year. All fines assessed, however, shall
be paid to the City Treasurer-Collector for deposit in the general fund.
Upon failure of the user of an alarm system to pay two consecutive fines
assessed hereunder within 30 days of assessment, the Police Chief or
Fire Chief shall order that the user discontinue use of the alarm system.
Any such discontinuance shall be effectuated within 15 days from the
date of receipt of the Police Chief's or Fire Chief's order.97
E.
96.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 109-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 109-10
1:175
§ 109-10. Conflict with other provisions.98
The provisions of this chapter do not regulate fire alarms regulated by
Chapter 159, Fire Prevention, Article III, §§ 159-16 through 159-22, of the
City Code.
Chapter 113
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, recreation areas and public
property — See Ch. 210.
§ 113-1. Possession or consumption in public buildings. [Amended
4-6-2011 by Ord. No. 43; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 96]
§ 113-2. Possession or consumption on public ways, in public places
or on private property.
The possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited in
all public buildings except:
In any City building under the supervision of the Beverly Golf and
Tennis Commission with the permission of the Beverly Golf and
Tennis Commission.
(1)
In any City building under the supervision of the Council on Aging
with the permission of the Council on Aging.
(2)
In the Carriage House at Lynch Park with the permission of the
Parks and Recreation Commission.
(3)
In any school building under the supervision of the School
Committee with the permission of the Superintendent of Schools.
(4)
In the Beverly Public Library or the Beverly Farms Library with the
permission of the Library Director. [Added 10-16-2017 by Ord.
No. 495]
(5)
A.
B. Any violation of this section shall result in a fine of $100.
No person shall drink any alcoholic beverages, as defined in MGL c.
138, § 1, or carry or be in possession of any opened bottle or can
containing an alcoholic beverage, as defined in MGL c. 138, § 1, while
A.
97.Editor's Note: Original Section 23.09 of the Code of Ordinances, Identification of
connected premises, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of
adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
98.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 109-10 BEVERLY CODE § 113-2
1:176
Chapter 117
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, recreation areas and public
property — See Ch. 210.
in or upon any public way, or any way to which the public has a right
of access, or any place to which members of the public have access
as invitees or licensees, park or playground, or private land, building,
structure or place without the consent of the owner or person in control
thereof. All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of this section
shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge
against the person arrested or summoned before the court, at which
time they shall be returned to the person entitled to lawful possession.
This section shall not apply to any place duly licensed to serve alcoholic
beverages as defined in MGL c. 138, § 1.
B.
§ 113-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 113-2
1:177

ARTICLE I
Keeping of Bees
§ 117-1. Number and location of hives.
Upon complaint by any resident of the City with respect to the keeping
of bees by a person in the neighborhood in which such complainant lives
and following a public hearing on which notice shall have been given
to all abutters and abutting abutters, as shown on the records in the
Assessor's office, seven days in advance by publication in a local newspaper
and by notification by United States mail with postage prepaid, at the
complainant's expense, the Animal Inspector shall be empowered to make
an order regulating the number and location of hives kept by the person
about whom the complaint shall have been made. Violation of such order
shall be punishable by a fine of $25 and each day of a continuing violation
to be considered a separate offense.
§ 117-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-1
1:179

ARTICLE II
Stables
§ 117-2. License required.
No person shall hereafter erect, occupy or use for a stable any building for
the maintenance of any domestic animal in the City without first obtaining
a license therefor from the Board of Health.
§ 117-3. Construction and maintenance standards.
The Board of Health may make such regulations or orders respecting the
drainage, ventilation, number of animals and the storage and handling of
manure in any stables as in its judgment the public health requires.
§ 117-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-3
1:181

ARTICLE III
Dogs, Cats and Ferrets
§ 117-4. Dog licenses required. [Amended 12-18-1996 by Ord. No.
148]
§ 117-5. Disposal of animal waste. [Amended 12-18-1996 by Ord.
No. 148; 10-5-2006 by Ord. No. 154]
Whoever owns or keeps a dog in the City which is over the age of six
months shall annually obtain a license therefor from the City Clerk.
[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
A.
The City Clerk shall not grant such license for any dog unless the owner
thereof provides the Clerk with either a veterinarian's certification
that such dog has been vaccinated in accordance with this section,
certification that such dog is exempt from the vaccination requirements
or a notarized letter from a veterinarian that either of these
certifications was issued. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
B.
The owner or keeper of a licensed dog shall cause it to wear around its
neck or body a collar or harness of leather or other suitable material, to
which shall be securely attached a tag in a form prescribed by the City
Clerk, and upon which shall appear the license number for the current
year.
C.
Whoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a fine
of $25. Any person failing to pay the above fines within the 21 days
provided will be subject to a surcharge of $5 in addition to the fine due.
D.
Duty to dispose. It shall be the duty of each person who owns, possesses
or controls a dog to remove and dispose of any feces left by his/her dog
on any sidewalk, street, park, public area or any private property of
another. A copy of this section shall be given to every dog owner when
licensing at the time the dog is licensed.
A.
Duty to possess means of removal. No person who owns, possesses or
controls such dog shall appear with such dog on any sidewalk, street,
park, public area or private property of another without the means of
removal of any feces left by such dog.
B.
Method of removal and disposal. For the purpose of this regulation, the
means of removal shall be any tool, implement or other device carried
for the purpose of picking up and containing such feces, unexposed
to said person or the public. Disposal shall be accomplished by
transporting such feces to the property of the owner or the dog or to
some other place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of
human feces or specifically reserved for the disposal of canine feces,
and so disposing of said feces.
C.
§ 117-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-5
1:183
§ 117-6. Dog kennel licensing and fees. [Added 10-19-2015 by Ord.
No. 406]
§ 117-7. Security and guard dogs. [Amended 12-18-1996 by Ord.
No. 148]
Fines for violation. Fines for violation of this section shall be $100 for
the first offense in a calendar year and $50 for subsequent offenses in
the same calendar year. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 036]
D.
Exemption for guide dogs. This section shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any handicapped person.
E.
The City Clerk is the licensing authority for any dog kennel or day care
sheltering more than three dogs at any given time and for any duration.
Any person operating such a kennel shall apply to the City Clerk for
a license and shall be subject to the following fee schedule for new
licenses and for renewals:
(1) Four dogs: $30.
(2) Five dogs to 10 dogs: $50.
(3) Ten dogs or more: $100.
A.
The City Clerk shall issue a license under this section only after the
kennel has been inspected by the Animal Control Officer in both the
case of a new license and a renewal.
B.
Kennel licenses must be renewed every June. Kennels subject to this
section must be in compliance with all state laws in their handling of
licensed and unlicensed dogs and in their operation in order to maintain
a kennel license.
C.
Any dog used primarily for the purpose of securing and protecting real
or personal property which is open to public access at any time shall
comply with all the following:
Such dog shall be registered with the City Clerk in accordance with
MGL c. 140, §§ 137 and 137A.
(1)
Such dog shall be kept within a suitable and closed-in area which at
all times shall not be accessible to the public when such property is
open to public access or during business hours. Such closed-in area
will consist of a fence at least six feet high with a fence covering
and a locked gate and/or within a locked room if in a business
establishment.
(2)
All areas secured or protected by a security or guard dog or dogs
shall be posted in such thorough manner as to give adequate notice
to the public ("Beware of Guard Dog," etc.).
(3)
A.
§ 117-5 BEVERLY CODE § 117-7
1:184
§ 117-8. Vaccination against rabies. [Amended 12-18-1996 by Ord.
No. 148; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
§ 117-9. Prohibited conduct; impounding, release and disposition of
dogs.
No person/business shall harbor a security dog or guard dog unless he
has obtained a security dog permit as follows.
Such permit will be issued by the City Clerk at no fee upon written
certification by the Animal Inspector that such business or person
has complied with all the guidelines of this section. Such permit
may be revoked by the Police Chief upon evidence of violation of
the provisions of this section.
(1)
The City Clerk shall provide the Fire Chief and Police Chief with a
copy of the security dog kennel permit.
(2)
The security dog permit shall specify the location at which the
dog is licensed to be located, and no transfer or relocation of the
duly licensed guard/security dog shall be permitted without the
approval of the Animal Control Officer.
(3)
(4) Such permit shall be valid for an indefinite period of time.
Any business or private resident harboring a security dog shall,
upon the request of the Animal Control Officer or any police officer,
allow him to enter and inspect the area where such dog is licensed
to be harbored. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
(5)
B.
Failure to comply with any subsection of this section will result in a fine
of $50 for each day of such violation.
C.
Whoever is the owner or keeper of a dog, cat or ferret six months of
age or older shall cause such dog, cat or ferret to be vaccinated against
rabies in accordance with MGL c. 140, § 145B.
A.
Unvaccinated dogs, cats or ferrets acquired or brought into the City
shall be vaccinated within 30 days after acquisition or entry into the
City or upon reaching the age of six months, whichever comes later.
B.
Whosoever violates the provisions of this section shall be subject to a
fine of $50. Any person failing to pay the above fines within the 21 days
provided will be subject to a surcharge of $5 in addition to the fine due.
C.
The owner or keeper of a dog, or both, may be prosecuted in a court
of law for the following violations of this section and the dog may be
impounded: [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013; 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 036]
(1) If found without a license when a license is required by law.
A.
§ 117-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-9
1:185
If found at large elsewhere than in unleashed designated areas as
described by written policy of the Beverly Parks and Recreation
Commission.
(2)
For having bitten, injured or physically molested any person.
Penalty: $50.
(3)
(4) For having bitten or injured any domestic animal. Penalty: $50.
For chasing any vehicle on a public way or on any way open to
public traffic in the City. Penalty: $25.
(5)
For repeatedly causing a nuisance, such as, but not limited to,
barking or littering. Penalty: first offense, $25; second offense, $50.
(6)
If found, not muzzled, off the property of its owner or keeper while
a muzzling order with respect to it is in effect under § 117-14 below.
Penalty: first offense, $100; second offense, MGL c. 140, § 157, fine
schedule.
(7)
For leaving defecation (a) On private property other than that of its
owner; (b) On a public sidewalk; (c) or On trees or lawns. Penalty:
$25.
(8)
If any person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog,
except a guide dog accompanying any handicapped person, shall
cause, suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate or commit
any nuisance on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway,
bypath, play area, park or any place where people congregate or
walk, or on any public property whatsoever, or on any private
property without the permission of the owner of said property.
(9)
The owner or keeper may obtain the release of an impounded dog as
follows:
In the case of a violation of Subsection A(1) hereinabove, upon
obtaining a license as required by law and by payment of a late
filing fee.
(1)
In the case of a violation of Subsection A(2) through (8), inclusive,
upon the agreement of the owner or keeper to undertake such
restriction or control of the dog as the Animal Control Officer shall
require. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
(2)
In addition to compliance with Subsection B(1) and (2), all pound
fees and fines, if any, must be paid before the dog is released.
(3)
No later than two days after the impoundment of any dog, the
owner or keeper shall be notified; or if the owner or keeper of
the dog is unknown or, after reasonable efforts, is not contacted,
written notice shall then be posted for 10 consecutive days on a K-9
bulletin board in the office of the City Clerk describing the dog and
the place and time of taking.
(4)
B.
§ 117-9 BEVERLY CODE § 117-9
1:186
§ 117-10. Dogs on beaches and in parks. [Amended 7-7-1987 by
Ord. No. 30; 10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 543; 12-7-1992 by Ord. No.
153; 12-18-1995 by Ord. No. 148; 5-7-2003 by Ord. No. 40; 6-4-2003
by Ord. No. 173; 5-16-2007 by Ord. No. 112; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
036]
Dogs shall be permitted on beaches and in parks of the City of Beverly only
as follows:
§ 117-11. Disposal of impounded cats.
Cats impounded and unclaimed by the owner or keeper after a two-day
period may be disposed of in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 140,
§ 151A.
Dogs impounded and unclaimed by the owner or keeper after
such a ten-day period shall be disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 140, § 151A.
(5)
From and including Memorial Day to and including Labor Day of each
year, leashed dogs will be permitted in Lynch Park (excluding gardens,
playing fields, and playground equipment areas) only between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. and 7:30 a.m.
A.
From and including Memorial Day to and including Labor Day of each
year, leashed dogs will be permitted in any other City park (excluding
gardens, playing fields, and playground equipment areas) only between
the hours of 7:30 p.m. and 7:30 a.m.
B.
Leashed dogs will be permitted in other special areas designated by
written policy of the Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission during
the hours designated in said policy.
C.
Unleashed dogs will be permitted in special areas designated by written
policy of the Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission during the
hours designated in said policy.
D.
The Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission and the Beverly Police
Department shall develop and coordinate an enforcement plan for this
section to ensure its effective enforcement.
E.
Annually, the Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission shall report
to the City Council recommending continuance, discontinuance or
changes to this section.
F.
The Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission shall create a website in
which this section and all written policies of the Commission relative
to leashed/unleashed dogs are available to the public. Such site will
provide for public comment relative to this section and the written
policies of the Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission pertaining to
leashed/unleashed dogs.
G.
§ 117-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-12
1:187
§ 117-12. Dog license term. [Amended 12-7-1992 by Ord. No. 153;
Ord. No. 1-10-1994; 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 173]
Dog licenses expire on March 31 of each year.
§ 117-13. Dog control. [Amended 12-7-1992 by Ord. No. 153;
12-1995 by Ord. No. 148; 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 173; 5-16-2007 by
Ord. No. 112; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
036]
§ 117-14. Muzzling of dogs. [Amended 12-7-1992 by Ord. No. 153;
2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 036]
No person owning, harboring or having custody and control of a dog
shall permit such dog to be unleashed in the City of Beverly at any
time, elsewhere than in unleashed areas as designated by policy of
the Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission or on the premises of
the owner, except if such dog be on the premises of another person
with the knowledge and assent of such person. Further, any person
owning, harboring or having custody and control of a dog in the City
of Beverly, when such dog is not on the premises of the owner or upon
the premises of another person with the knowledge and assent of such
person, shall control and restrain such dog by a leash of appropriate
length.
A.
The Animal Control Officer or Assistant Animal Control Officer may
take into custody any licensed dog found unleashed within the City of
Beverly in violation of Subsection A of this section. The Animal Control
Officer or Assistant Animal Control Officer may then impound said dog
at any licensed kennel and notify the owner of the location where the
dog may be claimed. The owner shall pay any boarding fee which may
have accrued before the kennel shall be obligated to release the dog. If
the owner does not claim the dog within three days of receipt of notice,
the Animal Control Officer shall cause a second notice to be sent to the
owner by registered mail. If the owner does not claim the dog within
three days of receipt of the second notice, the Animal Control Officer
may proceed against the owner for willful abandonment pursuant to
MGL c. 272, § 84.
B.
C. Dogs in cemeteries. Dogs are hereby prohibited in all City cemeteries.
Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine
of $50 for a first offense, $75 for a second offense and $100 for a third
or any subsequent offense relating to the same dog. Any dog which has
been the subject of four or more violations of this section within one
calendar year shall be deemed a nuisance to which the provisions and
procedures of MGL c. 140, § 157, shall apply, and shall be reported as
such by the Animal Control Officer to the Chief of Police for appropriate
action under that law. Any person failing to pay the above fines within
the 21 days provided will be subject to a surcharge of $15 in addition to
the fine due.
D.
§ 117-12 BEVERLY CODE § 117-14
1:188
§ 117-15. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
013; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 036]
Unless another penalty is provided, violations of this chapter shall cause
the owner or keeper of such dog to be penalized by a fine of $50 for the
first such violation, $75 for the second violation, and $100 for the third and
subsequent violations.
The Animal Control Officer may order the owner or keeper of a dog to
muzzle such dog for either of the following causes:
(1) For having bitten, injured or physically molested any person.
(2) For having done substantial injury to any domestic animal;
A.
The Animal Control Officer may remove an order to muzzle a dog if the
owner or keeper thereof satisfies him that the dog is unlikely to repeat
its offense.
B.
§ 117-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 117-15
1:189
Chapter 124
BOATING AND WATERWAYS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 201. Parks, recreation areas and public
property — See Ch. 210.
§ 124-1. Motorboat noise control. [Amended 12-15-2005 by Ord. No.
244]
Every motorboat operated upon the waters of the City of Beverly shall
at all times be equipped with a muffler or a muffler system in good
working order and in constant operation and effectively installed to
prevent any excessive or unusual noise, as more particularly described
in this section.
A.
For the purposes of this section, "muffler" means a sound-suppression
device or system designed and installed to abate the sound of exhaust
gases emitted from an internal combustion engine and which prevents
excessive or unusual noise.99
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
EXCESSIVE OR UNUSUAL NOISE — Includes but necessarily limited
to the following:
SAE J2005 — The publication of the Society of Automotive Engineers so
designated.
For an engine manufactured before January 1, 1993, as
demonstrated by documents provided the operator thereof, a noise
level of 90 dB(A) when subjected to a stationary sound level test as
prescribed by SAE J2005.
(1)
For any engine not demonstrated to have been manufactured prior
to January 1, 1993, a noise level of 88 dB(A) when subjected to a
stationary sound level test as prescribed by SAE J2005.
(2)
Total noise of operation for a motorboat underway exceeding 75
dB(A) when subjected to a stationary sound level test from the
shoreline or edge of any area through which passage by motorboat
is permitted.
(3)
C.
No motorboat shall be operated on the waters of the City of Beverly
if such vessel is equipped with an altered muffler or a muffler cutout
bypass or other device designed or installed in such a manner that it
D.
99.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 117-15 BEVERLY CODE § 124-1
1:190
§ 124-2. Swimming or bathing.
No person shall swim or bathe in the waters within or surrounding the City
unless properly clothed.
§ 124-3. Water pollution prohibited.
No person shall, without permission from the Board of Health, throw into or
deposit in tidewater or in any pond, brook or reservoir, within the limits of
the City, any dead animal, garbage, or any refuse matter whatsoever.
§ 124-4. Vessels passing wharves.
No vessel shall, in the harbor of the City, pass within 100 yards of any wharf
at a greater speed than at the rate of five miles an hour.
can be used, either intermittently or continually, to bypass or otherwise
reduce or eliminate the effectiveness of any muffler or muffler system
installed in such vessel; provided, however, that any use of a cutout
permitted under MGL c. 90B, § 6, shall also be permitted under this
section.
Any officer empowered to enforce the provisions of Chapter 90B of the
General Laws who has been certified in motorboat noise testing by the
Department of Fisheries, Wildlife and Environmental Law Enforcement
of the Executive Office of Environmental Affairs shall also be authorized
to enforce the provisions this section.
E.
Any authorized officer who has reason to believe that a vessel is being
operated or has recently been operated in violation of this section
may direct the operator of such vessel to submit the vessel to an
immediate on-site test to measure noise levels, with the authorized
officer on board if such officer chooses, and the operator shall comply
with such request for a test. If the authorized officer determines that
the vessel is in violation of this section, the officer may, in addition to or
instead of citing the operator for such violation, direct the operator to
take immediate and reasonable measures to correct the such violation,
including returning the vessel to its mooring place and keeping the
vessel at such mooring place until the condition causing the violation is
corrected or ceases.
F.
Any person who violates Subsection A or who refuses to comply with
the direction of an authorized officer under Subsection F shall be fined
not less than $50 for a first offense, $100 for a second offense, and $300
for any subsequent offense.
G.
§ 124-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-5
1:191
§ 124-5. Waterway regulations. [Amended 7-5-2012 by Ord. No.
121100]
The Harbormaster, Deputy Harbormaster and Assistant Harbormaster shall,
in their capacity as special officers of the City, subject to the direction
and control of the Chief of Police, insofar as they are acting as special
officers, enforce the following waterway ordinances, in addition to any laws
of the commonwealth and United States federal government pertaining to
waterways of the City:
§ 124-6. Glover Wharf regulations. [Amended 7-5-2012 by Ord. No.
121; 10-17-2012 by Ord. No. 185]
The speed limit for boats traveling in the area between Foster's Point
and the Number 8 NUN shall be five miles per hour, and shall be posted
as such with a sign indicating "No Wake Area." The fine for violating
this subsection shall be $50 for each offense.
A.
All boats in Beverly waters shall properly display current registration
numbers or have current documentation on board. The fine for violating
this subsection shall be $50 for each offense.
B.
Boats docked at the ferry way public landing in excess of the posted
time limits shall be subject to a fine of $50.
C.
Willful abandonment of any boat in City waterways or placing a boat on
an unauthorized mooring shall be prohibited. The fine for violating this
subsection shall be $50 per day.
D.
Each mooring in City waters shall clearly display the mooring number
assigned by the Harbormaster and shall comply with the rules and
regulations of the Office of the Harbormaster. Copies of such rules
and regulations shall be provided annually to individuals receiving or
renewing their mooring permits. The fine for violating this subsection
shall be $50.
E.
The number of boats tied to a mooring or the rafting of boats on a
mooring shall not exceed the number of boats assigned to each mooring
by the Harbormaster. The fine for violating this subsection shall be $25.
F.
Sailboarding shall not be permitted west of the Number 10 NUN to the
Veteran's Memorial Bridge. The fine for violating this subsection shall
be $50 per incident.
G.
Boats shall maintain a distance of 300 feet from public beaches and
shall not be operated in a manner that would endanger themselves or
others. The fine for violating this subsection is $50.
H.
The Police Department, as well as the Harbormaster, Deputy
Harbormaster and Assistant Harbormasters in their capacity as special
A.
100. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 124-5 BEVERLY CODE § 124-6
1:192
officers of the City, subject to the direction and control of the Chief of
Police, shall be the enforcement persons of this section.101
The fine for violating any of the Glover Wharf regulations shall be $25
for each offense, except for exceeding the time limit for remaining at
the transient dock. Boats docked at the transient dock in excess of the
posted time limits shall be subject to a fine of $25 for the first offense,
$50 for the second offense, and $100 for each subsequent offense.
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
APRON — The concrete platform and the fence along the length of the
concrete platform.
J AREA — The area from the recreational boat gate to the end of the
transient dock.
PIER — The public pier.
RECREATIONAL BOAT SLIPS — Those floating docks at the Glover
Wharf Marina on the water side of the fence along the concrete
platform and east of the recreational boat gate.
C.
The following restrictions shall apply to the J area:
(1) No casting at any time.
No access from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. except persons currently
leasing a recreational boat slip and their guests, dinghy rack
holders and transient docked boaters.
(2)
(3) Trash in/trash out policy applies.
Fishing will be allowed in those areas designated by the Harbor
Management Authority and in a manner not to impede navigation.
(4)
Boats may tie up temporarily at the transient dock tie-up for a
period of time not to exceed the posted time limit.
(5)
D.
The following restrictions shall apply to the apron:
(1) No casting at any time.
(2) No access from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(3) Trash in/trash out policy applies.
Fishing will be allowed in those areas designated by the Harbor
Management Authority and in a manner not to impede navigation.
(4)
E.
F. The following restrictions shall apply to the pier:
101. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 124-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-6
1:193
Chapter 130
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 159. Historic buildings and districts — See Ch.
168.
(1) No casting at any time.
(2) No access from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
(3) Trash in/trash out policy applies.
Fishing will only be allowed in those areas designated by the
Harbor Management Authority and in a manner not to impede
navigation.
(4)
Only persons currently leasing a recreational boat slip and their guests
are allowed access to the recreational boat slips.
G.
§ 124-6 BEVERLY CODE § 124-6
1:194
ARTICLE I
Building Code
[The State Building Code and the applicable Code of Massachusetts
Regulations govern the construction, alteration, repair,
maintenance, removal and demolition of buildings and structures in
the City.]
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 124-6
1:195

ARTICLE II
Storage Containers
[Amended 11-17-1986 by Ord. No. 389; 3-5-1993 by Ord. No. 90;
4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 188; 11-15-1993 by Ord. No. 511; 1-23-1999 by
Ord. No. 42; 11-22-2000 by Ord. No. 362; 6-10-2004 by Ord. No.
193]
§ 130-1. Permit required; time limits.
No storage container or bulk transportation device shall be stored or parked
on a premises without a permit from the Director of Municipal Inspections,
who may issue permits for the storage of a maximum of two such
containers/devices on a premises for a period not to exceed 30 calendar
days. Permits for the siting of storage containers or bulk transportation
devices for longer than 30 calendar days but no more than 90 calendar days
may be issued by the Beverly City Council. Each such device shall require a
permit, and no more than two permits of any duration may be issued to any
premises annually.
§ 130-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-1
1:197

ARTICLE III
Numbering of Structures
§ 130-2. Numbering required.
§ 130-3. Size, color and location of numbers.
The size, color, location, and visibility of the numbers shall be as follows:
§ 130-4. Violations and penalties.
The penalty for violation of this article shall be as follows:
All houses, businesses, and other buildings within the City shall be
conspicuously numbered so as to indicate the number of that house,
business, or other building upon the street upon which it fronts.
A.
It shall be the duty of every owner and/or occupant of each house,
building, and/or structure within the City to place thereon the number
of the house, building, or structure.
B.
A. The minimum height of such number shall be 3 1/2 inches in height.
In order to be visible from the road, street, or way, the number shall be
of a contrasting color.
B.
The numbers shall be affixed to the front door or as close to the front
door as possible.
C.
Where there are multiple houses, buildings, or structures located off
the road on private ways, private roads, or private lanes, the numbers
shall be placed at the following locations:
The numbers shall be affixed to a post at the entrance to said
private way, private road, or private lane.
(1)
If the house, building, or structure is so far off the private way
so as to cause the numbers to be unidentifiable from the private
way, then a post with the numbers affixed thereto shall be placed
at the entrance of the driveway leading to the house, building or
structure.
(2)
D.
The issuance of a notice, citation, or complaint may be done by any
police officer, code enforcement officer or the Board of Health.
A.
Any person found guilty of an infraction of this article shall be fined up
to $50 a day.
B.
A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or
on which a violation occurs or continues.
C.
§ 130-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 130-4
1:199
Chapter 136
CHILD SAFETY ZONES
§ 136-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
derivations shall have the meanings given herein. When not inconsistent
with the context, words in the plural number include the singular and
words in the singular number include the plural. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
CHILD SAFETY ZONE — A park, playground, recreation center, library,
school, day-care center, private youth center, video arcade, bathing beach,
swimming pool or wading pool, gymnasium, sports field, or sports facility,
including the parking area and land adjacent to any of the aforementioned
facilities, camp bus stops when children under the age of 18 are present,
and school bus stops during scheduled school transportation hours on
school days, which is:
CHILD SEX OFFENDER —
Under the jurisdiction of any department, agency, or authority of the
City of Beverly, including but not limited to the School Department of
the City of Beverly; or
A.
Leased or licensed by the City of Beverly to another person for the
purpose of operating a park, playground, recreation center, bathing
beach, swimming pool or wading pool, gymnasium, sports field, or
sports facility.
B.
Any person required to register as a sex offender pursuant to MGL c. 6,
§§ 178C to 178P, inclusive, and given a Level 2 or Level 3 designation by
the Sex Offender Registry Board and whose victim was (or was believed
by the offender to be) a child under the age of 18. For the purposes
Chapter 136, the term "victim" includes a child under the age of 18
whose image or likeness is used in any crime listed in Subsection 2 of
the definition of "Child Sex Offender."
A.
Any person who has not yet been classified and who resides, has
secondary addresses, works or attends an institution of higher learning
in the commonwealth and who has been convicted of or who has been
adjudicated as a youthful offender or as a delinquent juvenile, or a
person released from incarceration or parole or probation supervision
or custody with the Department of Youth Services for such a conviction
or adjudication of the following offenses: indecent assault and battery
on a child under 14 under MGL c. 265, § 13B; rape of a child under
16 with force under MGL c. 265, § 22A; rape and abuse of a child
under MGL c. 265, § 23; assault of a child with intent to commit rape
under MGL c. 265, § 24B; kidnapping of a child under the age of 16
under MGL c. 265, § 26; enticing a child under the age of 16 for the
purposes of committing a crime under MGL c. 265, § 26C; indecent
B.
§ 130-4 BEVERLY CODE § 136-1
1:200
assault and battery on a mentally retarded person under MGL c. 265,
§ 13F; assault with intent to commit rape under MGL c. 265, § 24;
inducing a minor into prostitution under MGL c. 272, § 4A; living off
or sharing earnings of a minor prostitute under MGL c. 272, § 4B;
disseminating to a minor matter harmful to a minor under MGL c. 272,
§ 28; posing or exhibiting a child in a state of nudity under MGL c. 272,
§ 29A; dissemination of visual material of a child in a state of nudity
or sexual conduct under MGL c. 272, § 29B; unnatural and lascivious
acts with a child under 16 under MGL c. 272, § 35A; drugging persons
for sexual intercourse under MGL c. 272, § 3; aggravated rape under
MGL c. 277, § 39; knowing purchase or possession of visual material
of child depicted in sexual conduct under MGL c. 272, § 29C; indecent
assault and battery on a child under the age of 14 during commission
of certain offenses or by mandated reporters under MGL. c. 265, § 13B
1/2; indecent assault and battery on a child under the age of 14 by
certain previously convicted offenders under MGL c. 265, § 13B 3/4;
indecent assault and battery on person 14 or older (where the victim
was between 14 and 18 years of age) under MGL c. 265, § 13H; rape
of a child during commission of certain offenses or by use of force
under MGL c. 265, § 22B; rape of a child through use of force by
certain previously convicted offenders under MGL c. 265, § 22C; rape
and abuse of child aggravated by age difference between defendant
and victim or when committed by mandated reporters under MGL c.
265, § 23A; rape and abuse of child by certain previously convicted
offenders under MGL c. 265, § 23B; enticement of child under age 18 to
engage in prostitution, human trafficking or commercial sexual activity
under MGL c. 265, § 26D; trafficking of persons for sexual servitude;
trafficking of persons under 18 years for sexual servitude under MGL
c. 265, § 50; and any attempt to commit a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections pursuant to MGL c. 274, § 6, or a like violation
of the laws of another state, the United States or a military, territorial
or Indian tribal authority, and whose victim was a child under the age
of 16.
A person who has been adjudicated a sexually dangerous person under
MGL c. 123A, § 14, as in force at the time of adjudication, or a person
released from civil commitment pursuant to MGL. c. 123A, § 9, and
whose victim was (or was believed by the offender to be) a child under
the age of 18.
C.
A person who resides in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, has a
secondary address, works at or attends an institution of higher learning
in the commonwealth and has been convicted in any other state, in a
federal or military court or in any foreign jurisdiction of any crime the
essential elements of which are substantially the same as any of the
crimes specified above in Subsection B of the definition of "child sex
offender", and which requires registration as a sexual offender in such
other state or in the federal or military system, and who resides or
works in this commonwealth and whose victim was (or was believed by
the offender to be) a child under the age of 18.
D.
§ 136-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-2
1:201
§ 136-2. Prohibitions and exceptions.
Prohibition. It shall be unlawful for a child sex offender to be present in
any child safety zone.
A.
Exceptions. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:
Any person whose name has been removed from the Massachusetts
Sex Offender Registry or from the registry of any other state or
in the federal or military system by act of a court or by expiration
of the term such person is required to remain on such registry
or reclassified as a Level 1 in Massachusetts or lowest offender
category in another jurisdiction.
(1)
Facilities in a child safety zone that also support a church,
synagogue, mosque, temple or other house of religious worship,
subject to all of the following conditions:
The child sex offender's entrance and presence upon the
property occurs only during hours of worship or other religious
program/scrvice as posted to the public; and
(a)
The child sex offender shall not participate in any religious
education programs that include individuals under the age of
18.
(b)
(2)
Property that also supports a use lawfully attended by a child
sex offender's natural or adopted child(ren), which child's use
reasonably requires the attendance of the child sex offender as the
child's parent upon the property, subject to the following condition:
The child sex offender's entrance and presence upon the
property occurs only during hours of activity related to the use
as posted to the public.
(a)
(3)
Property that also supports a polling location in a local, state or
federal election, subject to all of the following conditions:
(a) The child sex offender is eligible to vote;
The property is the designated polling place for the child sex
offender; and
(b)
The child sex offender enters the polling place property,
proceeds to cast a ballot with whatever usual and customary
assistance is available to any member of the electorate, and
vacates the property immediately after voting.
(c)
(4)
Property that also supports a school lawfully attended by a child
sex offender as a student, under which circumstances the child
sex offender may enter upon the property supporting the school at
which the child sex offender is enrolled, for such purposes and at
(5)
B.
§ 136-2 BEVERLY CODE § 136-2
1:202
§ 136-3. Notice.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall make reasonable efforts to provide
prompt, actual written notice of the enactment of this chapter (which notice
shall contain a copy of this chapter) to all persons who are listed on the
sex offender registry as of the effective date of this chapter and who were
given a Level 2 or Level 3 designation, as well as those persons who are
added to the sex offender registry at such levels thereafter, which persons'
addresses (as shown on the sex offender registry) are within the City of
Beverly. Such notice requirement may be satisfied by the mailing of such
notice by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, to the last
known address of such person as listed on the sex offender registry or
as otherwise known to the Chief of Police. The failure of any person to
receive such actual written notice shall not be a defense to a violation of
this chapter.
§ 136-4. Enforcement procedures; map of safety zones.
such times as are reasonably required for the educational purposes
of the school.
Property that also supports a court, government office or room
for public governmental meetings, subject to all of the following
conditions:
The child sex offender is on the property only to transact
business at the government office or place of business,
excluding a library, or attend an official meeting of a
governmental body; and
(a)
The child sex offender leaves the property immediately upon
completion of the business or meeting.
(b)
(6)
Upon reasonable belief of a police officer that a child sex offender is
present in a child safety zone in violation of this chapter, the officer
shall obtain from the suspected child sex offender his/her name,
address, and telephone number. Should the police officer thereafter
establish that the individual is a child sex offender as defined in this
chapter, then the officer shall issue a written citation that such
individual is in violation of this chapter and also require that the
individual leave the child safety zone. An individual who refuses to
leave or is later found to be in the same child safety zone shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 136-5.
A.
A map depicting and a written list describing the child safety zones
shall be created by the Planning and Engineering Departments of the
City and maintained by the Police Department, which map shall be
reviewed annually for changes. Said map and list, as well as a copy of
this chapter, shall be available to the public at the offices of the Beverly
Police Department and Beverly City Clerk and at all public buildings
and will also be posted on the City of Beverly's official website. In the
B.
§ 136-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 136-4
1:203
§ 136-5. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 143
CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 227. Water — See Ch. 282.
event that the list, map or the words of this chapter shall conflict, then
the words of this chapter shall control.
Any violation of this chapter may be subject to criminal penalties and
prosecuted in a court of competent jurisdiction and shall result in a
criminal fine of up to $150 for a first violation. Refusal to leave a child
safety zone or being later found in the same child safety zone shall
result in a criminal fine of up to $300. A second or any subsequent
violation of this chapter shall be subject to a criminal fine of up to $300.
A child sex offender commits a separate offense for each and every
violation of this chapter. Except for persons who are not yet 18 years of
age when they commit any such offense, violation of this chapter may
further constitute a violation of MGL c. 272, § 59, for which the violator
is also subject to immediate arrest without warrant. The issuance of a
citation shall not preclude the City from seeking or obtaining any or
all other legal and equitable remedies to prevent or address a violation
of this chapter, to include written notification to the parole and/or
probation officer and the Commonwealth's Sex Offender Registry Board
that the child sex offender has violated a municipal ordinance.
A.
As an alternative, any violation shall result in a noncriminal fine of
$150 for a first violation. Refusal to leave a child safety zone or being
later found in the same child safety zone shall result in a noncriminal
fine of $300. A second or subsequent violation of this chapter shall be
subject to a noncriminal fine of $300. A child sex offender commits a
separate offense for each and every violation of this chapter. Except
for persons who are not yet 18 years of age when they commit any
such offense, any violation of this chapter may further constitute a
violation of MGL c. 272, § 59, for which the violator is also subject to
immediate arrest without warrant. The issuance of a citation shall not
preclude the City from seeking or obtaining any or all other legal and
equitable remedies to prevent or remove a violation of this chapter, to
include written notification to the parole and/or probation officer and
the Commonwealth's Sex Offender Registry Board that the child sex
offender has violated a municipal ordinance.
B.
Injunction. If a child sex offender is present upon or within a safety zone
in violation of this chapter, the City Solicitor may bring an action in
the name of the City to enjoin future violations of this chapter by such
violator.
C.
§ 136-4 BEVERLY CODE § 136-5
1:204
§ 143-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:
§ 143-2. Authority. [Amended 8-23-1995 by Ord. No. 334]
§ 143-3. Surveys; responsibility to install devices.
The DPS shall be responsible for the protection of the public potable water
distribution system from contamination or pollution due to the backflow or
backsiphonage of contaminants or pollutants. If, as a result of a survey of
the premises, the DPS determines that an approved backflow prevention
device is required at the City's water service connection or as in-plant
protection on any customer's premises, the DPS, or its delegate agent,
shall issue a cross-connection violation form to the customer to install
approved backflow prevention devices. The customer shall, within a time
frame determined by the DPS, install such approved device or devices
at his own expense, and failure or refusal or inability on the part of the
customer to install the device or devices within the specified time frame
shall constitute grounds for discontinuing water service to the premises
until such device or devices have been properly installed.
To protect the public potable water supply served by the Department of
Public Services (DPS) from the possibility of contamination or pollution
by isolating such contaminants or pollutants which could backflow or
backsiphon into the public water system.
A.
To promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections,
actual or potential, between its customers' in-plant potable water
system and nonpotable systems.
B.
To provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of crossconnection
control which will effectively prevent the contamination or
pollution of all potable water systems by cross-connection.
C.
As provided in the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974 (Public
Law 93-523), and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts Drinking Water
Regulations, 310 CMR 22.22, the water purveyor has the primary
responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources or any
other substances from entering the public potable water system.
A.
The City of Beverly's cross-connection control program shall be
implemented as provided in this chapter in compliance with the
applicable requirements of the Code of Massachusetts Regulations
(CMR). In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this chapter
and the requirements of the CMR, the CMR shall control.
B.
§ 136-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-4
1:205
§ 143-4. Definitions. [Amended 8-23-1995 by Ord. No. 334]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GAP SEPARATION — The method of preventing backflow through
the use of an unobstructed vertical distance through the free atmosphere
between the lowest opening from any pipe or faucet supplying water to a
tank, plumbing fixture, or other device and flood level rim of the receptacle.
APPROVED — Accepted by the reviewing authority as meeting an applicable
specification stated or cited in this regulation or as suitable for the proposed
use.
APPROVED BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE OR DEVICES — A method
to prevent backflow approved by the DEP for use in Massachusetts.102
ATMOSPHERIC VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow device used
to prevent backsiphonage which is not designed for use under static line
pressure.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY — Any water supply of unknown or
questionable quality on or available to the premises other than the
supplier's approved public potable water supply.
BACKFLOW PREVENTER WITH INTERMEDIATE ATMOSPHERIC VENT —
A device having two independently operating check valves separated by
an intermediate chamber with a means for automatically venting it to the
atmosphere, in which the check valves are force loaded to a normally closed
position and the venting means is force loaded to a normally open position.
BACKPRESSURE — Pressure created by mechanical means or other means
which causes water or other liquids or substances to flow or move in a
direction opposite to that which is intended.
BACKSIPHONAGE — A form of backflow due to reduced or subatmospheric
pressure within a water system.
BACKFLOW — The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other
than the intended source.
BAROMETRIC LOOP — A loop of pipe rising at least 35 feet, at its topmost
point, above the highest fixture it supplies.
CONTAMINANT — Any physical, chemical, biological or radiological
substance or matter in water.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any actual or potential connection between a
distribution pipe of potable water from a public water system and any waste
pipe, soil pipe, sewer, drain or other unapproved source.
CROSS-CONNECTION VIOLATION FORM — A violation form designated by
the DEP, which is sent to the owner by the water supplier with copies sent
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 143-4 BEVERLY CODE § 143-4
1:206
to the DEP, Gas/Plumbing Inspector and Board of Health delineating crossconnection
violations found on the owner's premises and a procedure for
corrective action.103
DEP — The Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
DOUBLE CHECK VALVE ASSEMBLY — A backflow prevention device which
incorporates an assembly of check valves, with shut-off valves at each end
and appurtenances for testing.
DPS — The City Department of Public Services or its designee if and
as permitted by applicable provisions in the Code of Massachusetts
Regulations.
IN-PLANT PROTECTION — The location of approved backflow prevention
devices in a manner which provides simultaneous protection of the public
water system and the potable water system within the premises.
OWNER — Any person maintaining a cross-connection installation or
owning or occupying premises on which cross-connections can or do exist.
PERMIT — A document issued by the DEP which allows a cross-connection
installation.104
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, company, association, trust,
partnership, the commonwealth, a municipality, district, or other
subdivision or instrumentality of the United States, except that nothing
herein shall be construed to refer to or to include any American Indian tribe
or the United States Secretary of the Interior in his capacity as Trustee of
Indian lands.
PRESSURE VACUUM BREAKER — An approved backflow prevention device
designed to prevent only backsiphonage and which is designed for use
under static line pressure and which has necessary appurtenances for
testing.
REDUCED PRESSURE BACKFLOW PREVENTER — An approved backflow
prevention device incorporating:
RESIDENTIAL DUAL CHECK — An assembly of two spring-loaded,
independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves
and test cocks; generally employed immediately downstream of the water
meter to act as a containment device.
A. Two more check valves;
An automatically operating differential relief valve located between the
two checks;
B.
C. Two shut-off valves; and
D. Necessary appurtenances for testing.
103. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 143-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-4
1:207
REVIEWING AUTHORITY — The Massachusetts Department of
Environmental Protection.
§ 143-5. Administration.105
§ 143-6. Requirements. [Amended 8-23-1995 by Ord. No. 334]
The DPS will operate an active cross-connection control program, to
include the keeping of necessary records, which fulfills the
requirements of the state DEP's cross-connection regulations and is
approved by the DEP.
A.
The owner shall allow his property to be inspected for possible crossconnections
and shall follow the provisions of the DPS' program and the
DEP regulations.
B.
DPS.
On new installations, the DEP or its designee will provide on-site
evaluation and/or inspection of plans in order to determine the type
of backflow preventer, if any, that will be required, and notify the
owner of plan approval requirements by the appropriate reviewing
authority.
(1)
For premises existing prior to the start of this program, the DPS
will perform surveys of the premises and reviews of as-built plans
and issue a cross-connection violation form to the owner detailing
any corrective action required, the method of achieving the
correction, and the time allowed for the correction to be made.
The time period allowed shall depend upon the degree of hazard
involved.
(2)
The DPS will not allow any cross-connection to remain unless
it is protected by an approved backflow preventer for which a
permit has been issued and which will be regularly tested to ensure
satisfactory operation. The DPS may require the installation of a
temporary device if the DEP is late issuing a permit.
(3)
If the DPS determines at any time that a serious threat to the public
health exists, the water service will be terminated immediately.
(4)
The DPS shall have on its staff, or shall have a delegated
representative, a person who is a backflow prevention device tester
certified by the commonwealth.
(5)
The DPS will begin initial premises inspections to determine the
nature of existing or potential hazard, following the approval of this
program by the DEP, during calendar year 1989. Initial focus will
be on high-hazard industries and commercial premises.106
(6)
A.
105. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 143-4 BEVERLY CODE § 143-6
1:208
Owner.
The owner shall be responsible for the elimination or protection of
all cross-connections on his premises.
(1)
The owner shall be responsible for applying for and obtaining all
necessary approvals and permits for the maintenance of crossconnections
and installation of backflow prevention devices, and
applying annually for the renewal of each permit.
(2)
The owner shall have any device that fails on inspection or tests
repaired by a licensed plumber.
(3)
The owner shall inform the DPS of any proposed or modified crossconnection
and also any existing cross-connections of which the
owner is aware but have not been found by the DPS.
(4)
The owner shall not install a bypass around any backflow preventer
unless there is a backflow preventer of the same type on the
bypass. Owners who cannot shut down operation for testing of the
device(s) must supply additional devices necessary to allow testing
to take place.
(5)
The owner shall install backflow preventers in a manner approved
by the DEP and by the DPS.107
(6)
The owner shall install only reduced pressure backflow preventers
and double check valve assemblies approved by the State DEP.
(7)
Any owner of industrial, commercial or institutional premises
having a private well or other private water source must have a
permit if the well or source is cross-connected to the DPS' system.
Permission to cross-connect may be denied by the DPS. The owner
may be required to install a backflow preventer at the service
entrance if a private water source is maintained, even if it is not
cross-connected to the DPS' system.108
(8)
The owner of any residential premises having a private well or
other private water source will not be allowed a physical crossconnection
with the public water supply system.
(9)
The owner shall be responsible for the payment of all fees for
surveys, permits, device testings, retestings in the case the device
fails to operate correctly, and second reinspections for
noncompliance with DPS or DEP requirements.109
(10)
B.
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 143-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 143-7
1:209
§ 143-7. Prevention of contamination.
The DPS recognizes the threat to the public water system arising from
cross-connections. As such, the DPS, whereas it is responsible for the
quality of the public water supply, may require a containment device on
the water service entrance to any customer who, as a result of unprotected
cross-connections, could contaminate the public water supply system.
§ 143-8. Cross-connections prohibited; violations and penalties.
The DPS shall not allow a cross-connection to exist with the public water
supply system unless it is considered necessary and all appropriate
approvals and permits have been issued. A fine of $500 per occurrence shall
be assessed for a violation of this section.
§ 143-9. Existing in-use backflow prevention devices. [Amended
8-23-1995 by Ord. No. 334]
Any existing backflow preventer shall be allowed by the DPS to
continue in service unless the degree of hazard is such as to supersede
the effectiveness of the present backflow preventer or result in an
unreasonable risk to the public health. Where the degree of hazard
has increased, as in the case of a residential installation converting
to a business establishment, any existing backflow preventer must
be upgraded to a reduced pressure backflow preventer, or a reduced
pressure backflow preventer must be installed in the event that no
backflow device was present.
A.
Periodic testing.
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies shall be tested and inspected at least semiannually by a
certified device tester hired by the DPS. All tests shall be witnessed
by the DPS' licensed staff tester.
(1)
The testing shall be conducted during regular business hours.
Exceptions to this, when at the request of the owner, may require
additional charges to cover the increased costs to the DPS.
(2)
Reduced pressure backflow preventers and double check valve
assemblies must be tested annually by the owner, independent of
the semiannual test by the DPS' representative, and such test must
be conducted by a certified tester.
(3)
Any backflow preventer which fails during a periodic test must
be repaired or replaced by a licensed plumber. When repairs are
necessary, upon completion of the repair, the device will be
retested at the owner's expense to ensure proper operation. Highhazard
situations will not be allowed to continue unprotected if
the backflow preventer fails the test and cannot be repaired
immediately. In other situations, a compliance date of not more
than 14 days after the test date will be established. The owner is
(4)
B.
§ 143-7 BEVERLY CODE § 143-9
1:210
§ 143-10. Records and reports. [Amended 8-23-1995 by Ord. No.
334]
Chapter 155
FIREARMS AND WEAPONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, recreation areas and public
property — See Ch. 210.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 215.
§ 155-1. Firearms. [Amended 11-17-1992 by Ord. No. 152]
responsible for spare parts, repair tools or a replacement device.
Parallel installation of two devices is an effective means of the
owner ensuring that uninterrupted water service remains during
testing or repair of devices and is strongly recommended when the
owner desires such continuity.
Backflow prevention devices will be tested more frequently than
specified above in Subsection B(1) in cases where there is a history
of test failures and the DPS feels that, due to the degree of hazard
involved, additional tests will be borne by the owner.
(5)
Records. The DPS will initiate and maintain:
(1) Master files on customer cross-connection tests and/or inspections.
(2) Master files on approved cross-connection installations.
(3) Copies of lists and summaries supplied to the DEP.
A.
Reports. The DPS will submit the following to the DEP:
Initial listing of high-hazard cross-connections and potential crossconnections.
(1)
Initial listing of low-hazard cross-connections and potential crossconnections.
(2)
(3) Annual update lists of Subsection A.
(4) Annual summary of cross-connection inspections and surveys.
B.
No person shall hunt with a firearm, fire or discharge a rifle, shotgun,
or handgun within the limits of the City; but to the extent not otherwise
prohibited by law, the provisions of this section shall not apply to the
discharge of firearms, rifles, or shotguns:
(1) In the lawful defense of the person; or
A.
§ 143-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-1
1:211
§ 155-2. Carrying certain weapons or weapon-like objects
prohibited. [Amended 6-23-2004 by Ord. No. 182]
By any duly authorized law enforcement officer acting in the proper
performance of his or her duty; or
(2)
By any duly authorized military personnel participating in military
exercises;
(3)
By any person using blank cartridges in theatrical performances,
sporting events, or dog training; or
(4)
By a person lawfully on a target, trap, or skeet range established
for such purposes; or
(5)
By a person legally licensed under MGL Chapter 131 to hunt on his
or her own land or the land of another, with the written permission
of the owner, tenant or person having control of said property;
said written permission shall be carried with person hunting at all
times; or
(6)
By a person hunting migratory game over the tidal waters within
the City; or
(7)
By a person legally licensed under MGL Chapter 131 hunting on
public land owned or maintained by the City or any subdivision
thereof, so long as written permission of the City, or of its
subdivision, is granted; said written permission shall be carried
with the person hunting at all times.
(8)
A rifle or handgun of any caliber as defined by MGL c. 140, § 121, shall
not be discharged or fired at any time for the purpose of hunting within
the City.
B.
Any police officer authorized to serve criminal process may arrest,
without a warrant, any person found in violation of this section or any
person whom said officer has probable cause to believe is in violation.
C.
The penalty for violation of this section shall be a fine of not less than
$50, nor more than $100, or imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
or both.
D.
If the written permission identified under Subsection A(8) above is
granted, the form evidencing the same shall be obtained from the City
Clerk's office.
E.
No person, except as provided by law, shall carry on his person, or
carry on his person or under his control in a vehicle, any weapon or
instrument identified in MGL c. 269, § 10, Paragraph (b), and MGL c.
269, § 12, any weapon or object commonly called "nun-chucks" or any
substance or material; a shotgun having a barrel less than 18 inches in
length; any saber, sword, or weapon of like or similar nature; any knife
having any type of blade in excess of 2 1/2 inches (except when actually
A.
§ 155-1 BEVERLY CODE § 155-2
1:212
Chapter 159
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 109.
engaged in hunting or fishing or in going directly to and/or returning
directly from such activities, or any employment which requires the use
of any such type of knife); ice picks, dirks or similar weapons that are
likely to penetrate through police officer's ballistic vests; or any other
object or tool so redesigned, fashioned, prepared or treated that the
same may be used to inflict bodily harm or injury to another.
Violation of any provisions of this section shall be subject to arrest and a
fine of not more than $300 for each offense. Violation of any provisions
of this section within a park, playground or on school property shall be
subject to arrest and a fine of not more than $300.
B.
§ 155-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 155-2
1:213

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 159-1. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
CAPTAIN — The Captain of the Fire Department in charge of the Fire
Prevention Bureau within the Fire Department.
HEAD OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT — The chief executive officer of the Fire
Department. Any authority conferred upon the head of the Fire Department
under this chapter may be delegated to such members of the Fire
Department as the head of the Fire Department shall designate.
LICENSE — Permission granted by the licensing authority to keep, store,
use, manufacture or sell at specified locations materials which produce
conditions hazardous to life or property.
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The City Council.
§ 159-2. False alarms prohibited.
No person shall intentionally raise or sound a false alarm of fire.
§ 159-3. Interference with or defacing signal boxes or fire alarm
telegraph.
No person shall open any of the signal boxes connected with the fire alarm
telegraph, except in case of fire, or interfere in any way with such boxes
by breaking, cutting, injuring or defacing same, or tampering or meddling
with such boxes or any part thereof; nor shall any person interfere with the
poles by which wires of the fire alarm telegraph are supported, by breaking,
cutting, injuring or defacing the same, or by posting placards or bills upon
them, or in any other manner.
§ 159-4. Demolition of buildings.
Whenever it shall be determined at any fire, by the Fire Chief, Deputy Chief
or other officer of the Fire Department in command, to be necessary to pull
down or demolish any buildings in order to prevent the spreading of fire,
the same may be done by his order in accordance with statutes in such case
made and provided.
§ 159-5. Drawing water from hydrants or reservoir.
No person except the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works or the Chief of the Fire Department, or their
designees, shall draw water from the reservoir or hydrants, except in case
of fire.
§ 159-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-6
1:215
§ 159-6. Driving over fire hose.
No person shall drive any vehicle upon or over any hose placed in any street
by order of any officer of the Fire Department without the consent of some
officer of the Department.
§ 159-7. Gasoline stations. [Amended 3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 173;
11-5-1992 by Ord. No. 510]
Islands.
Self-service gasoline stations with an area of at least 15,000 square
feet of land, with a minimum frontage of 150 feet, shall maintain
not more than four islands, each island to be not more than 17 feet
in length, with a total of not more than eight dual pumps.
(1)
Self-service gasoline stations with an area of at least 10,000 square
feet of land, with a minimum frontage of at least 100 feet, shall
maintain not more than three islands, each island to be not more
than 17 feet in length, with a total of not more than six dual pumps.
(2)
Self-service gasoline stations with an area of at least 9,500 square
feet of land, with a minimum frontage of at least 85 feet, shall
maintain not more than two islands, each island to be not more
than 17 feet in length, with a total of not more than four dual
pumps.
(3)
No station shall have more than eight dual gasoline dispensing
pumps, as approved by the Fire Chief.
(4)
(5) No island shall maintain more than two dual pumps.
(6) No island shall be more than 17 feet in length.
A.
Only the tanks of motor vehicles and approved containers shall be filled
with gasoline.
B.
C. No one without a driver's license shall fill a vehicle.
D. There shall be one employee per eight nozzles in operation.
E. The operator of the console must be 18 years of age or over.
All retail operations shall be subject to all City and state license and
inspection requirements.
F.
G. "No smoking" signs shall be posted.
Trucks, trailers and campers shall be filled in one specific location, and
signs shall be posted showing this location.
H.
The zones of fire protection, in addition to being shown on the
installation drawings, shall be outlined on the station filling area, by
the owners or building contractor, by paint or other acceptable visual
I.
§ 159-6 BEVERLY CODE § 159-7
1:216
§ 159-8. Petroleum storage licenses.
means, so that the station operator will know when a vehicle is within
the protected zone.
The station operator (attendant) shall not allow gasoline to be pumped
if a vehicle is not within the protected zone.
J.
In addition to automatic operation, systems must be equipped with a
manual release, either mechanical or electrical, or both. If more than
one release is employed, they must be clearly marked to indicate which
system they control.
K.
Pumps shall be interconnected with the fire protection system so that
they automatically shut down in the event of system discharge.
L.
The owner shall post suitable instruction, and he shall ensure that all
operators understand them.
M.
A test of the system shall be conducted by the installing contractor and
witnessed by a representative of the local Fire Department. This test
shall demonstrate that the system is in complete working order and
installed in accordance with the approved plans.
N.
Operation of the fire protection system shall cause an audible and/or
visible alarm to activate.
O.
Hours of operation for both full-service and self-service gas stations will
be subject to approval by the City Council, which approval will not be
unreasonably withheld.
P.
Full-service gasoline stations duly licensed by the City and operating
as of May 1, 1985, may convert to self-service gasoline stations upon
the approval of the Fire Chief, the Director of Municipal Inspections
and the Director of Public Health and upon the final approval of the
City Council, subject to any terms or conditions that the City Council
may require. Upon approval as provided above, an entry shall be made
upon such gasoline station's license indicating its allowance as a selfservice
gasoline station, together with any conditions mandated by the
City Council.
Q.
An application for a petroleum storage license shall contain the
following information:
Plot plan showing the location, size, material, and age of all
petroleum storage tanks situated on the premises which have been
or will be filed with the Fire Department.
(1)
(2) Notification of the Fire Department of all changes.
Total amount of storage:
(a) Aboveground: _____ gallons.
(3)
A.
§ 159-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-8
1:217
(b) Underground: _____ gallons.
Names and addresses of all suppliers of petroleum products
making deliveries to the licensee.
(4)
(5) Whether or not all petroleum storage tanks are in continuous use.
Whether or not the Fire Department has been notified of the
nonuse of petroleum storage tanks.
(6)
All underground petroleum storage tanks which have been in service
for 20 years shall be tested by a Kenmore test or a semi-par test
approved by the Fire Chief. The tanks shall also be tested every five
years thereafter. Failure to pass the test shall be cause for the Fire
Chief to order the tanks replaced.
B.
Whenever a petroleum storage license has not been exercised for more
than six days, the licensee shall notify the Fire Department per 527
CMR 16.2.3.110
C.
If a petroleum storage license has not been exercised during the
previous year, the Fire Chief shall order the petroleum storage tank
removed. A removal permit shall be obtained from the fire department
before a petroleum storage tank may be removed.
D.
Upon receipt of a completed application, the Fire Department shall
inspect the premises and storage tanks and make recommendation to
the City Council which shall approve or disapprove of the license.
E.
Renewal of a petroleum storage license which has not been exercised
during the previous year shall be at the discretion of the City Council.
F.
110. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 159-8 BEVERLY CODE § 159-8
1:218
ARTICLE II
Fire Department
§ 159-9. Clerical assistants.
There shall be one clerical assistant assigned to the Fire Department who
may be classified as Clerk-Typist, Senior Clerk-Typist, or Principal Clerk, as
the case may be, whose duties shall consist of clerical work only.
§ 159-10. Appointment of members.
§ 159-11. Fire Department mechanic. [Amended 3-20-1989 by Ord.
No. 39B111]
The Mayor, subject to the confirmation of the City Council, shall appoint
one Fire Department mechanic, whose duties shall consist of automotive
equipment repairs and maintenance of the Fire Department equipment. The
mechanic shall work under the control and direction of the Fire Chief. The
Fire Department mechanic shall be entitled to all of the benefits afforded to
the City Hall employees, including, but not limited to, the following benefits:
medical insurance, life insurance, pension plan, vacation time, personal
days, holidays and sick days. This position shall not be subject to Chapter
31 of the Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 159-12. Command structure at fires.
The Chief of the Fire Department shall have sole and absolute control and
command of all the other members of the Department and all other persons
present at fires. The officer in command of the company which first arrives
at a fire shall be the officer in command until the Chief or a Deputy Chief
arrives.
§ 159-13. Deputy to act in absence of Chief.
In the absence of the Chief of the Fire Department, or in case of his inability
to act, his duties and powers as herein provided shall be vested in one of
the Deputy Chiefs selected by the Chief.
§ 159-14. Fire Chief.
Appointment of Chief and Deputy Chiefs; terms. The appointment of the
Chief and the Deputy Chiefs shall be made by the Mayor, and confirmed
by the City Council, subject to the civil service laws of the state.
A.
Appointment of other members. All other members of the Fire
Department shall be recommended by the Chief, and shall be appointed
by the Mayor and confirmed by the City Council, subject to the laws
relating to civil service.
B.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 159-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-14
1:219
§ 159-15. Use of apparatus outside City.
No Fire Department apparatus shall be taken from the City without special
permission of the Chief of the Fire Department or ranking officer in charge
Establishment. There shall be a Fire Chief as provided in MGL c. 48,
§§ 42 to 44, who shall be the head of the Fire Department, which shall
be responsible for the coordination of all the fire protection services of
the City and for the supervision and coordination of all activities of all
City agencies in relation to any firesafety programs, fire suppression
and extinguishing fires and emergency management and medical
services.112
A.
Duties regarding Department and fire apparatus. The Chief shall file,
on a monthly basis, a detailed and written report to the Committee on
Public Services regarding the following:
A log of time spent by the mechanic on fire apparatus. Detail must
be provided specifying the nature of work and to which vehicle the
time was applied. Time is to be differentiated between regular and
overtime hours.
(1)
Any work not performed by the mechanic, but by an outside
contractor. Specific detail is to be provided as to the nature and
cost.
(2)
A listing of materials, parts, etc., purchased to effect the work in
Subsection B(1) above.
(3)
The Chief shall file, annually, on or about June 30 of each year, a
detailed and written report to the Committee on Public Services
outlining the present condition and repairs necessary, if any, for all
fire vehicle apparatus. [Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 39A]
(4)
B.
Chief in charge of buildings; purchases. The Chief of the Fire
Department shall have the superintendence and control of the engines
and hose house and other buildings used for the Department, of the
furniture therein and of the engines and apparatus and other property
pertaining to the Department, and shall have charge of the ordinary
repairs thereof. All materials and supplies required for the Department
shall be purchased through the Purchasing Department as required
by law, and shall first be referred to and approved by the standing
Committee on Public Services (and by the Planning and Construction
Committee per Charter Section 5-6).
C.
Chief to make rules and regulations. The Chief of the Fire Department
shall make such rules and regulations for the proper government of the
Department as he may from time to time deem expedient, subject to the
approval of the Mayor and the City Council and not repugnant to the
laws of the commonwealth or any ordinance of the City.
D.
112. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 159-14 BEVERLY CODE § 159-15
1:220
of the Department, and in all cases such apparatus shall be returned to the
City as soon as practicable.
§ 159-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-15
1:221

ARTICLE III
Fire Alarm Systems
[Added 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 248]
§ 159-16. Definitions.
When used in this article, unless a contrary intention clearly appears, the
following words shall have the following meanings:
CENTRAL STATION OPERATING COMPANY (CSOC) — A company
equipped to receive a fire alarm signal from each of its customers and
which then notifies the Beverly Fire Department (BFD) by telephone of the
location and nature of any such alarm the CSOC receives.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM — Any heat-activated, smoke-activated, flameactivated,
sprinkler-activated or other such automatic device capable of
transmitting a fire alarm signal to either a CSOC or directly to the BFD by
way of a master box, or sounds only on the premises being protected.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM MALFUNCTION — The transmittal of a fire alarm
signal to a CSOC directly to the BFD by way of a master box or by way
of a telephone call from the occupant; which alarm is caused by improper
installation of a fire alarm system, a mechanically defective fire alarm
system, lack of maintenance or some other reasons that cause the fire alarm
system to sound even though there is no actual fire emergency or situation
that reasonably could evolve into a fire.
FIRE ALARM SYSTEM OWNER — An individual or entity who or which
owns the title to and/or has on his or its business or residential premises a
fire alarm system equipped to send a fire alarm signal to a CSOC or directly
to the Beverly Fire Department by way of a master box.
FIRE CHIEF — The Chief of the Beverly Fire Department.
LOCAL ALARM SYSTEM — An alarm system that is activated by smoke,
heat or other device and which sounds an alarm only on the property being
protected. The alarm must be transmitted to the Beverly Fire Department
via telephone.
MASTER BOX — A connection to the municipal fire alarm system used to
transmit an alarm of fire to the Beverly Fire Department communications
center.
MASTER BOX OWNER — An individual or entity who or which has on his of
its business or residential premises a fire alarm system equipped to send a
fire alarm signal directly to the BFD by way of a master box.
SPRINKLER SYSTEM — A sprinkler system designed for fire protection
purposes as an integrated system of piping equipped with sprinkler heads
which are activated by heat from a fire and dispense water over the
protected area.
TELEPHONE DIALER — A tape dialer or similar automatic telephone device
which will transmit an alarm message to a designated telephone line of the
BFD.
§ 159-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-17
1:223
§ 159-17. Information required prior to installation.
Before any fire alarm system is connected to the BFD, the master box owner
shall provide the Fire Chief with the following information:
§ 159-18. Updating information.
Every master box owner shall be responsible for updating the information
herein required to be provided to the Chief. If the information provided
changes, the master box owner shall provide the Fire Chief with the
updated information.
§ 159-19. System malfunctions and false alarms; fines.
The name, address, and home and work telephone numbers of the
master box owner;
A.
B. The street address where the master box is located;
The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the persons or
businesses protected by the fire alarm system connected to the master
box;
C.
The names, addresses and home and work telephone numbers of at
least two persons other than the owner who can be contacted 24 hours
a day, who are authorized by the master box owner to respond to an
alarm signal and who have access to the premises in which the master
box is located; and
D.
E. Such other information as the Fire Chief may require.
If there is a fire alarm system malfunction or malicious false alarm, as
herein defined, the Fire Chief may assess a fine against a fire alarm
system owner for each malfunction or false alarm per calendar year
according to the following schedule. For the purpose of this section,
"malicious false alarm" is defined as "the intentional activation of a fire
alarm system not resulting from an actual fire or emergency."
(1) Malicious false alarm, first time and every time thereafter: $150.
A.
Private fire alarm systems connected to the Beverly Fire Department
by telephone dialer or through retransmission from a central station
operating company shall be subject to the above conditions.
B.
Any false fire alarm which is the result of the failure of the property
owner, occupant or his/her agent to notify the Beverly Fire Department
of repair, maintenance or testing of the internal fire alarm system
within the protected premises shall cause a penalty to be assessed in
accordance with Subsection A above.
C.
D. Fire alarm malfunctions.
§ 159-17 BEVERLY CODE § 159-19
1:224
§ 159-20. Appeal procedure.
Any fire alarm system owner who is aggrieved by an action taken by the
Fire Chief under this article may, within 10 days of the receipt of the bill or
notice of fine, file an appeal, in writing, to the City Council, City of Beverly.
After notice, the City Council shall hold a hearing, after which it shall issue
a decision in which it affirms, annuls or modifies the action taken by the Fire
Chief, giving its reasons therefor in writing. The City Council shall send its
decision to the owner by first class mail within 10 days after the hearing.
The decision of the Board shall be a final administrative decision. The owner
shall have 30 days from the date of the written decision to seek judicial
review in the Essex County Superior Court.
§ 159-21. Regulations and enforcement.
The Fire Chief may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to
implement this article. The Fire Chief is authorized to pursue such legal
action as may be necessary to enforce this article.
§ 159-22. Disposition of fines.
All fines assessed herein shall be payable to the Beverly Fire Department
for deposit in the general fund.
For the purposes of this article, a fire alarm malfunction shall be
defined as follows:
(a) The operation of a faulty smoke or heat detection device.
(b) Faulty control panel or associated equipment.
(c) A water pressure surge in automatic sprinkler equipment.
(d) Accidental operation of an automatic sprinkler system.
An action by an employee of the owner or occupant of the
protected premises or a contractor employed by the owner or
the occupant which causes accidental activation of the internal
fire alarm system.
(e)
(1)
Property owners will be billed once a month for the previous
month's malfunction activity. All fines assessed shall be paid to the
Beverly Fire Department for deposit in the general fund.
(2)
If the bill is not paid within 30 days, a second notice will be
sent; if the bill is not paid after another thirty-day period, a final
notice will be sent informing the owner and/or occupant that court
proceedings will commence.
(3)
§ 159-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 159-22
1:225
Chapter 168
HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND DISTRICTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 159-22 BEVERLY CODE § 159-22
1:226
ARTICLE I
Historic Districts
[Adopted 1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 33 (Art. XV of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 168-1. Title; authority.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Historic Districts
Ordinance" promulgated under authority of MGL Chapter 40C.
§ 168-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to promote the educational, cultural, economic
and general welfare of the public through the preservation and protection
of the distinctive characteristics or architecture of buildings and places
significant in the history of the commonwealth and the City, and through the
maintenance and improvement of settings for such buildings and places and
the encouragement of design compatible therewith.
§ 168-3. District established.
There is hereby established under the provisions of MGL Chapter 40C,
as amended, an historic district to be known as "Fish Flake Hill I
Historic District," shown on a plan entitled, "Plan showing Fish Flake
Hill I Historic District, located off Cabot Street between Stone, Bartlett
and Water Streets, Beverly, Mass., dated November, 1971 and signed by
Edgar G. Mitchell, Acting Commissioner of Public Works," which plan is
on file in the offices of the City Clerk and is recorded in the Essex South
District Registry of Deeds, and described as follows:
Beginning at the most northwesterly corner of Front Street, being the
intersection of the easterly line of Cabot Street and the northerly line of
Front Street, thence running easterly along the northerly line of Front
Street, a distance of about 100.0 feet to the southwesterly corner of
Lot #2 on said plan, thence turning and running in a general northerly
direction on three courses by Lot #2, a distance of about 111.5 feet to
the southeasterly line of Cabot Street, thence turning and running in a
northeasterly direction along the southeasterly line of Cabot Street, a
distance of about 32.5 feet to the northeastern corner of Lot #3 on said
plan, thence turning and running in a general northeasterly direction
several courses, by the rear lot lines of Lots #3, #4, #5 and #6, a
distance of about 394.9 feet to the northerly line of Lot #6 on said
plan, thence turning and running along the northerly line of Lot #6, a
distance of about 35.8 feet to the westerly line of Davis Street, thence
turning and running in a northerly direction along the westerly line of
Davis Street, a distance of about 119.1 feet to Cabot Street, thence
turning and running in an easterly direction by the end of Davis Street,
a distance of about 53.0 feet to the easterly line of Davis Street, thence
turning and running in a southeasterly direction along the southerly
line of Stone Street, a distance of about 95.0 feet to the easterly line of
A.
§ 168-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-3
1:227
Lot #4 on said plan, thence turning and running in a southerly direction
along the rear lot line of Lot #41, a distance of about 60.0 feet to
the northerly side line of Lot #42, thence turning and running in an
easterly direction along the northerly side line of Lot #42, a distance
of about 20.0 feet to the rear lot line of Lot #42, thence turning and
running in a southerly direction along the rear lot lines of Lots #42,
#43, #44 and #45, a distance of about 160.0 feet to the northerly line
of Lot #34, thence turning and running in an easterly direction along
the rear lot lines of Lots #34 and #35, a distance of about 92.7 feet
to the westerly line of South Street, thence turning and running in a
southerly direction along the westerly line of South Street, a distance
of about 50.0 feet, thence turning and running in an easterly direction
across South Street and along the rear lot line of Lot #46, a distance of
about 128.5 feet to the westerly line of Lot #47 on said plan,
thence turning and running in a northern direction along the western
line of Lot #47, a distance of about 38.0 feet to the southerly line
of Cottage Lane, thence turning and running in an easterly direction
along the southern line of Cottage Lane, a distance of about 85.0
feet to the easterly line of Lot #47 on said plan, thence turning and
running in a southern direction along the easterly line of Lot #47, a
distance of about 40.00 feet to the rear lot line of Lot #48, thence
turning and running in an eastern direction along the rear lot lines
of Lots #48, #49 and #50, a distance of about 179.0 feet to the
western line of Lot #51 on said plan, thence turning and running in
a northerly direction along the westerly line of Lot #51, a distance of
about 40.0 feet to the southerly line of Cottage Lane, thence turning
and running in an eastern direction along the southerly line of Cottage
Lane, a distance of about 55.0 feet to Bartlett Street, thence turning
and running along the western line of Bartlett Street in a southern
direction, a distance of about 80.0 feet to Front Street, thence turning
and running in a southeasterly direction along the eastern end of Front
Street, a distance of about 70.0 feet to the southern line of Front Street,
thence turning and running in a general southeastern direction along
the southwesterly line of Bartlett Street on several courses, a distance
of about 406.8 feet to Lothrop Street, thence turning and running in a
southerly direction along the westerly line of Lothrop Street and across
Water Street, a distance of about 60.0 feet to the southerly line of Water
Street, thence turning and running in a general westerly direction
along the southerly line of Water Street, a distance of about 1,314.6 feet
to a point about 200.0 feet west of the eastern line of Lot #83 as shown
upon said plan, thence turning and running in a northwestern direction
across Water Street, by Lot #1-82 and across Front Street, a distance
of about 120.0 feet to the point of beginning.
The establishment of the historic district under this section shall not
take effect until all the Commissioners are appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by the City Council.
B.
§ 168-3 BEVERLY CODE § 168-3
1:228
ARTICLE II
Demolition of Historic Buildings
[Adopted 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 279 (Art. XVI of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 168-4. Intent and purpose. [Amended 2-19-2004 by Ord. No. 24]
§ 168-5. Definitions. [Amended 2-19-2004 by Ord. No. 24]
The following words and phrases, when used, whether or not capitalized
in this article, shall have the meanings set forth below, unless the context
otherwise requires:
APPLICANT — Any person or entity who or which files an application for a
demolition permit. If the applicant is not the owner of the premises upon
which the building is situated, the owner must indicate with the application
his/her assent to the filing of the application.
BUSINESS DAY — A day which is not a legal municipal holiday, Saturday or
Sunday.
DEMOLITION — The intentional act of pulling down, destroying, removing,
dismantling or razing a building or structure or commencing the work of
total or substantial destruction with the intent of completing the same.
HISTORIC DISTRICT — Fish Flake Hill Historic District or any other
historic district which may be established in the City under Chapter 40C
of the General Laws of Massachusetts; or the regulations of the National
Register of Historic Places.
HISTORICAL COMMISSION or COMMISSION — The Beverly Historic
Districts Commission, which has the powers and duties and acts as the
Beverly Historical Commission. The Commission may designate one or more
of its members to act in its behalf between the Commission's regular
monthly meetings.
This article is adopted to protect and preserve buildings and structures
within the City which reflect or constitute distinctive features of the
architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the City
and to encourage the preservation and restoration rather than
demolition of such buildings and structures; and, by furthering these
purposes, to promote the public welfare and to make the City a more
attractive and desirable place in which to live and work.
A.
To achieve this purpose, the Beverly Historic Districts Commission
(hereinafter "the Commission") is empowered to advise the Director
of Municipal Inspections with respect to the issuance of permits for
demolition of historically significant buildings. Further, the Commission
is mandated to offer its advice and expertise to owners of preferably
preserved buildings and structures.
B.
The issuance of demolition permits is regulated as described hereafter
in this article.
C.
§ 168-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-5
1:229
HISTORICALLY SIGNIFICANT BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any building
or structure within the City which is determined by the Commission to be
historically significant because such building or structure is:
PREFERABLY PRESERVED HISTORIC BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any
historically significant building or structure which is determined by the
Commission, because of the important contribution made by such building
or structure to the historical and/or cultural resources of the City, to be in
the public interest to preserve.
§ 168-6. Regulated buildings and structures.
The provisions of this article shall apply only to any building or structure
which, in whole or in part, was built 50 or more years prior to the date of
the application for the demolition permit, and is:
§ 168-7. Procedures. [Amended 2-19-2004 by Ord. No. 24]
Associated with one or more historic persons or events, or with the
architectural, cultural, economic, political or social history of the City;
or
A.
Historically or architecturally important (in terms of period, style,
method of building construction or association with a famous architect
or builder) either by itself or in the context of a group of buildings or
structure.
B.
A building or structure listed or eligible to be listed on the National
Register of Historic Places, or on the State Register of Historic Places
(The criteria used to determine eligibility for listing on the National
and/or State Register of Historic Places is on file in the Planning
Department in City Hall and available for public review.); or
A.
A building or structure importantly associated with one or more
historical persons or events, or with the broad architectural, cultural,
economic, political or social history of the City; or
B.
A building or structure which is historically or architecturally
significant in terms of period style, method of building construction or
association with a significant architect or builder either by itself or as
part of a group of buildings; or
C.
A building or structure located within 150 feet of a federal, state or
local historic district boundary.
D.
No permit for the demolition of any building or structure shall be issued
other than in conformity with the provisions of this article, as well
in conformity with the provisions of the other laws and ordinances
applicable to the demolition of buildings and structures and the
issuance of permits generally.
A.
§ 168-5 BEVERLY CODE § 168-7
1:230
Upon receipt of an application for a demolition permit, the Director of
Municipal Inspections shall forward a copy to the Commission and to
the Planning Director of the City.
B.
Within 10 business days from receipt by the Commission or a designee
of the Commission of an application for a demolition permit, the
Commission or a designee of the Commission shall make determination
of whether or not the building or structure is a regulated building
or structure, and if the Commission or a designee of the Commission
determines that the building or structure is regulated by this article,
the Commission or a designee of the Commission shall also determine
within the same 10 business days whether or not the building or
structure may be an historically significant building or structure.
C.
If the Director of Municipal Inspections does not receive the opinion
of the Commission or a designee of the Commission in regard to these
determinations within 10 business days of the date of the receipt of the
application by the Commission or a designee of the Commission, then,
subject to the provisions of the Historic Districts Act as provided in
this article, the Director of Municipal Inspections may grant the permit
applied for.
D.
If the Commission or a designee of the Commission determines that
the building or structure is not regulated by this article, or is not
historically significant, the demolition permit application shall be
signed as approved by the Commission or a designee of the Commission
and returned to the Director of Municipal Inspections. Upon receipt
of such, the Director of Municipal Inspections may, subject to the
requirements of the building code and any other applicable laws, issue
the demolition permit.
E.
If the Commission or a designee of the Commission determines that
the building or structure may be an historically significant building
or structure, the Commission or a designee of the Commission shall
review the application for demolition at a public hearing to be held
within 20 business days of determination that the subject building
or structure may be an historically significant building or structure.
The Commission or a designee of the Commission shall cause to be
published in a newspaper of local circulation notice of the date and
place of such public hearing. Such notice shall specify the address of
the subject building, and shall be published in said newspaper at the
expense of the applicant once during each of the two weeks preceding
the date of such public hearing.
F.
No less than five business days before the public hearing, the applicant
for the demolition permit shall submit to the Commission three copies
of a demolition plan which shall include the following:
A map showing the location of the building or structure to be
demolished on its property and with reference to the neighboring
properties.
(1)
G.
§ 168-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-7
1:231
§ 168-8. Notice. [Amended 2-19-2004 by Ord. No. 24]
Notice of a hearing or determination provided for in this article shall be sent
by the Commission to the owner of record, the applicant for the demolition
permit (if different from the owner of record), the immediate abutters to
the subject property, the Director of Municipal Inspections, and to such
other persons and organizations in such manner as the Commission may
determine appropriate. The Commission may require that the applicant
maintain on the building which is subject of a demolition permit application
notice, in a form designated by the Commission, visible from the nearest
(2) Photographs of all street facade elevations.
A description of the building or structure, or part thereof, to be
demolished.
(3)
The reasons for the proposed demolition and data supporting said
reason or a brief description of the proposed reuse of the property
on which the building or structure to be demolished is located.
(4)
After said public hearing, the Commission shall, within 10 business
days, determine whether or not the subject building or structure is
(1) historically significant; and (2) a preferably preserved building or
structure, and notify, in writing, the applicant and the Director of
Municipal Inspections of its determination, stating the reasons for such
decision.
H.
If the determination is that the subject building or structure is both
historically significant and preferably preserved, the Director of
Municipal Inspections shall not issue a demolition permit for a period of
12 months from the date of such determination, unless the Commission
informs the Director of Municipal Inspections, in writing, prior to the
expiration of the twelve-month period, that:
The Commission is satisfied that the applicant has made a bona
fide, reasonable, and unsuccessful effort to locate a purchaser for
the building or structure who is willing to preserve, rehabilitate or
restore the building or structure; or
(1)
The applicant has agreed to accept a demolition permit according
to certain conditions approved by the Commission.
(2)
I.
No permit for demolition of a building determined to be a preferably
preserved building shall be granted until all plans for future use and
development of the site have been filed with the Director of Municipal
Inspections and have been found to comply with all laws pertaining
to the issuance of a building permit. All approvals necessary for the
issuance of such building permit, including, without limitation, any
necessary zoning variances or special permits, must be granted and all
appeals from the granting of such approvals must be concluded, prior
to the issuance of a demolition permit under this section.
J.
§ 168-7 BEVERLY CODE § 168-8
1:232
public way, of any hearing on the subject matter or such application; and
applicant shall comply with such requirement.
§ 168-9. Emergency demolition. [Amended 2-19-2004 by Ord. No.
24]
Nothing in this article shall be construed to derogate in any way from the
authority of the Director of Municipal Inspections derived from Chapter
143 of the General Laws. However, before acting pursuant to this article,
the Director of Municipal Inspections shall make every reasonable effort
to inform the Chairperson of the Historic Districts Commission of his
intentions to issue a demolition permit before it is issued.
§ 168-10. Historic Districts Act.
Nothing in this article shall be deemed to conflict with the provisions of
the Historic Districts Act, Massachusetts General Laws Chapter 40C, with
respect to requirements of notice, hearing and issuance by the Commission
of a certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability or a
certificate of hardship prior to demolition of any building in an historic
district. Any temporary building erected or maintained in an historic district
pursuant to a certificate issued by the Commission may be demolished in a
manner consistent with the terms of such certificate.
§ 168-11. Enforcement; violations and penalties. [Amended
1-8-2003 by Ord. No. 33; 2-19-2004 by Ord. No. 24]
The Director of Municipal Inspections is specifically authorized to
institute any actions, in law or in equity, as he or she deems necessary
to obtain compliance with the requirements of this article or to prevent
a threatened violation thereof.
A.
Any owner of a building determined by the Commission to be a
preferably preserved historic building or structure who caused the
building to be demolished without first obtaining a demolition permit in
accordance with the provisions of this article shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $300. Each day the violation exists shall constitute a
separate offense until a faithful restoration of the demolished building
is complete or unless otherwise agreed to by the Commission.
B.
No building permit shall be issued with respect to any premises upon
which a building or structure subject to this article has been voluntarily
demolished in violation of this article for a period of two years after
the date of the completion of such demolition, to be determined by the
Director of Municipal Inspections. As used herein, "premises" includes
the parcel of land upon which the demolished significant building was
located.
C.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, whenever the Commission shall, on
its own initiative, or on the application of the landowner, determine
that earlier reconstruction, restoration or other remediation of any
D.
§ 168-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-11
1:233
demolition in violation of this article better serves the intent and
purpose of this article, it may, prior to the expiration of said period
of two years, consent to the issuance of a building permit, upon such
conditions as the Commission deems necessary or appropriate to
effectuate the process of this article, and may so notify the Director of
Municipal Inspections.
Upon the determination by the Commission that a building is a
preferably preserved building, the owner shall be responsible for
properly securing the building if vacant, to the satisfaction of the
Director of Municipal Inspections. Should the owner fail to secure the
building, the loss of such building through fire or other cause shall be
considered demolition for the purpose of this article.
E.
§ 168-11 BEVERLY CODE § 168-11
1:234
Chapter 192
LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shellfish — See Ch. 232.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 253.
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 274.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 168-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-11
1:235

Part 1
Licenses And Business Regulations
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 192-1. Authority to grant licenses and permits; term; revocation.
§ 192-2. Fees generally.
Fees set forth for licenses or permits shall be paid to the City Clerk at
the time of the application therefor and such fees shall be returned if the
licenses or permits are refused.
The City Council shall grant such licenses or permits as are required
by this chapter in accordance with the provisions of law applying to the
same.
A.
All licenses or permits provided by this chapter shall be issued by the
City Clerk and shall expire on the 30th day of April annually unless
otherwise provided by law, and may be revoked or annulled at any time,
for cause, by the City Council.
B.
Revocation due to unpaid fees. If any tax payable to the City remains
unpaid 50 days after its due date, and the delinquent taxpayer holds
a license or permit issued by the City Council or any office, officer or
board, the City Treasurer-Collector may request the City Council or
such office, officer or board to revoke or suspend such license or permit
in accordance with law.
C.
§ 192-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-2
1:237

ARTICLE II
Denial, Revocation or Suspension for Failure to Pay Taxes
[Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 429]
§ 192-3. List of delinquent taxpayers.
The City Finance Director shall annually furnish to each department, board,
commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensing authority,"
that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of
any persons, corporation, or business enterprise, hereinafter referred to as
the "party," that has neglected or refused to pay any other local taxes, fees,
assessments, betterments, or other municipal charges, who have not paid
said local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments, or other municipal charges
for over a twelve-month period. This article shall not apply to any party who
has filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement of such tax or
has a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board.
§ 192-4. Authority to deny, revoke or suspend.113
The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license or permit,
including renewals and transfers, of any party whose name appears on
said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector or
with respect to any activity, event or other matter which is the subject
of such license or permit and which activity, event or matter is carried
out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real
estate owned by any party whose name appears on said list furnished
to the licensing authority from the Tax Collector; provided, however, that
written notice is given to the party and the Tax Collector, as required by
applicable provisions of law, and the party is given a hearing, to be held
not earlier than 14 days after said notice. Said list shall be prima facie
evidence for denial, revocation or suspension of said license or permit to
any party. The Tax Collector shall have the right to intervene in any hearing
conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension.
Any findings made by the licensing authority with respect to such license
denial, revocation or suspension shall be made only for the purposes of
such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other
proceeding at law, except for any appeal from such license denial,
revocation or suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or
revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the license
authority receives a certificate issued by the Tax Collector that the party is
in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments,
betterments or other municipal charges, payable to the municipality as the
date of issuance of said certificate.
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 192-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-5
1:239
§ 192-5. Exceptions.114
This article shall not apply to the following licenses and permits:
Open burning MGL c. 48, § 13
Sales of articles for charitable purposes MGL c. 101, § 33
Children work permits MGL c. 149, § 69
Clubs, associations dispensing food or
beverage licenses
MGL c. 140, § 21E
Dog licenses MGL c. 140, § 137
Fishing, hunting, trapping licenses MGL c. 131, § 12
Marriage licenses MGL c. 207, § 28
Theatrical events, public exhibition permits MGL c. 140, § 181
§ 192-6. Payment agreements.
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement,
thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating
said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license
shall be conditioned upon the satisfactory compliance with said agreement.
Failure to comply with said agreement shall be grounds for the suspension
or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder is
given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law.
§ 192-7. Waiver.
The City Council may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds
there is no direct or indirect business interest by the property owner, its
officers or stockholders, if any, or members of his immediate family, as
defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on
said property.
114. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 192-5 BEVERLY CODE § 192-7
1:240
Part 2
Licensed Businesses
ARTICLE III
Automatic Amusement Devices
§ 192-8. Purpose and applicability.
The provisions of this article establish and regulate the use of automatic
amusement devices in the City, excluding coin-operated music machines.
§ 192-9. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AUTOMATIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any mechanism whereby upon the
deposit therein of a coin or token any apparatus is released or set in motion
or put in a position where it may be set in motion for the purpose of playing
any game involving, in whole or in part, the skill of the player, including, but
not exclusively, such devices as are commonly known as "pinball machines"
or "electronic video machines," excluding coin-operated music machines,
including any other similar machine or device, as defined in MGL c. 140,
§ 177A.
SCHOOL — Any educational institution, public, private, secular, or
parochial, which offers instruction of high school grade or below and which
is accredited by the State Department of Education.
§ 192-10. Licenses. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 446]
A license shall be required before any premises may operate an
automatic amusement device in the City.
A.
All applications shall be filed with the City Clerk on such form as the
City Council may from time to time prescribe, with the fee set forth to
be paid to the City Clerk at the time of the application, and such fee
shall be returned if the license is refused.
B.
The City Clerk shall issue such license upon a majority vote of the City
Council.
C.
Licenses shall be renewable on the last day of December of each year.
Renewals must be issued by the City Clerk, with submission to the City
Council.
D.
The applicant shall be the owner or manager of the establishment
requesting the license.
E.
All applications must list the vendor or owner of the automatic
amusement device to be placed upon the premises.
F.
§ 192-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-10
1:241
§ 192-11. Operating conditions.
There shall be no more than two machines allowed per any premises,
except in compliance with Subsection I of this section.
G.
All applications for automatic amusement devices for three or more
such machines at any one location not licensed to dispense alcoholic
beverages must have a public hearing before the Committee on Legal
Affairs of the City Council. Such public hearing must be advertised,
by legal notice, by the applicant, at least 10 days prior to any public
hearing in one newspaper of general circulation. The applicant must
forward a copy of the legal notice to the abutters of the premises where
the automatic amusement devices are to be located. Such notification
is to be by registered or certified mail.
H.
Any existing licensee with two or more automatic amusement devices
legally upon his premises must comply with all provisions of this section
if an application for additional automatic amusement devices is filed
with the City Clerk.
I.
In acting on each application for an automatic amusement device
license, the City Council shall consider whether the granting of such
license would be consistent with the general good, order and welfare of
the City. The Board shall consider, among other things:
Whether maintenance of automatic amusement devices could
affect traffic and pedestrian congestion.
(1)
Whether maintenance of automatic amusement devices is
consistent with the best economic and social interests of the area.
(2)
Whether maintenance of automatic amusement devices would
unreasonably increase the level of noise in the area.
(3)
Whether maintenance of automatic amusement devices would
unreasonably increase the incidence of illegal or disruptive conduct
in the area.
(4)
Whether maintenance of automatic amusement devices would
otherwise significantly harm the general good, order and welfare
of the immediate area in which the premises are located.
(5)
J.
Automatic amusement devices licensed under this article shall be so
installed on the premises as to be in open view at all times while in
operation and shall at all times be available for inspection. All machines
shall have the owner's or vendor's name, address and telephone
number attached in clear view.
A.
No person keeping or offering for operation or allowing to be kept or
offered for operation any automatic amusement device shall permit the
same to be used for the purpose of gambling.
B.
§ 192-10 BEVERLY CODE § 192-11
1:242
§ 192-12. Violations and penalties.115
Any violation of the provisions of this article shall result in the revocation of
all licenses to operate automatic amusement devices at such premises for
a period of one year from the date of violation. Any violation of this article
shall result in a fine of up to $200. Any licensee found to be in violation
of any provision of this article shall be granted a public hearing before the
Legal Affairs Committee of the City Council upon written request.
No machine shall be operated by persons 16 years of age or younger
while City public schools are in session from the hours of 7:00 a.m. to
2:00 p.m., weekdays only.
C.
No person under the age of 21 years may operate an automatic
amusement device which is located on premises licensed to dispense
alcoholic beverages. The preceding shall not apply in circumstances
where the individual under the age of 21 years is accompanied by his
parent or guardian, provided that such parent or guardian consents to
the operation of such device by such individual.
D.
Any machine which is in violation of this section may be confiscated
from the premises by the Chief of Police.
E.
No provision of this article shall authorize or permit or be construed as
authorizing or permitting the keeping, maintaining, possessing, using
or operating in the City of any contrivance or device otherwise
prohibited by law.
F.
Any such automatic amusement device lawfully in existence and
properly licensed by the City Clerk and operating prior to the effective
date of this article shall not be denied renewal of such existing license
without just cause.
G.
115. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 192-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-12
1:243

ARTICLE IV
Fortune Tellers
§ 192-13. License required.
No person shall engage in the business of palmistry, fortunetelling,
phrenology, card reading, astrology and like enterprises unless he first
obtains a license therefor.
§ 192-14. Issuance of license; fee.
All licenses required by this article shall be granted by the City Council,
which shall require the licensees to pay a fee therefor.
§ 192-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-14
1:245

ARTICLE V
Junk and Secondhand Dealers
§ 192-15. License required; revocation. [Amended 6-21-2011 by
Ord. No. 98]
No person who makes a business of purchasing or purchasing and selling,
or who keeps a place of business in the City for purchasing or purchasing
and selling, either gold or silver, collectible domestic or foreign coins,
collectible domestic or foreign currency, stamps, other precious metals, art
objects, paintings, jewelry, rugs or other secondhand items such as antiques
and/or furniture, junk, electronics, tools or old metals, shall engage in such
business or open such place of business for such purposes unless licensed
by the City Council. The City Council may revoke such licenses at pleasure.
For the purposes of this Article V, "collectible coins and/or collectible
currency" shall mean any coin or currency for which the shopkeeper pays
more or less than face value (domestic coin or currency) or pays more or
less than the value at the rate of exchange on the date of the transaction
(foreign coin or currency).
§ 192-16. Record of purchases. [Amended 6-21-2011 by Ord. No.
98]
§ 192-17. Dealing with minors.
No dealer in junk, old metals or secondhand items shall directly or indirectly
purchase or receive by way of barter or exchange such goods, or allow such
Every keeper of a shop in the City for the purchase, sale or bartering of
the goods described in § 192-15 shall keep a permanent record in the
English language detailing the date of transaction, name of customer,
telephone number of customer, name of shop, description of items,
including make, model number, serial number, color, size, markings/
engravings, and the amount paid to the customer.
A.
In addition thereto, such shopkeeper shall:
Require the person selling such articles to provide one form of
photo identification issued by a government agency. A copy of such
photo identification shall be made and maintained with said book
as part of his records.
(1)
Make and maintain a photograph of all items purchased and keep
said photograph with said book as part of his records.
(2)
B.
Said book and the photocopies and photographs required hereby shall
at all times be open to the inspection of the Mayor, the City Council
or any individual City Councilor, police officers of the City of Beverly
or State Police or to any other person authorized by the Mayor or City
Council to make such inspection.
C.
§ 192-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-17
1:247
goods to be deposited upon or within his premises, shop or vehicle, by any
minor, knowing or having reason to believe him to be such.
§ 192-18. Merchandise retention period. [Amended 2-13-2006 by
Ord. No. 12; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 98]
No such item purchased or received by any dealer or keeper of a shop shall
be removed from the City or sold or otherwise disposed of nor its identity
changed until at least 30 days from its date of purchase have elapsed unless
permission in writing has been obtained from the Chief of Police or his
designee, who may request to observe or photo such item. All items shall be
held in the condition received for the duration of the retention period.
§ 192-19. Identification sign required.
Every keeper of a shop for the purchase, sale or barter of junk, old metals or
secondhand items in the City shall put in a suitable and conspicuous place
in his shop a sign having his name and occupation legibly inscribed thereon.
§ 192-20. Examination of shop and items.
The shop and all items of merchandise referred to in this article, and any
place, vehicle or receptacle used for the collection or keeping of such items,
may be examined at all times by the Mayor and City Council, or by any
police officer of the City, or by any person authorized by the Mayor or City
Council to make such examination.
§ 192-21. Hours of operation. [Amended 2-13-2006 by Ord. No. 12;
5-2-2016 by Ord. No. 081]
The shops referred to in this article shall be closed from 10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m. of the following morning, and no keeper of such shop shall purchase or
sell any of the items mentioned in this article during such hours.
§ 192-22. Business location.
No dealer in junk, old metals or secondhand items shall carry on his
business in any other place than that designated in his license, unless a
consent to his removal is granted by the City Council.
§ 192-23. Vehicles to be licensed and numbered.
No vehicle shall be used for the collection of junk, old metals, rags or
secondhand items unless licensed by the City Council. Every such vehicle
shall bear conspicuously the owner's name and the number of the license
on the outside, and on each side.
§ 192-17 BEVERLY CODE § 192-24
1:248
§ 192-24. Identification of new material. [Amended 10-17-2016 by
Ord. No. 212]
Any person engaged in a business under such license that also offers for
sale or rent new goods shall label, place, or designate goods so that new
goods are clearly distinguishable from used or secondhand goods.
§ 192-25. Storage of inflammables.
Every person licensed under this article shall store all rags, paper or other
inflammable material in a building constructed of fireproof material.
§ 192-26. City Clerk to keep list of dealers.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a list of the dealers in the items
mentioned in this article, and of the places wherein the business is carried
on.
§ 192-27. Required reporting to Police Department. [Amended
6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 98]
Simultaneously with the entry of information required by § 192-15 into
a permanent record in a form prescribed by the Police Department, the
keeper of a shop for the purchase and sale of gold or silver, collectible
coins, collectible currency, stamps, other precious metals, art objects,
paintings, jewelry, antiques, electronics, or tools shall forward
electronically, not later than Friday of every week, to the Chief of Police
of the City or his designee a copy of such entry. If delivery cannot
be made electronically for whatever reason, the copy of the above
transaction shall be hand delivered to the Chief of Police or his designee
not later than Friday of every week.
A.
In addition thereto such shopkeeper shall:
Forward digital photographs of all purchased or pawned items of
a quality acceptable to the Police Department electronically to the
Police Department on a daily basis. Photos shall be accompanied
by a form prescribed by the Police Department describing items
in said photos and shall also contain an image of the governmentissued
identification used in the transaction. Acceptable quality
photos must be in focus, the item must be identifiable, photo size
shall be no smaller than six inches by 4.5 inches (432 pixels by 324
pixels; file size 32 kilobytes) and no larger than 11 feet by seven
inches (792 pixels by 527 pixels; file size 130 kilobytes); a scale
must be included in the photograph.
(1)
Submit to the Police Department on a weekly basis a spreadsheet
prescribed by and available from the Police Department. The
spreadsheet shall include the date of transaction, name of
customer, telephone number of customer, name of shop,
description of items, including make, model number, serial number,
(2)
B.
§ 192-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-27
1:249
§ 192-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-13-2006 by Ord. No.
12; 6-21-2011 by Ord. No. 98]
color, size, markings/engravings, and amount paid/loaned to
customer.
Failure to comply with any requirement of this article shall result in a
fine of $100 for the first offense and a fine of $300 for any second or
subsequent offense. Each item purchased by the shopkeeper and which
transaction fails to fully comply with the requirements of this Article V
shall constitute a separate offense.
A.
Nothing in this section shall abrogate the right of the City Council
to revoke any license issued under this Article V at its pleasure in
accordance with § 192-15 herein or MGL c. 140, § 54.
B.
§ 192-27 BEVERLY CODE § 192-28
1:250
ARTICLE VI
Lodging Houses
§ 192-29. License required; term.
A license shall be required for any premises to operate as a lodginghouse, as
defined by MGL c. 140, § 22, as amended. Such license shall expire on the
31st day of December in each year, but it may be granted during December
to take effect during the following year, as provided in § 192-30.
§ 192-30. Applications.
Renewal applications for licenses required under the provisions of this
article shall be sent to all record holders of lodginghouse licenses on
September 15 of each year by the City Clerk. An application shall be
provided to new applicants by the City Clerk, upon request. Completed
renewal applications, together with the fee required, shall be returned to
the City Clerk by October 15 following the receipt of such application. The
completed new application, together with the fee, shall be returned to the
City Clerk within 30 days of receipt.
§ 192-31. Inspection period.116
The City Clerk shall send copies of renewal applications for licenses issued
under the provisions of this article to the Director of Municipal Inspections,
the Director of the Board of Health, the Fire Chief and the Inspector of
Wires/Electrical Inspector when he sends them to the renewal applicant
on September 15. The Fire Chief, the Director of Municipal Inspections,
the Director of the Board of Health and the Inspector of Wires/Electrical
Inspector shall schedule simultaneous inspections of renewal applicants for
the period between October 15 and November 15. Inspection of a new
applicant's premises shall occur within 60 days after the receipt of the
completed application by the City Clerk.
§ 192-32. Reports of inspections; renewal licenses.117
Upon completion of their inspections of the lodginghouses, but in any
event by November 15 in the case of renewals, the Director of Municipal
Inspections, Fire Chief, Director of Public Health and Inspector of Wires/
Electrical Inspector shall each forward a written report to the City Clerk,
recommending renewal or nonrenewal of the licenses, or granting or not
granting of a new license. The City Clerk shall present the completed
applications, evidence of payment of the fee and reports by December 7 to
the City Council. Renewal licenses shall be granted only upon a majority
vote of the City Council after review of the reports and full payment of the
fee.
116. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
117. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 192-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-33
1:251
§ 192-33. Issuance of license.
The City Clerk shall issue the license applied for under this article after the
City Council grants such license, but in any event by December 31 in the
case of renewal licenses and within 30 days of granting in the case of new
licenses.
§ 192-34. Revocation of license.
Licensed lodginghouses that are not in compliance with all relevant code
requirements shall be brought to the immediate attention of the City
Council for its review and action. The Board, in its discretion, may
immediately revoke the license, upon majority vote, if in its opinion there
is a public health or public safety emergency. In the case of less serious
violations, it may schedule a public hearing upon publication and notice to
the licensee and at such public hearing vote to revoke the license.
§ 192-33 BEVERLY CODE § 192-34
1:252
ARTICLE VII
Pawnbrokers
§ 192-35. License required; number; revocation; term. [Amended
3-28-1997 by Ord. No. 91]
The City Council may license suitable persons to carry on the business of
pawnbrokers in the City, subject to the laws of the commonwealth, and may
revoke such licenses at pleasure. The City Council shall not issue more than
one license for every 50,000 inhabitants. All licenses shall continue in force
until the first day of May following the granting of such license. Whenever
such a license is revoked, the City Clerk shall note the revocation upon the
face of the record thereof and shall give written notice to the licensee in
person or leave it at the place of business designated in the license.
§ 192-36. Duties of City Clerk; contents of license; location of
business.
Every license required under the provisions of this article shall be signed
by the City Clerk and shall be recorded by him in a book kept for that
purpose before being delivered to the licensee. Such license shall set forth
the name of the person licensed, the nature of the business, and the building
or place in which it is to be carried on. The licensee shall not conduct the
pawnbroker business in a building or place other than that designated in
the license, unless consent is granted by the City Council.
§ 192-37. Bond required. [Amended 2-19-1991 by Ord. No. 70A]
The licensee shall, at the time of receiving such license, file with the
authorities who issue the license a bond in the sum of $300 with two
sureties approved by such authorities and conditioned for the faithful
performance of the duties and obligations pertaining to the business so
licensed.
§ 192-38. Recordkeeping. [Amended 4-10-2003 by Ord. No. 79]
Every person licensed to carry on the business of pawnbroker shall
keep a book at his place of business in which he shall, at the time of
making a loan, enter in the English language a detailed description
of every article purchased or taken in pawn at the time of receiving
it, particularly describing any prominent or descriptive marks, and the
name, age, and residence (by street and number) of the person from
whom, and the day and hour when, he purchased it, and the amount
paid therefor or loaned thereon, including the monthly interest rate for
such loan, and the number of the pawn ticket.
A.
Every pawnbroker shall photograph any person pawning or pledging
articles and shall keep such photographs with said books as part of his
records.
B.
§ 192-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-38
1:253
§ 192-39. Dealing with minors prohibited; time of sale; daily report
to Chief of Police.
No pawnbroker shall, directly or indirectly, receive any article in pawn of
any minor, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe him to be such;
and no article received in pawn shall be sold until the expiration of the time
and in the manner provided by statute. Every pawnbroker shall make out
and deliver at the office of the Chief of Police each day before the hour of
12:00 noon a legible and true copy of all entries made during the 24 hours
ending at 8:00 a.m. of the same day in the record book required to be kept
by § 192-38.
§ 192-40. Right of entry.
The Chief of Police or the City Council, or any police officer authorized by
either of them, may at any time enter upon any premises used by a licensed
pawnbroker for the purposes of his business, ascertain how he conducts his
business and examine all articles taken in pawn or kept or stored in or upon
such premises, and all books and inventories relating thereto. Any person
who willfully hinders, obstructs or prevents such officers from entering such
premises or making such examination shall be punished as provided by
statute.
§ 192-41. Maximum rates of interest; extra charges prohibited.
[Amended 4-10-2003 by Ord. No. 79; 10-22-2003 by Ord. No. 293]
§ 192-42. Firearms. [Amended 4-10-2003 by Ord. No. 79]
Articles deposited in pawn with a licensed pawnbroker shall, unless
redeemed, be retained by him on the premises in accordance with MGL
c. 140, § 71.
C.
Licensed pawnbrokers may not charge more than:118
For loans up to and including $25: 5% per month (and each fraction
thereof at the same rate).
(1)
For loans over $25: 3% per month (and each fraction thereof at the
same rate).
(2)
A.
No such pawnbrokers shall charge or receive any greater rate of
interest, and interest shall be determined on the precise sum advanced.
B.
No pawnbroker shall make or receive any extra charge or fee for
storage, care or safekeeping of any goods, articles or thing pawned with
him.
C.
No pawnbroker shall loan money secured by deposit or pledge of a
firearm, rifle, shotgun or machine gun.
A.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 192-38 BEVERLY CODE § 192-42
1:254
§ 192-43. Stolen property. [Amended 4-10-2003 by Ord. No. 79]
If any goods or articles pawned or pledged and in the possession of a
pawnbroker are subsequently determined to be stolen property by a
member of the Beverly or State Police Department, or if the rightful owner
identifies property in the possession of a pawnbroker and the property
so identified is confirmed to be stolen goods by a member of the Beverly
or State Police Department, upon direction by the Beverly or State Police
Department, said property shall be forthwith returned to the rightful owner
or delivered to such member of the Beverly or State Police Department at
no cost to such owner.
No pawnbroker shall hold a license to sell, rent, or lease a firearm,
rifles, shotguns, or machine guns.
B.
§ 192-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-43
1:255

ARTICLE VIII
Peddlers and Hawkers; Canvassers and Solicitors
[Amended 1-7-1991 by Ord. No. 42; 12-10-1992 by Ord. No. 81;
12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 243; 10-19-2015 by Ord. No. 449]
§ 192-44. Definitions.
The following words shall, for the purpose of this article, have the following
meanings:
HAWKER AND PEDDLER — Any person, either principal or agent, who
goes from town to town or from place to place in the same town selling or
bartering, or carrying for or barter or exposing therefor, any goods, wares
or merchandise, either on foot or on or from any animal or vehicle.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Includes without limitation each individual
dwelling unit.
SOLICITATION OR CANVASSING — Traveling by foot, motor vehicle or any
type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street
to street, for salary, commission or other remuneration, whether on behalf
of oneself or of another person, firm or corporation and:
TRANSIENT VENDOR — Any person, either principal or agent, who
engages in any exhibition and sale of goods, wares or merchandise
temporarily in any tent, booth, building or structure and who does not
intend to become and does not become a permanent merchant in such
place. For the purposes of this article, "transient vendor" shall not include
persons who conduct what are commonly known as "yard sales."
§ 192-45. Sale of certain articles without license; registration of
solicitors and canvassers.
Selling, leasing or taking orders for the sale of any goods, wares,
merchandise or services whatsoever, including without limitation
books, periodicals, food, and home improvement services, or
attempting to so sell, lease or take orders, whether or not advance
payment on such sales is collected; or
A.
Seeking or requesting donations of money, goods, or services for any
for-profit or nonprofit entity.
B.
Any transient vendor, hawker or peddler who seeks to sell articles
referenced in this section shall obtain an identification card from the
Chief of Police. Hawkers and peddlers may sell without a license
newspapers, religious publications, ice, flowering plants, and such
flowers, fruits, nuts and berries as are wild or uncultivated; provided,
however, that such hawkers and peddlers shall record their names and
residences with the Chief of Police and receive a license number and
identification card from the Chief of Police; and provided further that
such hawkers and peddlers shall comply with the other provisions of
this article.
A.
§ 192-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-45
1:257
§ 192-46. Procedure for obtaining license or registration.
Solicitation or canvassing.
No person shall engage in solicitation or canvassing in or upon
any private residential property in the City of Beverly, and no
firm, corporation, organization or other entity shall arrange for
any person to engage in solicitation or canvassing in or upon any
residential property, without first registering with the City Clerk
and obtaining from the Chief of Police a certificate of good moral
character.
(1)
Each person engaged in solicitation or canvassing in or upon any
residential premises shall immediately leave such premises upon
the request of the occupant.
(2)
B.
Transient vendors, hawkers or peddlers. [Amended 12-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 250]
Any transient vendor, hawker or peddler who seeks to sell articles
other than those referenced as permitted to be sold without a
license as provided in § 192-45 for a period of 21 consecutive days
or more shall obtain a license from the City Council. Applicants
for hawker's and peddler's and transient vendor's licenses shall
apply to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall forward the application
to the Chief of Police for his review and recommendation and,
upon receiving the Chief of Police's recommendation, shall forward
said application to the City Council, which shall be the awarding
authority for said licenses.
(1)
(2) A fee of $100 is required upon application.
A licensee under this section may apply to add up to four additional
persons to be licensed as part of his/her license for no additional
fee. Each additional person applied for under this license shall be
required to receive the Chief of Police's recommendation. but shall
not need to be reviewed by the City Council. If a licensee seeks to
add more than four additional persons to his license, an additional
fee of $100 is required upon application and such request shall go
before the City Council. The licensee shall be held responsible for
all actions of any additional persons licensed.
(3)
A.
Solicitors or canvassers.
Any solicitor/canvasser who seeks to engage in solicitation or
canvassing in or upon any private residential property in the City
of Beverly shall register with the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall
forward the application to the Chief of Police for his or her review
and recommendation.
(1)
Each person soliciting or canvassing in the City of Beverly must
provide a copy of any materials that he/she will be distributing.
(2)
B.
§ 192-45 BEVERLY CODE § 192-46
1:258
§ 192-47. Temporary licenses.
Any transient vendor, hawker or peddler who seeks to sell articles other
than those referenced as permitted to be sold with a license as provided in
§ 192-45 for a period of 20 days or less shall obtain a temporary license from
the City Clerk. Applicants seeking a temporary license (one for a period
of less than 21 days) shall file an application with the City Clerk, together
with the application fee. The City Clerk shall forward the application to the
Chief of Police for his review and recommendation. If the Chief of Police
recommends a license be issued to the applicant, then the City Clerk shall
issue same. If the Chief does not so recommend, no license shall issue. Any
one applicant may not receive more than one temporary license for any one
calendar year.
§ 192-48. Location restrictions.
§ 192-49. Records to be kept by City Clerk.
It shall be the duty of the City Clerk to keep a record of the name and
residence of every registered by the City under this article and the
particular business for he or she is registered.
§ 192-50. Identification numbers; weighing and measuring devices.
Every hawker and peddler and transient vendor licensed by the City Council
shall be assigned a number. No person shall be assigned a number until he
presents a certificate from the Sealer of Weights and Measures stating that
all weighing and measuring devices intended to be used by such persons
have been duly inspected and sealed as required by law.
(3) A fee of $25 is required upon registration.
Transient vendors, hawkers and peddlers seeking to locate on public
streets, sidewalks, parks or any other public areas shall not impede
public vehicular and foot traffic and shall not adversely impact public
safety.
A.
Any transient vendor, hawker or peddler, who, in the opinion of the
Chief of Police or his designee, adversely impacts the safety of the
public may have his/her police identification card and license
suspended forthwith and without further notice. Such license will
remain suspended pending a hearing before the City Council pursuant
to the following subsection.
B.
Any transient vendor, hawker or peddler whose activities impede public
vehicular and foot traffic or adversely impact public safety may have
his/her license revoked by the City Council upon notice to the licensee
and a public hearing.
C.
§ 192-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-51
1:259
§ 192-51. Name and number on vehicles.
Every vehicle or other receptacle used by a licensee under the provisions of
this article shall have plainly printed on each side thereof the name of the
licensee and the number of his license.
§ 192-52. Disturbing peace; cleanliness of vehicles.
No person hawking, peddling or carrying or exposing any articles for sale
shall cry his wares to the disturbance of the peace and comfort of the
inhabitants of the City nor otherwise than in vehicles and receptacles which
are neat and clean and do not leak.
§ 192-53. Hours of sale or solicitation.
§ 192-54. Standing time.
No person shall stand or stop any vehicle upon any public way in the City
for a period of more than five minutes for the purpose of selling or offering
for sale any food, beverages or goods, wares or merchandise therein or
therefrom. The aforementioned notwithstanding, final jurisdiction of
standing time, where appropriate, shall be determined by the Chief of
Police.
§ 192-55. Health requirements.
Any hawker, peddler, or transient vendor who offers for sale food or drink
as defined by Chapter 10 of the Massachusetts Sanitary Code shall obtain
a permit from the Board of Health, and said permit shall identify any food
restrictions on items to be sold as set by the Board of Health.
Transient vendors, hawkers, peddlers, or solicitor of donations. No
transient vendor, hawker, peddler, or solicitor of donations shall sell
or offer for sale, any goods, wares, or merchandise, solicit donations
or circulate petitions in the City between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m., except that a duly licensed ice cream vehicle vendor may
sell or offer for sale any ice cream products from his vehicle in the City
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., provided he shall not use
any sounding devices between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 p.m.
A.
Solicitors and canvassers. No solicitor or canvasser shall solicit or
canvass in the City between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.
B.
§ 192-51 BEVERLY CODE § 192-55
1:260
ARTICLE IX
Shellfish and Sea Worms
§ 192-56. Permit required; location restrictions.
The City Council is hereby authorized to issue permits for the taking of sea
worms or shellfish from the flats and shores of the City; provided, however,
that no permit shall be granted to any person for the taking of shellfish or
sea worms from the flats on the westerly side of the Bass River channel and
the northerly side of the Danvers River channel, from Hall-Whitaker Bridge
to Kernwood Bridge, known as the "Salters Point" area.
§ 192-57. Residency requirement.
No permit for the taking of sea worms or shellfish shall be issued to any
person who is not a citizen of the City or a resident.
§ 192-58. Applicability.
Persons engaged in the business of selling sea worms to be used for fishing
shall be included in this section.
§ 192-59. Exception for sea worms for fishing.
Digging may take at any time sufficient sea worms for a day's fishing
without any permit, provided such taking does not exceed one quart of
worms per person.
§ 192-60. Use of electrical or mechanical device for digging
prohibited.
No person shall be permitted to take or dig sea worms by means of any
electrical appliance or other mechanical device.
§ 192-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-60
1:261

ARTICLE X
Signs
[Amended 6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 57]
§ 192-61. Sandwich board signs.
§ 192-62. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Violations of the provisions of this article shall be a warning for the first
offense and a fine of $100 for the second and subsequent offenses, with
Sandwich board signs as defined by Chapter 300, Zoning,119 must be
authorized by the City Council prior to the issuance of a sign permit
by the Director of Municipal Inspections. The City Council may issue
a permit to a business establishment for one such sign, provided such
sign meets the requirements outlined in Chapter 300, Zoning, for such
signs120 and the provisions of this section. The term of the permit
issued by the Council shall be for one year and shall be subject to
the application and/or renewal fees determined by the Director of
Municipal Inspections, and its revocation shall be subject to Subsection
B. The City Council may vote at any time to revoke any permit for
a sandwich board sign whenever, in its opinion, the sign becomes an
eyesore, a nuisance, a public safety concern, or is neglected, or when
the number of violations of the zoning and City ordinance warrant such
action in the interest of public safety and ensuring the integrity of the
City's ordinances.
A.
In cases where the City Council revokes a permit for a sandwich board
sign that is placed on City property, the City of Beverly has the authority
to immediately remove such sign from a public way.
B.
No permit for a sandwich board sign shall be issued by the City Council
unless and until the following requirements have been met:
An application packet in a form acceptable to the City Council has
been filed with the City Clerk's office;
(1)
Proof of adequate liability insurance for the duration of the permit
period is provided in a form acceptable to the City Council; and
(2)
All applicable approvals from City boards (including but not limited
to the Design Review Board) have been obtained.
(3)
C.
An application for renewal of an existing permit for a sandwich board
sign shall not require review by the Design Review Board, so long as
there are no changes being proposed to the previously approved sign
design and so long as there are no changes to any condition(s) upon
which the existing permit was issued.
D.
119. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning, § 300-5.
120. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning, § 300-66.
§ 192-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-62
1:263
each day of violation constituting a separate offense. This provision shall
be enforced by the City of Beverly Director of Municipal Inspections or
designee.
§ 192-62 BEVERLY CODE § 192-62
1:264
ARTICLE XI
Timber and Lumber
§ 192-63. License for cutting or splitting required.
§ 192-64. Public hearing.
No license required by this article shall be granted by the City Council until
a public hearing shall have been held thereon, notice of the time and place
of which hearing shall have been given, at the expense of the applicant, by
the City Clerk, not less than seven days prior thereto, in a daily newspaper
published in the City. The notice shall specify the land on which such license
is to be exercised, including street address and number, if any. The City
Clerk shall also cause notice of the hearing to be mailed to all property
owners within 300 feet of any location for which a license application is
made, not less than seven days prior to the date of the hearing.
§ 192-65. Approval of Fire Chief.
All applications for licenses made under the provisions of this article shall
be referred by the City Council, prior to the date of the hearing, to the Chief
of the Fire Department for his approval or disapproval.121
§ 192-66. Applicability to landowners.
Any person who cuts lumber or timber on his own land for his own private
use and allows the accumulation of slash, sawdust or other combustible
materials shall be subject to the penalties provided in this article.
§ 192-67. Terms and conditions of license.
In order to prevent the creation of conditions which would constitute
a fire hazard and for the prevention of fires and for the preservation
of life, no person shall cut or split timber or lumber in the City for
the purpose of sale without securing a license to do so from the City
Council.
A.
The provisions of this section shall not apply to the cutting of timber
or sale of lumber from forest lands classified under the provisions of
Chapter 61 of the General Laws as added by Acts of 1981, Chapter 768,
§ 1, approved January 2, 1982.
B.
The applicant for a license required by the provisions of this article
shall conform with all the statutes of the commonwealth relating to the
storage of inflammable and combustible materials.
A.
The accumulation of slash, sawdust or other combustible materials
shall not be allowed on the premises.
B.
121. Editor's Note: Original Section 17.13(d) of the Code of Ordinances, Grant of license, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. III).
§ 192-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-67
1:265
§ 192-68. Violations and penalties; inspections.
Failure of any person to procure a license and any violation of any of the
provisions of this article by any person shall be punishable as provided in
Article I for each and every offense. The Chief of the Fire Department is
authorized and directed to make such inspections as he deems necessary
and to investigate the existence of any conditions likely to cause fire or to
endanger public safety. He shall notify the licensee of any violation of the
regulatory provisions of this article or of existing conditions likely to cause
fire and shall order him, in writing, forthwith to cease such violation or
remedy such dangerous conditions as may exist. Such written order shall be
delivered personally to the licensee of the premises or by registered letter
addressed to him at his business address. Any licensee who fails or refuses
to comply with the order within 48 hours shall be prosecuted by the Chief
of the Fire Department. If failure or refusal of the licensee to comply with
the written order continues for seven days after notice has been given, it
shall be the duty of the Chief of the Fire Department to report such violation
or noncompliance to the City Council, in writing, with recommendation for
revocation of the license.
§ 192-69. Notice to City Arborist.
Any person not being exempt from MGL c. 132, §§ 42 and 43, under the
provisions of MGL c. 132, § 44, shall, before a permit is granted, produce
sufficient evidence that he has given notice of his intentions to cut to the
City Arborist and has received an approved plan of operations from the
Director as provided for in MGL c. 132, § 42.
The applicant shall remove any accumulation of slash and other
material immediately upon being notified by the Chief of the Fire
Department.
C.
The applicant shall file a performance surety company bond
guaranteeing that he will perform the terms and conditions set forth in
his license.
D.
The applicant shall construct and maintain a twelve-foot road in such
a manner that fire apparatus can reasonably obtain access to the site
of operations. The road shall be approved by the Chief of the Fire
Department and the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works.
E.
§ 192-67 BEVERLY CODE § 192-69
1:266
ARTICLE XII
Used Car Dealers
§ 192-70. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
COUNCIL — The City Council.
LICENSE — A Class 2 license as provided under MGL c. 140, § 58.
LICENSEE — A person licensed under the provisions of a Class 2 license to
buy and sell secondhand motor vehicles.
§ 192-71. Number of vehicles for sale. [Amended 5-19-1987 by Ord.
No. 319]
No person shall be licensed to buy and sell secondhand motor vehicles
unless he has filed with his application a statement with the Board certifying
that such business will be his principal business. If the sale of secondhand
motor vehicles is to be an auxiliary business, then the number of
secondhand motor vehicles shall be restricted to six.
§ 192-72. Plot plan required.
Any person filing an application for a license shall file with the Board a plot
plan of the premises upon which the license will be exercised. The plot plan
shall show all abutters and any buildings presently on the premises or to be
erected.
§ 192-73. Location specifications.
Every licensee shall provide a suitable place to conduct the business, which
shall include the following:
A. Graded premises surfaced with hot-topping.
A building to provide service and storage for not less than one motor
vehicle, constructed to conform with all state laws and regulations and
ordinances pertaining to the purpose for which the building is to be
used. The service and storage area of the building shall be exclusive of
any office space.
B.
A fence shall be erected along the abutting lot lines and shall not be
less than four feet high.
C.
§ 192-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-74
1:267
§ 192-74. Approval of advertising signs.122
All signs erected for the purpose of advertising the business licensed under
the provisions of this article shall be approved by the Director of Municipal
Inspections.
§ 192-75. Advertising material on cars.
No licensee shall place upon any vehicle on display or offered for sale any
signs, placards or advertising matter, except a placard not larger than 12
inches by nine inches may be placed upon a windshield to indicate the sale
price of the vehicle.
§ 192-76. Proximity of vehicles to lot line.
No licensee shall park or display any motor vehicle within five feet of any
lot line.
§ 192-77. Suspension or revocation of license.
Failure of a licensee to conform with the provisions of this article shall be
deemed cause to suspend or revoke such license.
§ 192-78. Existing licenses.
This article shall have no effect upon any licensee who was licensed on April
6, 1962, for the term of his present license or any renewals thereof for the
same premises.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 192-74 BEVERLY CODE § 192-78
1:268
ARTICLE XIII
Yard and Garage Sales
§ 192-79. License required; notification of police.
It shall be unlawful for any person, transient merchant, hawker or peddler
to vend, sell, dispose of, or offer to sell, display or dispose of, any goods,
wares or merchandise on any public walk, street, alley or anywhere within
the City on public or private property without first obtaining a license from
the City Clerk for that purpose, and having paid a license fee therefor. Prior
to any sale, the police shall be notified of such impending sale.
§ 192-80. License restrictions.
The license required by this article, or its application, shall contain the
name of partners, if a copartnership, and shall include the location or place
where such a yard or garage sale will be held. No license shall be granted to
the same person at the same premises more than twice in any given twelvemonth
period. The license shall be valid for a period of two consecutive
days.
§ 192-81. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-16-1991 by Ord. No.
166]
Violations of this article shall be punishable by a fine as follows:
§ 192-82. Signs. [Amended 6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 57]
Yard and garage sale permittees shall be allowed to erect temporary signs
for the purpose of advertising the event, provided such signs are not erected
more than 48 hours before the beginning of the yard or garage sale, and
provided they are taken down within 24 hours of the end of the yard or
garage sale. Permittees that fail to adhere to the restrictions of this section
shall be subject to the penalties in Chapter 1, Article II, of the City Code.
A. First offense: $25.
B. Second offense: $50.
Third and subsequent offenses: $75, plus a cease-and-desist order
enforced forthwith by the Police Department.
C.
§ 192-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-82
1:269

ARTICLE XIV
Christmas Trees
[Amended 11-19-1990 by Ord. No. 582]
§ 192-83. License required.
No person shall engage in the sale of Christmas trees without first obtaining
a license from the City Council and paying a license fee therefor.
§ 192-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 192-83
1:271
Chapter 201
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 117. Peace and good order — See Ch. 215.
§ 201-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SOUND-PRODUCING EQUIPMENT — Any musical instrument, radio, music
player, boom box, tape cassette, disc player, television, audio system or any
other similar type of device for the creation or reproduction of sound.
§ 201-2. Vehicle repairs, testing, and operation.
§ 201-3. Sound-producing equipment restrictions.
§ 201-4. Sound-producing equipment in motor vehicles or upon
motorcycles.
No person shall operate, repair, or test any motor vehicle or motorcycle
in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance, i.e., in a manner in
violation of MGL c. 272, § 53.
A.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject for a
first offense to a fine of $100 and for any subsequent offense to a fine of
$150.
B.
No person shall operate any sound-producing equipment upon any
public or private property in the City in a manner or at a volume so
as to disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of other persons, i.e., in a
manner in violation of MGL c. 272, § 53. This section shall apply to all
establishments operating with an entertainment license. This section
shall not apply to organized events that have received a valid permit
from the City for such event.
A.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject for a
first offense to a fine of $100 and for any subsequent offense to a fine of
$150.
B.
No person shall operate any sound-producing equipment in a motor
vehicle or upon a motorcycle or similar vehicle at such volume as to
disturb the quiet, comfort, or repose of other persons, i.e., in a manner
in violation of MGL c. 272, § 53.
A.
§ 192-83 BEVERLY CODE § 201-4
1:272
§ 201-5. Loud parties or music on residential premises.
Chapter 206
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 201. Peace and good order — See Ch. 215.
§ 206-1. Notice to property owner or manager.
The Chief of Police or his designee shall notify the owner of record and,
if different and if known, the manager of rental property within this City
of any complaints pertaining to the property or the use thereof for the
purposes of prostitution, assignation, lewdness, illegal gaming, illegal
keeping or sale of alcoholic beverages, or illegal keeping, sale or
manufacture of controlled substances. Such notification shall be directed
to said owner and/or manager for the purpose of notice to such owners/
managers pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 139, § 20.
Chapter 210
PARKS, RECREATION AREAS AND PUBLIC PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating and waterways — See Ch. 124.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 215.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject for a
first offense to a fine of $100 and for any subsequent offense to a fine of
$150.
B.
No person shall play any sound-producing equipment upon residential
premises in a manner or at a volume so as to disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of neighboring residents, i.e., in a manner in violation of MGL
c. 272, § 53.
A.
The landlord or owner of the premises, if not among the offenders, shall
receive notice of the offense.
B.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject for
a first offense to a fine of $100, for a second offense to a fine of up to
$150, and for any subsequent offense to a mandatory fine of $200.
C.
§ 201-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 206-1
1:273

ARTICLE I
Parks and Recreation Areas
[Adopted as Art. XXV of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 210-1. City Hall park.
§ 210-2. Federal Street grounds.
The plot of land now known as the "Federal Street grounds" is hereby
accepted by the City for all playground activities and is to be the official
Ward 3 grounds.
§ 210-3. Park regulations. [Amended 4-16-1991 by Ord. No. 173;
5-7-2003 by Ord. No. 40; 6-4-2003 by Ord. No. 173]
No person shall loiter or congregate in City Hall park (the area located
to the right of the City Hall, Cabot Street, Beverly) between the hours
of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
A.
No person shall enter into or upon the City Hall park and take away,
mutilate, or destroy a tree, shrub, flower, or other vegetation therein.
B.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be punished
by a fine of $25 for the first offense and $100 for each additional
offense.
C.
The Beverly Parks and Recreation Commission is the agency
responsible for the operation of all public parks in the City. As such,
the Commission offers everyone free use of all grounds within its
jurisdiction with the exception of Lynch Park and Obear Park, which
are for the free use of Beverly residents and their guests. Exceptions
to this shall be defined in the accepted rate schedule as approved by
the Commission. Admittance of vehicles to Lynch Park and Obear Park
require the display of a proper sticker indicating Beverly residency or
payment of the current parking fee.
A.
Any violation of above shall constitute trespassing. Parks will be open
from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., October 1 to March 31, and from 8:00 a.m.
to 10:00 p.m., April 1 to September 30. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 013]
B.
Violation of these rules constitutes a noncriminal violation punishable
by a fine of $100 (see Chapter 1, Article II, § 1-6, of the City Code).
[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
C.
The rules are as follows:
(1) Speed limit for any vehicle is 10 miles per hour.
(2) Use or possession of alcohol is prohibited.
D.
§ 210-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-3
1:275
Operation of any vehicle on other than paved surfaces is punishable
by a fine of $100 plus damages.
(3)
Defacing, destroying or removing seats, shrubbery, flowers or any
other piece of park equipment will be subject to prosecution.
(4)
Any ceremony inside the park must be licensed by the Commission
or its agent.
(5)
Soliciting, vending or advertising is prohibited except with
Commission permission.
(6)
(7) Dumping of waste materials or litter on the grounds is prohibited.
Throwing or batting of balls and acceptable missiles is banned
except in properly designated areas. No golf is allowed.
(8)
Proper behavior and speech is expected of all persons using these
premises.
(9)
Building or use of any edifice, structure or tent on City property is
forbidden.
(10)
No external speakers shall be used without the permission of the
Commission. Acceptable levels must be maintained.
(11)
Any physical additions, plantings or changes to any park or
playground must be with the permission of the Commission.
(12)
Anyone violating any of the above rules and regulations shall be subject
to immediate expulsion from the park.
E.
§ 210-3 BEVERLY CODE § 210-3
1:276
ARTICLE II
Camping, Storage and Open Fires on Public Property
[Adopted 12-1-2014 by Ord. No. 233 (Art. XXII, § 22.42, of the Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 210-4. Restrictions on camping and open fires.
The following activities shall be prohibited on any public property without
express written permission from the City of Beverly:
§ 210-5. Storage restrictions.
§ 210-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating this article may be arrested without a warrant by any
officer authorized to serve criminal process and may be punished by a fine
not to exceed $50 for each offense.
Camping, except in a campground duly licensed by the Board of Health
and in conformity with the regulations of such campground.
A.
B. Campfires, bonfires, or other such open fires.
It shall be unlawful for any person to store personal property, including
camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except
as otherwise provided by ordinance or by written permission of the City
of Beverly:
(1) Any park.
(2) Any street.
(3) Any public property, improved or unimproved.
A.
For the purpose of this article, "store" means to put aside or accumulate
for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a
location.
B.
§ 210-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-6
1:277

ARTICLE III
Use of Parks and Public Spaces
[Adopted 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 048]
§ 210-7. Purpose; permitting process.
§ 210-8. Permits required for certain events and activities; costs.
Purpose. Maintaining the appearance of City parks and protecting City
public spaces from damage and ensuring public access and safety is
of paramount importance, and any activity implicating these interests
shall require a permit. The purpose of permitting events and other
uses of public property under the control of the Parks and Recreation
Commission is, among other things, to maintain the physical
appearance and integrity of the City's parks and to ensure that public
spaces remain available and open for use and enjoyment by all Beverly
residents and the general public.
A.
Permits.
The Parks and Recreation Department shall maintain a uniform
permitting process for all uses of public property and spaces within
its jurisdiction and in its care. Events or activities that in any
manner use City parks or spaces to the exclusion of or precluding
other members of the public from engaging in routine and usual
recreational park activities must obtain a permit from the Director
of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee.
(1)
Unpermitted activities that either intentionally or inadvertently
transgress or interfere with any of the interests protected by this
article shall be deemed a trespass. The Director of Parks and
Recreation shall either issue a permit or take appropriate steps to
terminate the activity in order to preserve the integrity of the park
and to ensure the public's safety.
(2)
Permit applications shall be made available through the
appropriate City department. Permit applications shall be
completed and filed with the Director of Parks and Recreation or
his/her designee. Said application shall also require the approval
of the Chief of Police pursuant to § 270-3 of the City Ordinances
if there is a likelihood of traffic or streets being impacted by the
permitted event.
(3)
B.
Any demonstration, rally, event, activity, or other gathering either
expected to or that may result in drawing a crowd that will in any
manner or for any period of time preclude use of park property by other
members of the public shall require a permit issued by the Director of
Parks and Recreation.
A.
The Director of Parks and Recreation shall not unreasonably withhold
such a permit. In reviewing the permit application, the Director shall
B.
§ 210-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 210-8
1:279
§ 210-9. Events or activities requiring license agreements.
Events including weddings, concerts, movie sets or other commercial
activity engaged in upon public parks or other public spaces shall require
a permit from the Director of Parks and Recreation or his/her designee. In
addition, such events may require a license agreement in the discretion of
the Director of Parks and Recreation in coordination with the Purchasing
Department and in accordance with Parks and Recreation regulations or
other City policy or practice.
consider the impact of the proposed demonstration, rally, event,
activity, or other gathering upon the physical condition and integrity
of the public space, the number of people expected to participate, the
duration of the proposed activity, the need for police details, traffic and
parking concerns, any contemporaneous events planned for the same
property and the nature of the activity in order to impose reasonable
conditions on the issuance of the permit.
The Parks and Recreation Department may charge for the actual costs
of a demonstration, rally, event, activity, or other gathering, including
but not limited to the costs of processing permits, cleanup costs, and/
or traffic control, and also may impose narrow insurance requirements.
Permit holders shall also be responsible for any wear and tear that
is anticipated based on the permitted use, excessive wear and tear
that may or may not be anticipated, and/or any damage to property,
including but not limited to the cost of restoration, replacement and/or
repair.
C.
§ 210-8 BEVERLY CODE § 210-9
1:280
Chapter 215
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Skateboards and scooters — See Ch. 236.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 253.
§ 215-1. Advertisements and notices.
§ 215-2. Playing in streets.
No person shall shoot with or use a bow and arrow, sling or air gun, play
at ball, throw a stone, snowball or other missile, or roller skate in any
street. For the purpose of this section, the term "roller skate" shall include
skateboards, scooters or any device so designed as to utilize roller-skate
parts or wheels in its construction.
§ 215-3. Auctions.
§ 215-4. Defacing public property.
No person shall deface, disfigure, defile or deform any property of the City.
§ 215-5. Drinking fountains.
No person shall place in any drinking fountain or basin of water established
in any public place any dirt, stone, ashes, rubbish, filth or foreign matter of
any kind.
No person shall post up or affix in any manner, paint, print or write,
or cause to be painted, printed or written, a notice, advertisement or
bill upon a post, pole, fence, wall or building without the consent of the
person having possession of such post, pole, fence, wall or building.
A.
No person shall injure, destroy, deface or remove any sign or notice of
the City put up, fixed or posted in any place by any officer or employee
of the City.
B.
Every auction in the City shall be conducted in accordance with the
provisions of MGL Chapter 100, and amendments thereto, and the
provisions of this section.
A.
No person shall sell, dispose of or offer for sale at public auction
between the hours of 12:00 midnight and 8:00 a.m. any gold, silver,
plated ware, precious stones, watches, clocks, jewelry, bric-a-brac,
crockery, glassware, art goods or leather goods, or articles or goods
represented as such.
B.
§ 210-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-6
1:281
§ 215-6. Barriers required during excavations.
§ 215-7. Gambling.
§ 215-8. Trespass in gardens.
No person shall enter into or upon any plot of ground in the City which
is under cultivation as a garden, unless such person is the owner of the
vegetables and plants of such garden or has permission from such owner;
provided, however, that if the garden belongs to any person whose only
interest in the plot of ground is that of a mere licensee, the owner or lessee
of the ground whose consent to plant the garden was necessary shall have
the right of access to and from the property at any time.
§ 215-9. Open-air fires.
No person shall kindle or maintain any open-air bonfire, rubbish fire or any
outdoor fire, or authorize any such fire to be kindled or maintained on any
property housing four or more families.
§ 215-10. Peeping or spying.
An owner of land which has been excavated shall erect barriers or take
other suitable measures within five days after such owner has been
notified in writing by the Mayor and the City Council that, in their
opinion, such excavation constitutes a hazard to public safety.
A.
Any person who violates this section shall be punished by fine of not
more than $200 as provided under MGL c. 40, § 21(19).
B.
Prohibited in streets. No person shall expose in any public street or
place any table or device of any kind fitted for any game of chance or
hazard, and no person shall play at any such table or device or at any
unlawful game in any street or way.
A.
Prohibited in City buildings. No gambling shall be allowed in any
building belonging to the City.
B.
No person shall enter upon premises of another for purposes of
committing any wanton or malicious act for the purpose or with
intention of invading the privacy of another by peeping into the
windows of a house or spying on any person residing therein.
A.
Nothing contained in this section shall be construed to abridge nor in
any way limit the right of a police officer to enter upon private property
nor to perform any act necessary in the performance of his official
duties.
B.
§ 215-6 BEVERLY CODE § 215-11
1:282
§ 215-11. Profanity.
No person shall use indecent, profane or insulting language in any street or
public place or building or near any dwelling house or other building to the
annoyance or disturbance of any person.
§ 215-12. Placing or depositing snow or ice into streets or
sidewalks. [Amended 6-20-1994 by Ord. No. 35]
No person shall place or deposit any ice or snow on any street or sidewalk.
§ 215-13. Vehicles on sidewalks.
No person shall drive, wheel, propel or draw along any sidewalk or footpath
any vehicle, except children's carriages or sleds drawn by hand; provided,
however, that a driver of a vehicle may drive upon any sidewalk at a
permanent or temporary driveway.
§ 215-14. Loitering. [Amended 7-2-1990 by Ord. No. 377]
§ 215-15. Access to Beverly Golf and Tennis Club property
restricted. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
Access to the Beverly Golf Course shall be restricted to players, guests,
and authorized persons only. Offenders of this section shall be subject to
penalties provided under Chapter 1, Article II, Fees and Fines, of the City
Code and MGL Chapter 266.
§ 215-16. Nighttime limitation on retail sale of food. [Amended
5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 159; 12-15-2005 by Ord. No. 255]
No person shall loiter or habitually congregate in any street, lane, alley
or public place in the City or in any schoolyard, park, playground,
beach or the public pier between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 8:00
a.m. unless the premises have been designated as a place of assembly
by the persons in charge of such premises. Any person found loitering
or habitually congregating in such an area after the prescribed time
may be arrested, without warrant, by any officer authorized to serve
criminal process.
A.
Any person found in the act of violating Subsection A may be arrested
without a warrant by any officer authorized to serve criminal process.
B.
Any person found in the act of violating Subsection A shall be punished
by a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $25.
C.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect the nighttime
tranquility of the City of Beverly residents from disturbances due to the
late-night operation of retail food stores.
A.
Restrictions. No store, place of business or person whose building
housing said place of business is within 65 feet of a structure used for
B.
§ 215-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 215-16
1:283
§ 215-17. Retail marijuana establishments; limits. [Added 1-7-2019
by Ord. No. 211B]
The number of marijuana retailers, as defined in Chapter 300, § 300-5,
within the City shall be limited to no more than 20% of the number of
licenses issued within the city for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages not
to be drunk on the premises where sold under Section 15 of Chapter 138
of the General Laws. Marijuana retailers lawfully operating shall not be
barred by this section from continuing to do so in the event that there is
a reduction in the number of aforementioned licenses after such marijuana
retailer receives all necessary state and local approvals.
Chapter 227
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 130.
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 143.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 249.
Water — See Ch. 282.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 375.
Board of Health regulations — See Ch. 400.
residential dwelling purposes shall sell any food at retail between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m.
Definitions. The term "food" as used in this section shall include any
article or commodity, however stored or packaged, intended for human
consumption, and shall include alcoholic beverages to be consumed off
the premises at which they are sold, unless any other law or permit or
license granted to the seller of such beverages shall otherwise provide.
C.
Exceptions. This section shall not apply to the sale of food or alcoholic
beverages to be consumed on the premises at which they are sold or to
be consumed off the premises on which they are sold when such sale
is by a licensed pharmacy or by a licensed common victualer primarily
engaged in the sale of food to be consumed on such premises.
D.
Penalty. Persons found guilty of violating this section shall pay a fine of
$100. For purposes of this section, each separate sale shall be deemed
a separate offense. In the event of sale of several items or articles at
one time to one customer, only one sale shall be deemed to have taken
place.
E.
§ 215-16 BEVERLY CODE § 215-17
1:284
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 227-1. Laying and maintenance.
The Mayor and City Council may lay, make and maintain all such main
drains or common sewers as they adjudge to be necessary for the public
convenience or the public health through any of the streets or ways of
the City, and through the lands of any person, and may repair the same
whenever it is necessary. Main drains and common sewers so laid shall be
the property of the City, and all drains and common sewers in a street or
highway shall be substantially made or repaired with brick, stone or with
such other materials and in such manner as the Mayor and City Council may
direct.
§ 227-2. Responsibility for connections, service and repairs;
determination of need.
§ 227-3. Sewer connection license.123
The City Council shall grant sewer connection licenses as required by this
chapter as recommended by the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works and also approved by the Mayor. All work
performed by the contractors will be inspected and approved or
disapproved by representatives of the Department of Public Services.
§ 227-4. Preparation of plans.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
shall, whenever any main drain or common sewer is ordered to be built,
ascertain its depth, dimensions and mode of construction, distance from
street lines and general direction, and insert the same on plans of sewerage
Responsibilities of property owner. Commencing at the sewer line, all
sewer connections, sewers, sewer services and sewer maintenance
shall be the responsibility of the property owner.
A.
Responsibilities of building owner; work to be performed by person
licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and by the City of
Beverly Engineering Department. All sewer repairs or sewer
replacements between the street line and property building will be the
responsibility of the owner of the building.
B.
Responsibility of City Department of Public Services. All sewer repairs
or sewer replacements between the main sewer line and street line will
be the responsibility of the Department of Public Services.
C.
Need. The need of such work will be determined by the Director of
Public Services.
D.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 227-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-4
1:285
on file in his office. He shall from time to time ascertain and insert on the
plans the particular location of all private drains entering into such main
drain or sewer.
§ 227-5. Duties of Director; appropriations.
All main drains and sewers owned or constructed by the City, and all
property connected therewith, shall be under the care of the Director
of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works, and all
appropriations for sewer connections shall be expended under the direction
of such Commissioner.
§ 227-6. Drains entering main drains or common sewer; fee.
§ 227-7. Gasoline and explosives.
No gasoline or other explosive or inflammable substance shall be caused or
allowed to enter directly or indirectly any common sewer or other public
drain.
§ 227-8. Brine and injurious substances.
No brine or other injurious substance shall be caused or allowed to be
emptied directly or indirectly into any public catch basin.
§ 227-9. Assessments.
Permit required. No person shall enter his particular drain into any
main or common sewer without a permit in writing from the Director
of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works, which
permit, the application therefor, and the granting thereof shall be in
such form and under such regulations as the Commissioner may
prescribe, and any person to whom such permit shall be granted shall
pay therefor the sum of $100, payable to the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works.
A.
Construction. Any particular drains entering any main drain or common
sewer shall, so far as the same shall be constructed within the limits
of any street or way, be built of such materials, of such size and in
such a manner as the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works may direct.
B.
Generally. When a main drain or common sewer is laid in any street or
way of the City, the City Council shall assess upon owners of estates
abutting on such street or way the cost thereof, based upon the
estimated average cost of the sewers in the sewerage system adopted
by the City by the following fixed uniform rate: $1.50 per foot of
frontage which such estates have upon any street or way where a sewer
is constructed, and $0.015 per square foot of area which such estates
contain within 100 feet from such street or way; provided, however,
that no assessment in respect to any such estate, which by reason of
A.
§ 227-4 BEVERLY CODE § 227-9
1:286
its grade, level or any other cause cannot be drained into such sewer,
shall be made, certified or notified by the Director of Engineering
until such incapacity is removed. Such assessment shall be ascertained,
assessed and certified by the City Council to the Board of Assessors
for assessment, and notice thereof shall be given to the party to be
charged, or his tenant or lessee.
Exception. Any drain or sewer laid in any land or way, public or private,
which is opened or proposed to be opened for public travel and
accommodation, shall be a main drain or common sewer, and if such
drain or sewer is laid in a public or private way or land at the expense
of the owner thereof, his land shall not be assessed for such drain
or sewer, except for the cost of connecting it with common drains or
sewers already established.
B.
Estates abutting on more than one street. When estates abut upon more
than one street or way, assessment for sewers based upon frontage
shall be assessed upon the frontage of one such street or way and upon
so much of such other street as is not exempted by the City Council; and
the City Council may exempt from assessment so much of the frontage
on such other street as it may deem just and equitable.
C.
Assessments to constitute lien. Assessments so made hereunder shall,
for two years after they have been committed to the Treasurer-
Collector for collection, constitute a lien on the real estate assessed,
and may, together with incidental costs and expenses, be levied by sale
of such real estate if the assessment is not paid within three months
after a written demand for payment made either upon the person
assessed or upon any person occupying the estate, such sale to be
conducted in like manner as sales for the payment of taxes; provided,
however, that if any owner of real estate within 30 days after notice
of a sewer assessment thereon, or of any charges made for entering
or using any public sewer, notifies in writing the Board of Assessors
to apportion the same, such Board shall apportion the same into such
number of equal parts, not exceeding 10, as the owner shall in the
notice state. The Assessors shall add one of such parts with interest
to the annual tax of such real estate each year next ensuing, until
all such parts have been so added. Such assessments or charges or
apportionments thereof shall constitute a lien upon the real estate,
and may be collected according to the provisions of law made for
the collection of taxes upon real estate. All liens for the collection
of such assessments or charges shall continue until the expiration of
two years from the time when the last installment is committed to the
Treasurer-Collector, and interest shall be added to all such assessments
or charges until they are paid, provided that nothing herein contained
shall be constructed to prevent the payment at any time in one payment
of any balance of such assessment or charges then remaining unpaid,
notwithstanding a prior apportionment.
D.
Extension of time payment. The City Council may extend the time of
payment of assessments upon estates not built upon, when requested
E.
§ 227-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-9
1:287
by the owner, until built upon or for a fixed time, provided that interest
at a rate of 4% per annum shall be charged or paid annually upon the
assessment from the time it was made, and in such case the assessment
shall be paid within three months after such estate is built upon or after
the expiration of such fixed time.
§ 227-9 BEVERLY CODE § 227-9
1:288
ARTICLE II
Sewer Use
§ 227-10. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meanings of terms
used in this article shall be as follows:
BOD (denoting BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of
oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under
standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C., expressed in
milligrams per liter.
BUILDING DRAIN — That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage
pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer,
which begins five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building
wall.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the building drain to the public
sewer or other place of disposal.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage.
DIRECTOR — The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works of the City, or his authorized deputy, agent, or
representative.
DISTRICT — The South Essex Sewerage District.
DISTRICT SEWER — Sewer lines, appurtenances, and other works owned
and operated by the South Essex Sewerage District.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food, and from the handling, storage, and sale of
produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — The liquid wastes from industrial manufacturing
processes, trades, or businesses, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
NATURAL OUTLET — Any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or
other body of surface water or groundwater.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions in
grams per liter of solution.
PLUMBING INSPECTOR — The Plumbing Inspector of the Department of
Municipal Inspections of the City.124
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree
that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally
prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch (1.27
centimeters) in any dimension.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 227-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-10
1:289
PUBLIC SEWER — A sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have
equal rights, and which is controlled by public authority, or a sewer laid in
any land or way, public or private, open or proposed to be opened for public
travel.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwaters are not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of the water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions, and industrial establishments, together
with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwaters as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — Any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating sewage.
SEWAGE WORKS — All facilities for collecting, pumping, treating, and
disposing of sewage.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage, or industrial waste which in
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds, for
any period of duration longer than 15 minutes, more than five times the
average twenty-four-hour concentration or flows during normal
operation.125
STORM DRAIN (sometimes termed "STORM SEWER") — A sewer which
carries stormwater and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage
and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of, or are in
suspension in, water, sewage, or other liquids, and which are removable by
laboratory filtering.
WATERCOURSE — A channel in which a flow of water occurs, either
continuously or intermittently.
§ 227-11. Unlawful tampering with sewage works.
No unauthorized person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break,
damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with any structure,
appurtenance, or equipment which is a part of the sewage works.
§ 227-12. Power and authority of inspectors.
The Director and Plumbing Inspector, and other duly authorized
employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection,
observation, measurement, sampling, and testing in accordance with
the provisions of these regulations. The Director and Plumbing
Inspector, or his representative, shall have no authority to inquire into
any processes, including metallurgical, chemical, oil, refining, ceramic,
A.
125. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 227-10 BEVERLY CODE § 227-12
1:290
§ 227-13. Violations and penalties.
§ 227-14. Building sewers and connections.
paper, or other industries beyond that point having a direct bearing
on the kind and source of discharge to the sewers or waterways or
facilities for waste treatment.
The Director and Plumbing Inspector, and other duly authorized
employees of the City, bearing proper credentials and identification,
shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the
City holds a duly negotiated easement for the purposes of, but not
limited to, inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, and
maintenance of any portion of the sewage works lying within the
easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on the easement
shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly negotiated
easement pertaining to the private property involved.
B.
Any person found to be violating any provision of this article, except
§ 227-11, Unlawful tampering with sewage works, shall be served by
the Director or Plumbing Inspector with written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the
satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
such time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations.
A.
Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for in Subsection A or § 227-11, Unlawful tampering with
sewage works, without the necessity of written notice, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor and, on conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
of $50 for each violation. Every day during which any such violation
shall continue shall be deemed a separate offense; such offense may be
prosecuted by indictment or complaint before a District Court. Such a
fine shall be in no way any defense to the proceedings by the Director or
Plumbing Inspector for enforcement of any such order or regulations,
by injunction or otherwise, or any complaint or prosecution under MGL
Chapter 266 for malicious mischief or malicious damage to property.126
B.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall become
liable to the City for any expense, loss, or damage occasioned the City
by reason of such violation.
C.
Permit required. No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any
connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer
or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from
the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works, or his authorized deputy, agent, or representative.
A.
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 227-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-14
1:291
Authority of Director. No person shall lay or connect a sewer in any
land or way, private or public, open or proposed to be opened for the
public travel, or connect any such sewer to an existing sewer, except by
authority of the Director.
B.
Permit application; form; fee. The owner or his agent shall make
application on a special permit form furnished by the City Plumbing
Inspector, if work is being performed in the building to within 10
feet of the building, or the Engineering Department, if work is being
performed outside of the building to the sewer main. The permit
application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other
information considered pertinent, in the judgment of the Commissioner
and Plumbing Inspector, for services to commercial buildings and
establishments producing industrial wastes.127
C.
Costs and expenses of connections. All costs and expenses incident to
the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by
the owner. The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage
that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the
building sewer and maintenance thereof.
D.
Separate sewers. A separate and independent building sewer shall be
provided for every building.
E.
Old building sewers. Old building sewers may be used in connection
with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and
review by the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works and Plumbing Inspector to meet all
requirements of this article.
F.
Construction methods; compliance with technical codes; connection of
drains, downspouts.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building
sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the
pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform
to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes, or other
applicable rules and regulations of the City. In the absence of
code provisions, or in amplification thereof, the materials and
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
(American Society for Testing and Materials) and the WPCF (Water
Pollution Control Federation)128 Manual of Practice No. 9, shall
apply.
(1)
Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the
building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings
in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to
the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain
(2)
G.
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
128. Editor's Note: Now the Water Environment Federation.
§ 227-14 BEVERLY CODE § 227-14
1:292
§ 227-15. Use of public sewers.
shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building
sewer. The owner shall hold the City free from any claim for
damage from the backflow of sewage due to malfunction or
stoppage within or due to such building drain.
No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, exterior
foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface
runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain, which
in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer.
(3)
The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall
conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing codes,
or other applicable rules and regulations of the City, or the
procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
(American Society for Testing and Materials) and the WPCF (Water
Pollution Control Federation)129 Manual of Practice No. 9. All such
connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Any deviation
from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved
by the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works and Plumbing Inspector before installation.
(4)
Inspection upon connection to public sewer. The applicant for the
building sewer permit shall notify the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works when the building sewer
is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The
connection shall be made under the supervision of the Director and the
Plumbing Inspector, or their duly appointed representatives.
H.
Barricades; restoration of disturbed public property. All excavations for
building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades
and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks,
parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work
shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the City.
I.
Prohibited discharges. No person shall discharge or cause or allow
to be discharged into any sewers under the control of the City or
any sewer tributary thereto within the South Essex Sewerage District
the following described substances, materials, waters or wastes if it
appears likely, in the opinion of the City, that such wastes can harm
either the sewers, sewage treatment process, or equipment, have an
adverse effect on the receiving waters, or can otherwise endanger
life, limb, public property, or constitute a nuisance. In forming its
opinion as to the acceptability of these wastes, the City and the South
Essex Sewerage Board will give consideration to such factors as the
quantities of wastes in relation to the flows and velocities in the sewers,
nature of the sewage treatment plant, capacity of the sewage treatment
plant, degree of treatability of wastes in the sewage treatment plant,
A.
129. Editor's Note: Now the Water Environment Federation.
§ 227-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-15
1:293
materials of construction of the sewers, and other pertinent factors.
The substances prohibited are:
(1) Any liquid or vapor having a temperature higher than 150° F.
Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease, or oils, whether
emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing substances
which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 32°
F. and 150° F.
(2)
Any garbage that has not been properly shredded. The installation
and operation of any garbage grinder equipped with a motor of
three-quarters horsepower or greater shall be subject to the review
and approval of the Commissioner and Plumbing Inspector.
(3)
Any waters or wastes containing strong acid iron pickling wastes
or concentrated plating solutions, whether neutralized or not.
(4)
Any waters or wastes containing iron, chromium, copper, zinc,
and similar objectionable or toxic substances; or wastes exerting
an excessive chlorine requirement to such degree that any such
material received in the composite sewage at the sewage treatment
works exceeds the limits established by the South Essex Sewerage
Board for such materials.
(5)
Any waters or wastes containing phenols or other taste- or odorproducing
substances in such concentrations exceeding limits
which may be established by the South Essex Sewerage Board
as necessary, after treatment of the composite sewage, to meet
the requirements of the state, federal, or other public agencies or
jurisdiction for such discharge to the receiving waters.
(6)
Any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life or concentration
as may exceed limits established by the South Essex Sewerage
Board in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
(7)
(8) Any waters or wastes having a pH in excess of 9.5.
Materials which exert or cause:
Unusual concentrations of inert suspended solids (such as, but
not limited to, fuller's earth, lime slurries, and lime residues) or
of dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride
and sodium sulfate).
(a)
Excessive discoloration (such as, but not limited to, dye wastes
and vegetable tanning solutions).
(b)
Unusual BOD, chemical oxygen demand, or chlorine
requirements in such quantities as to constitute a significant
load on the sewage treatment works.
(c)
(9)
§ 227-15 BEVERLY CODE § 227-15
1:294
Unusual volume of flow or concentration of wastes constituting
a "slug" as defined in this article.130
(d)
Waters or wastes containing substances which are not amenable
to treatment or reduction by the sewage treatment processes
employed, or are amenable to treatment only to such degree that
the sewage treatment plant effluent cannot meet the requirements
of other agencies having jurisdiction over discharge to the
receiving waters;
(10)
Any sewage, drainage, substances, or wastes containing caustic
lime, calculated as CaCO3 (calcium carbonate), in excess of 75 mg/
l.
(11)
No person shall discharge or cause or allow to be discharged,
directly or indirectly, into any sewer under the control of the City or
any other sewer tributary thereto within the South Essex Sewerage
District, any of the following described waters or wastes:
Any gasoline, benzene, naphtha, fuel oil, or other flammable or
explosive liquid, solid, or gas.
(a)
Any waters or wastes containing toxic or poisonous solids,
liquids, or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or by
interaction with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any
sewage treatment process, constitute a hazard to humans or
animals, create a public nuisance, or create any hazard in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant.
(b)
Any waters or wastes having a pH lower than 5.5, or having
any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or
hazard to structures, equipment, and personnel of the sewage
works.
(c)
Solid or viscous substances in quantities or of such size
capable of causing obstruction to the flow in sewers, or other
interference with the proper operation of the sewage works,
such as, but not limited to, ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw,
shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood,
unground garbage, whole blood, paunch manure, hair and
fleshings, entrails, paper dishes, cups, milk containers, buffing
dust, or waters or wastes containing suspended solids in
excess of 500 mg/l.
(d)
Any stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff,
subsurface drainage, cooling water, uncontaminated cooling
water, or unpolluted industrial process water which the State
Division of Water Pollution Control determines is sufficiently
(e)
(12)
130. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 227-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-15
1:295
free from contamination to permit its discharge into the
nearest stream, drain or watercourse.
Options of City regarding admission into system of hazardous waste.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or proposed to be
discharged into any sewers under the control of the City or any
sewer tributary thereto within the South Essex Sewerage District,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics
enumerated in prohibited discharges section of this article, and
which in the judgment of the City and the South Essex Sewerage
Board may have deleterious effects upon the sewerage works,
processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which otherwise
create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the City may:
(a) Reject the wastes.
Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge
to the public sewers.
(b)
(c) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
Require payment to cover the added costs of handling and
treating the wastes not covered by existing taxes or sewer
charges under the provisions of Subsection G of this section.
(d)
(1)
If the City permits the pretreatment or equalization of waste flows,
the design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be
subject to the review and approval of the Commissioner and
Plumbing Inspector, and subject to the requirements of all
applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
(2)
B.
Traps and separators. Garages and other establishments, where wastes
containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable waste, sand
or other harmful ingredients can be discharged and are connected,
directly or indirectly, with public sewers, shall be provided with a
suitable trap or separator. All traps or separators shall be of a type and
capacity approved by the Director of the Division of Water Pollution
Control or his authorized representative, and shall be located so as to
be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
C.
Maintenance of facilities. Where preliminary treatment or flowequalizing
facilities are provided for any waters or wastes, they shall be
maintained continuously in satisfactory and effective operation by the
owner at his expense.
D.
Required control manhole. When required by the Director and
Plumbing Inspector, the owner of any property serviced by a building
sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control
manhole, together with such necessary meters and other
appurtenances, in the building sewer to facilitate observation,
sampling, and measurement of the wastes. Such manhole, when
E.
§ 227-15 BEVERLY CODE § 227-15
1:296
§ 227-16. Appeals.
required, shall be accessibly and safely located, and shall be
constructed in accordance with plans approved by the Director and
Plumbing Inspector. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his
expense, and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible
at all times.
Compliance with Standard Methods; sampling. All measurements, tests
and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which
reference is made in this article shall be determined in accordance with
the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association,
and shall be determined at the control manhole provided, or upon
suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that
no special manhole has been provided, the control manhole shall be
determined by the Commissioner. Sampling shall be carried out by
customarily accepted methods to reflect the effect of constituents upon
the sewage works, and to determine the existence of hazards to life,
limb and property. (The particular analyses involved will determine
whether a twenty-four-hour composite of all outfalls of a premises is
appropriate, or whether a grab sample or samples should be taken.
Normally, but not always, BOD and suspended solids analyses are
obtained from twenty-four-hour composites of all outfalls, whereas pHs
are determined from periodic grab samples.)
F.
Agreements allowing acceptance of unusual-strength wastes. No
statement contained in this article shall be construed as preventing any
special agreement or arrangement between the City and any industrial
concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character
may be accepted by the City for treatment, subject to payment therefor
by the industrial concern.
G.
Any owner aggrieved by the refusal of the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works to issue a sewer permit,
or aggrieved by an order of the Director of Engineering, Commissioner
of Public Services, Public Works issued in accordance with this article,
shall have the right to review such refusal or decision of the Director
with the Committee on Public Services, such review to be requested
in writing within five days of the receipt by the owner of the decision
or refusal; the Committee shall issue a final decision after review, and
shall establish and direct that the decision of the Director shall stand,
or revise the decision of the Director, or remand the decision of the
Director for further investigation, or revoke the decision of the Director
and render an appropriate decision in writing in accordance with this
article.
A.
An owner aggrieved by a decision of the Director of Public Health or
Plumbing Inspector rendered in accordance with this article shall have
the right to a review of such refusal or decision, so far as it pertains to
the Board of Health, by notifying the Chairman of the Board of Health
B.
§ 227-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 227-16
1:297
in writing within five days of the receipt of the decision of the Plumbing
Inspector or the Director of Public Health, and the Board shall issue
a decision after review and shall establish and direct that the decision
of the Director shall stand, or review the decision of the Director, or
remand the decision of the Director for further investigation, or revoke
the decision of the Director and render an appropriate decision in
writing in accordance with this article.
§ 227-16 BEVERLY CODE § 227-16
1:298
Chapter 232
SHELLFISH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating and waterways — See Ch. 124. Seaworms and shellfish — See Ch. 192, Art.
IX.
§ 232-1. Closed season.
§ 232-2. Size of clams.
No person shall take or have in his possession clams less than two inches
in longest diameter to the amount of more than 5% of any one batch,
provided that it shall not be unlawful to take such clams or have the same
in possession under the authority of a permit therefor which the Mayor and
City Council may grant for replanting for seed purposes in waters of flats
within the commonwealth.
§ 232-3. Digging hours.
All permits giving authority to dig clams shall be on the condition that no
clams shall be dug from any flats in the City from one hour after sunset to
one hour before sunrise of any day.
§ 232-4. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall prosecute any person who violates the law or
the provisions of this chapter governing the taking of clams from the flats
controlled by or under the authority of the City.
§ 232-5. Clam permits.
The Director of Public Health is hereby authorized and empowered to
declare a closed season on any and all flats in the City for such period
as he may deem advisable.
A.
No order, however, closing any part of the clam flats shall become
effective until after three days' notice has been given by advertising,
such advertisement giving the location closed. When any flats which
have been closed are about to be opened for public digging, no such
digging in such flats shall be permitted until notice of such opening has
been advertised for at least three days.
B.
Authorized. The Mayor and City Council are hereby authorized to grant
clam permits. All applications for clam permits shall be submitted to the
Legal Affairs Committee for its investigation before the same are acted
upon by the Mayor and City Council.131
A.
§ 227-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 232-5
1:299
Chapter 236
SKATEBOARDS AND SCOOTERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, recreation areas and public
property — See Ch. 210.
Use on streets — See Ch. 215, § 215-2.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 253.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
§ 236-1. Motorized scooters, skateboards and similar vehicles.
[Amended 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 161]
§ 236-2. Skateboarding. [Amended 6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 123]
To whom granted. No clam permit shall be granted except to a nativeborn
or naturalized citizen of the United States. No such permit shall
be granted to any person who was not an actual resident of the City
on January 1 of the year in which the application is made. If, however,
a person who has a legal settlement in the City may become a public
charge unless such permit is granted, this rule may be suspended if in
the judgment of the Mayor and City Council it is for the best interest of
the City to do so.
B.
Term. All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
terminate on the first day of June in each year.
C.
Revocation. The Mayor and City Council are authorized and empowered
to revoke any permit for the digging of shellfish for any violation of this
chapter.
D.
No person shall operate a motorized scooter, motorized skateboard,
or other similar motorized motor vehicle on any public way, sidewalk,
playground, or on any property owned by the City of Beverly. The
following vehicles shall be exempt from the provisions of this section:
(1) Vehicles licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(2) Vehicles used by handicapped persons.
(3) Landscaping equipment.
A.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject for a
first offense to a fine of $25 and for any second or subsequent offense
to a fine of $50.
B.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 232-5 BEVERLY CODE § 236-2
1:300
Chapter 244
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 159.
Trees — See Ch. 261.
Board of Health regulations — See Ch. 400.
No person shall drive, wheel, propel or ride upon a skateboard within
any playground, within 100 feet of any public building or upon any
property owned by the City of Beverly except public ways and except
within facilities that are specifically designated by the City as
skateboard parks.
A.
Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject for
a first offense to a fine of $25 and for any subsequent offense to a fine
of $50. Any skateboard used in violation of this section shall be subject
to confiscation and destruction by the Police Department of the City of
Beverly.
B.
§ 236-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 236-2
1:301

ARTICLE I
Dumpsters
[Adopted as Art. XIV, §§ 14.01 and 14.02, of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 244-1. Dumpster regulations.
Dumpster regulations for the storage and transportation of garbage,
rubbish or other substances are established as follows:
§ 244-2. Construction or alteration projects. [Amended 4-18-1989
by Ord. No. 156]
Location generally. Each dumpster must be located at a minimum
distance of 10 feet from the lot line so as not to interfere with the safety,
convenience or health of abutters or residents.
A.
Obstruction of traffic flow. Each dumpster must be situated so as not to
obstruct the flow of traffic.
B.
Enclosures and screening. When deemed necessary by the Board of
Health, a dumpster site may be required to be enclosed or screened/
shielded by the property owners or authorized agent.
C.
Hours of filling. A dumpster is not to be filled between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in residentially zoned areas nor after the close
of the business day for all types of business properties. All lids are to be
closed and made secure when the dumpster is not in use.
D.
Capacity and size; pickup schedule for apartment buildings. Each
dumpster shall be of sufficient size and capacity to eliminate
overflowing. Routine weekly scheduled pickups shall be mandatory for
apartment buildings.
E.
The property owner, tenant, occupant or authorized agent of the
premises utilizing the services must notify the contractor at least 24
hours in advance for an additional call-in for pickup which may be
necessary to prevent overflowing.
F.
Whenever and for whatever reasons deemed necessary, including
repeated violations, the Board of Health may order dumpster capacity
size changed and/or additional pickups.
G.
The property owner, tenant, occupant or authorized agent utilizing a
dumpster service must make known to the Board of Health the name
and telephone number of the person responsible for maintaining the
dumpster and dumpster area and notifying the contractor to empty
contents when full. Any changes in the name of the person(s) shall be
reported to the Board of Health forthwith.
H.
Any person(s) maintaining a dumpster on private property for purposes
other than for domestic rubbish (i.e., construction debris such as, but
not limited to, brick, earth, plaster, lathing, roofing materials, siding,
A.
§ 244-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-2
1:303
lumber, plumbing fixtures) shall keep such dumpster(s) off all public
ways, including City sidewalks.
No dumpster used for construction/alteration projects in residential
areas shall be in use for more than a thirty-day period without written
approval of the Board of Health.
B.
Dumpster permit required; fee. The property owner, tenant, occupant
or authorized agent responsible for maintaining the dumpster service is
required to have a permit from the Board of Health for each dumpster.
This permit requirement shall not apply to any homeowner using a
dumpster under the provisions of Subsection B above. The responsible
party shall apply for a permit by filing an application at the Board of
Health office, and the information shall include the owner's address,
telephone number, address of the property being serviced, the name
and telephone number of the contact person in charge at the property
site and any other information deemed necessary by the Board of
Health. All permits shall expire December 31 of every year and may be
renewed annually on application as provided.132
C.
Permit required for dumpster service; fee. No contractor, firm or person
shall supply a dumpster service in the City for the purpose of storage,
removal or transporting of garbage, rubbish or other offensive
substances, as well as rubbish, trash, debris and other material,
including scrap, without first obtaining a permit from the Board of
Health. All permits shall expire on December 31 of every year and may
be renewed annually on application as provided. Notwithstanding the
provisions that may be in conflict with the Massachusetts General Laws
and the revised ordinances of the City, this permit requirement shall be
binding upon all parties concerned.133
D.
Maintenance; dumpster pads. It shall be the responsibility of the
property owner, tenant, occupant or agent being serviced to maintain
the dumpster and dumpster area free of all nuisances, including, but
not limited to, insects, rodents, offensive odors, leaking conditions,
scattered debris, and overflowing conditions.
The dumpsters shall be free of any holes and dumpsters provided
with drain plugs shall be properly fitted with a plug.
(1)
Dumpster pads may be required to be installed if the Board of
Health deems it necessary upon inspection of the dumpster site.
(2)
E.
Display of contractor name and telephone number. The contractor shall
have its name and telephone number conspicuously displayed on the
dumpster.
F.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 244-2 BEVERLY CODE § 244-2
1:304
Hours of removal of dumpster contents. No contractor shall remove
dumpster contents prior to 7:00 a.m. nor later than 8:00 p.m.
G.
Deodorizing, washing and sanitizing. The dumpster contractor shall
have the dumpster deodorized when emptied or, if necessary, washed,
steamed, and/or sanitized as directed by order of the Board of Health.
H.
Spillage of garbage; cleanup required. The contractor shall not cause
nor allow spillage during removal or transportation of any garbage,
rubbish or other offensive substance and shall be responsible for any
cleanup required.134
I.
134. Editor's Note: Original Section 14.02(k) of the Code of Ordinances, Penalty for violation,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch.
1, General Provisions, Art. III). See now § 244-6 of this chapter.
§ 244-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-2
1:305

ARTICLE II
Residential Storage of Rubbish and Garbage
[Adopted 4-18-1989 by Ord. No. 156A (Art. XIV, § 14.03, of the Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 244-3. Receptacles; placement for collection.
Garbage or mixed garbage and rubbish shall be stored in watertight
receptacles with tight-fitting covers. The receptacles and covers shall be
of metal or other durable, rodentproof material. Garbage and rubbish shall
be put out for collection no earlier than 18 hours prior to collection and
removed within 18 hours after collection.
§ 244-4. Use of plastic bags.
Plastic bags shall be used to store garbage or mixed rubbish and garbage
only if as a liner in watertight receptacles with tight-fitting covers.
§ 244-5. Property maintenance.
The owner of any parcel of land, vacant or otherwise, shall be responsible
for maintaining such parcel of land in a clean and sanitary condition and
free from garbage, rubbish or other refuse. The owner of such parcel of land
shall correct any condition caused by or on such parcel or appurtenance
which affects the health or safety and well-being of the occupants of any
dwelling or of the general public.
§ 244-6. Violations and penalties for Articles I and II.
Any person(s) who shall fail to comply with the provisions of §§ 244-1
through 244-5 of this chapter shall be fined $15 for the first offense and
$25 for each succeeding offense. Each day's failure to comply with these
sections shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 244-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-6
1:307

ARTICLE III
Disposal Restrictions; Littering
[Adopted as Art. XXII, §§ 22.01, 22.04 and 22.05, of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 244-7. Abandoned refrigerators.
No person shall place or cause to be placed on his land or premises
old iceboxes, refrigerators, or other self-locking articles which when seen
would inevitably and infallibly allure children to investigate and play in such
articles, the natural and probable result of which would be either injury or
death to the children.
§ 244-8. Ashes, rubbish and yard waste. [Amended 8-1-1997 by Ord.
No. 224]
§ 244-9. Litter. [Amended 5-4-2005 by Ord. No. 104]
Spilling contents of container. No person shall willfully tip over and spill
the contents of any box, barrel or vessel containing ashes or rubbish set
upon a sidewalk.
A.
Setting upon public ways. No person shall set upon any public way any
box, barrel or vessel used for the purpose of rubbish collection except
during the period of time from 18 hours prior to collection and 18 hours
after collection.
B.
Throwing into streets and sewers. No person shall throw or place, or
cause to be thrown or placed, in or upon any street or public place, or
into any catch basin of any sewer or drain in the City any dirt, glass,
filth, garbage, shavings, rubbish, refuse or waste matter of any kind.
C.
No person shall throw, place or dump any rubbish, trash, trees,
branches, grass clippings, or other yard materials, construction debris,
or any other items on or upon any public ways or property within the
City of Beverly. No items, as described above, or other materials may be
left outside the closed gates at the Standly Street Dump or other City
facilities at any time.
D.
Any violation of this section shall be subject to a fine of not less than
$200.
E.
Whenever any public area, paved or unpaved, landscaped or
unlandscaped, adjoins private property on any street, avenue, road,
lane, court, square, way, or other similar area, no matter how named, it
shall be the duty of the lot occupier of such private property, or if such
private property shall be unoccupied, the duty of its owner, to keep such
public area free of all discarded cans and bottles, litter, debris, paper
or other refuse.
A.
§ 244-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-9
1:309
Failure by such occupier or owner to comply with this section shall in
the first instance result in a written warning; in the second instance
shall result in a fine of $100; and for any subsequent offense shall result
in a fine of $250. Each day of noncompliance with this section shall be
a separate offense.
B.
The Director of Municipal Inspections and all Health Department
agents of the City, in addition to police officers, shall be enforcing
persons for this section.
C.
§ 244-9 BEVERLY CODE § 244-9
1:310
ARTICLE IV
Recycling
[Adopted as Art. XXVIII, § 28.01, of the Code of Ordinances;
amended in its entirety 11-6-2002 by Ord. No. 332]
§ 244-10. Source separation required.
So long as the City collects or pays a contractor to collect rubbish in the
City, no rubbish shall be collected by the City or by such a contractor
from any residence, commercial establishment, municipal building, school
or any other location unless such rubbish material is first sorted and placed
for collection in separate containers according to such categories as the
Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
shall determine is necessary to enable those rubbish materials which are
recyclable under the then current state of technology, as such technology
may from time to time change, to be recycled for reclamation without
further sorting and separation of such rubbish materials.
§ 244-11. Recycling of separated materials.
Rubbish materials so sorted and separated for recycling shall, following
their collection, be recycled for reclamation.
§ 244-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RUBBISH and RUBBISH MATERIALS — All nonputrescible solid wastes
(excluding ashes) consisting of both combustible and noncombustible
wastes, such as but not limited to paper, newsprint, cardboard, glass, metal,
wood and rags.
§ 244-13. Rules and regulations.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
may from time to time make, amend and rescind such rules and regulations
as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this article.
§ 244-14. Fees.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
may, subject to the approval of the Mayor and the City Council, establish
such fees as the Director deems necessary to implement the provisions of
this article.
§ 244-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-14
1:311

ARTICLE V
Trash Removal and Disposal Fees
[Adopted 7-1-2004 by Ord. No. 184 (Art. XXVIII, § 28.02, of the Code
of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 45]
§ 244-15. Residential.
A trash fee of $100 per dwelling unit is hereby established, effective July 1,
2012, on all residential structures of six units or less. Residential structures
of more than six units currently serviced by the City of Beverly will continue
to be serviced at $100 per unit.
§ 244-16. Commercial.
A minimum fee of $300 is hereby established for all commercial entities
currently being serviced by the City of Beverly. The final fee and conditions
shall be subject to the determination of the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works, who shall establish a
written standard therefor.
§ 244-17. Discounts and waivers. [Amended 11-16-2015 by Ord. No.
481]
(Based on Boston-Cambridge-Quincy, MA-NH HUD Metro FMR Area,
Current FY Income Limits Documentation, as amended from time to time.)
Senior citizens. Any senior citizen (65 years or older) who owns and
occupies a single dwelling unit with an income of $33,050 or less for a
single adult, or $37,800 or less for two or more adults, will be eligible
for a fifty-percent discount of this fee.
A.
Hardship cases. The fee for any citizen who owns and occupies a singlefamily
home or condominium with an income of $19,850 or less for a
single adult, or $22,650 or less for two or more adults, will be waived.
B.
Eligibility. Eligibility for a senior citizen discount or hardship waiver
shall be determined by using the adjusted gross income (AGI) number
found on the IRS 1040, 1040A, or 1040EZ Form, or, if no income
tax return has been filed for tax years 2012 or 2013, equivalent
documentation of income, to be provided to the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works under the
pains and penalties of perjury. Age shall be documented by a driver's
license, birth certificate, or equivalent proof. Any resident with a "life
estate" interest in a residential property will be treated as if he and/
or she were the record owners of the property. In one-, two- or threefamily
housing types where the tenant and the homeowner both meet
the eligibility requirements for the waiver or both meet the eligibility
requirements for the discount, such waiver or discount shall be granted
to the homeowner.
C.
§ 244-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-17
1:313
§ 244-18. Lien for unpaid fees.
Any fee not paid within 60 days of the demand shall become, upon
application of the Treasurer-Collector of the City of Beverly, a lien upon the
property.
§ 244-19. Billing.
The annual fee will be collected in quarterly statements billed on the same
cycle as the subject property's water and sewer bill cycle.
§ 244-20. Increases.
This fee shall not be increased for any reason other than to offset an
increase in the incineration cost per ton ("tipping fee") or an increase in the
contractual trash removal cost; and in such cases, the trash fee may not be
increased beyond an amount equal to the increases in these costs.
§ 244-21. Exemptions.
Any person who can demonstrate and document to the satisfaction of the
Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works an
alternative lawful disposal method may apply for an exemption from the fee.
Vacancies. Any property owner who owns an unoccupied unit shall be
eligible to receive a credit for each full six-month period for which the
unit is not occupied. Property owners must provide documentation to
the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works, signed under the pains and penalties of perjury, demonstrating
that the unit was vacant during the entire six-month billing period
for which such credit is requested. Eligibility shall be determined by
the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works using a water bill or, in cases where a unit's water meter is
not separate from another unit, a letter or billing statement from the
electric company.
D.
Violations and penalties. The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works shall assess applicants a fine of not more
than $250 for submitting false documentation.
E.
§ 244-17 BEVERLY CODE § 244-21
1:314
ARTICLE VI
Bring Your Own Bag
[Adopted 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 117B135]
§ 244-22. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BIODEGRADABLE PLASTIC BAG — A bag that is capable of undergoing
biological decomposition in a compost site such that the material breaks
down into carbon dioxide, water, inorganic compounds and biomass at a
rate consistent with known compostable materials; for the purposes of this
article, "biodegradable bags" does not include paper bags.
CUSTOMER — Any person purchasing or carrying goods from a retail
establishment.
DEGRADABLE PLASTIC BAG — Plastic bags that are made from polymers
that are capable of being broken down quite readily by hydrolysis, the
process by which chemical bonds are broken by the addition of water.
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that is one-hundred-percent
recyclable and contains at least 40% post-consumer recycled content, and
displays the words "Recyclable" and "made from 40% post-consumer
recyclable content" in a visible manner on the outside of the bag.
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any business or commercial enterprise or
facility, whether for profit or not, that sells goods and/or services directly to
the customer, including but not limited to grocery stores, pharmacies, liquor
stores, convenience stores, restaurants, retail stores, pop-up retail stores,
and vendors selling clothing, food, and personal items, and dry-cleaning
services.
REUSABLE BAG — A bag that is specifically designed and manufactured
for multiple reuse and is either polyester, polypropylene, cotton or other
durable material, or durable plastic that is greater than 4.0 mils in
thickness.
SINGLE-USE PLASTIC CHECKOUT BAG — A carryout bag or checkout bag
made predominantly of plastic derived from either petroleum, natural gas,
or a biologically based source, such as corn or other plant sources, which
is provided to a customer at the point of sale and which is 4.0 mils (0.1016
mm) in thickness or less.
The term "single-use plastic checkout bag" shall not include:
Bags, whether plastic or not, in which loose produce or products
are placed by a consumer to deliver such items to the point of sale
or checkout area of a retail establishment;
(1)
(2) Laundry or dry-cleaner bags;
A.
135. Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 1-1-2019.
§ 244-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 244-22
1:315
§ 244-23. Single-use plastic checkout bags prohibited; permitted
bags.
§ 244-24. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(3) Newspaper bags;
Bags used to contain or wrap frozen foods, meat or fish, whether
prepackaged or not, to prevent or contain moisture;
(4)
(5) Reusable bags; or
(6) Recyclable paper bags.
The term "single-use plastic checkout bag" shall include:
(1) Degradable plastic bags; and
Biodegradable plastic bags that are not commercially compostable
as well as commercially compostable plastic bags.
(2)
B.
No retail establishment in the City of Beverly shall provide single-use
plastic checkout bags to any customer for the purpose of enabling the
customer to carry away goods from the point of sale.
A.
If a retail establishment provides or offers any checkout bags to
customers, such bags shall be either a recyclable paper bag or a
reusable bag.
B.
This article shall be enforced by the Public Health Director or his/her
designee. Any retail establishment that violates any provision of this
article shall be subject to the following penalty:
Upon the first documented violation of this article, the enforcement
agent shall provide the violator with a written warning of such
violation. The violator will then be entitled to a one-time thirty-day
grace period after receipt of such notice to cure such violation.
(1)
After the expiration of the one-time thirty-day grace period, the
enforcement officer is authorized to levy a fine of $50 for each
and every consecutive or nonconsecutive day that the retail
establishment is found to distribute single-use plastic checkout
bags, each day constituting a separate subsequent violation.
(2)
A.
Whoever violates any provision of this article may be penalized by a
noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
B.
§ 244-22 BEVERLY CODE § 244-24
1:316
Chapter 249
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 227.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 287 and Ch.
565.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 375.
§ 249-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the surface water bodies,
natural resources, and public and private property within the City of
Beverly from the negative impacts caused by polluted and unmanaged
stormwater runoff and activities related to development, construction
and land surface alteration and work not otherwise subject to
regulation by the Planning Board and/or the Conservation Commission.
In response to the mandates set forth under the amendments to the
Federal Clean Water Act, this chapter partially fulfills the requirement
of the Phase II National Pollution Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit in order to achieve compliance with the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency's stormwater regulations.
A.
Because stormwater discharges from a variety of sources, including
storm sewers, construction, waste disposal, earth disturbance and
resource extraction, are major causes of impairment to the water
quality of natural coastal and inland water bodies and wetland resource
areas, this chapter is designed to regulate a myriad of aspects relating
to the development or redevelopment of land as well as to detect and
eliminate illicit discharges into the City's storm drainage system.
B.
This chapter and the regulations promulgated hereunder serve to
establish minimum standards, design criteria, implementation,
guidance and enforcement to achieve the following objectives:
Establish, regulate and enforce stormwater management standards
for development and redevelopment projects by adopting and
enforcing the nine stormwater management standards set forth in
the Massachusetts Stormwater Management Policy.
(1)
Detect and eliminate illegal discharges to the municipal storm
drain system, including but not limited to sewage, process
wastewater, wash water, indoor drains, floor drains, sinks from
residential, commercial or industrial sources.
(2)
Guide, regulate and manage construction activities that render soil
exposed and vulnerable to erosion by wind and water as well as
contain and properly manage potential on-site pollutants, including
(3)
C.
§ 244-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-1
1:317
§ 249-2. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all construction, development, and redevelopment
activities that involve and/or impact stormwater discharge, soil disturbance,
altering of grades or drainage patterns not expressly exempted from it.
§ 249-3. New development and redevelopment projects.
but not limited to oils, gasoline, pesticides, paints, garbage and
sanitary wastes.
Regulate the alteration of grades/elevations of the land surface
by more than two feet to protect against damage to abutting
properties and adjacent wetlands resource areas resulting from
altered drainage patterns.
(4)
Establish a Stormwater Management Advisory Committee to work
with the Engineering Department in establishing and evaluating
rules and regulations to further clarify and implement this chapter.
(5)
Regulation of discharges to the municipal storm drainage system and
the surface waters and wetlands is necessary for the protection of
the City of Beverly's water bodies and groundwater, and to safeguard
the public health, safety, welfare and the environment. Increased and
contaminated stormwater runoff associated with developed land uses
and the accompanying increase in impervious surface is a major cause
of impairment of water quality and flow in the ocean, lakes, ponds,
streams, rivers, wetlands and groundwater, contamination of drinking
water supplies, erosion of stream channels, alteration or destruction of
aquatic and wildlife habitat, and flooding.
A.
This chapter establishes stormwater management standards for
development and redevelopment projects that disturb an acre or more
of land to minimize adverse impacts off site and downstream which
would be borne by abutters, residents and/or the general public by:
Complying with all other state and federal statutes and regulations
relating to stormwater discharges and adopting the following
standards of the Massachusetts Stormwater Policy:
Stormwater management systems must be designed so that
post-development peak discharge rates do not exceed predevelopment
peak discharge rates.
(a)
Loss of annual recharge to groundwater should be minimized
through the use of infiltration measures to the maximum extent
practicable. The annual recharge from a site post-development
should approximate the annual recharge from the preexisting
or existing site conditions, based on soil types.
(b)
For new development, stormwater management systems must
be designed to remove 80% total suspended solids (TSS).
(c)
(1)
B.
§ 249-1 BEVERLY CODE § 249-3
1:318
§ 249-4. Exemptions.136
The following activities are exempt from the provisions of this chapter:
Redevelopment of previously developed sites must meet the
stormwater management standards to the maximum extent
practicable.
(d)
All stormwater management systems must have an operation
and maintenance plan to ensure that systems function as
designed.
(e)
(2) Protecting groundwater and surface water from degradation.
(3) Promoting groundwater recharge.
Preventing pollutants from entering Beverly's municipal storm
drainage system and to minimizing discharge of pollutants from the
system.
(4)
Ensuring adequate long-term operation and maintenance of
structural stormwater best management practices so that they
function as designed.
(5)
Ensuring public safety and protecting public and private property,
surface drinking water supplies, groundwater resources,
recreation, aquatic habitats, fish and other aquatic life, property
values and other uses of lands and waters.
(6)
Requiring practices to control the flow of stormwater from new and
redeveloped sites into the Beverly storm drainage system in order
to prevent flooding and erosion.
(7)
Establishing Beverly's legal authority to ensure compliance with
the provisions of this chapter through inspection, monitoring, and
enforcement.
(8)
Normal maintenance and improvement of land in agricultural use as
defined by the Wetlands Protection Act regulation, 310 CMR 10.04.
A.
Maintenance of existing landscaping, gardens or lawn areas, provided
such maintenance does not include the addition of soil material or
alteration of existing grades.
B.
The construction of any walls and fencing that will not alter existing
terrain or drainage patterns.
C.
Construction of utilities, other than drainage (gas, water, sanitary
sewer, electric, telephone, etc.), which will not alter terrain, ground
cover, or drainage patterns.
D.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 249-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-4
1:319
§ 249-5. Illicit connections.
§ 249-6. Erosion/Sedimentation and materials management.
Projects wholly within the jurisdiction of the Conservation Commission
and requiring an order of conditions.
E.
This chapter also provides for the health, safety, and general welfare
of the citizens of Beverly by regulating stormwater discharge into
the City's storm drain system and waterways in accordance with the
requirements of the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES) permit process.
A.
The City's storm drainage system includes stormwater pipes and
drainage waterways and conveys surface water runoff to receiving
waters. Generally, runoff enters the stormwater drainage system piping
through catch basins on streets and on public and private property and
from drainage swales and ditches. No sewage discharge is allowed into
this system.
B.
The City also has a separate piped municipal sanitary sewerage system.
In order to reduce and eliminate infiltration and inflow into this system,
no storm drainage discharge is allowed into the municipal sanitary
sewer system from any source, including, but not limited to, sump
pumps and roof drainage. The sewerage system conveys wastewater
from residences and commercial and industrial establishments to the
South Essex Sewerage District wastewater treatment plant in Salem.
The City's sewerage system is regulated by Chapter 227, Sewers, of the
City Code.
C.
The objectives of this section are to:
Minimize the contribution of pollutants to the municipal storm
drainage system;
(1)
Minimize the negative impact of illicit connections and discharges
upon the City's natural resources;
(2)
Prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the municipal storm
drainage system; and
(3)
Establish legal authority to carry out all inspection, surveillance
and monitoring procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this chapter.
(4)
D.
During the construction process, soil is highly vulnerable to erosion by
wind and water. Eroded soil endangers water resources by reducing
water quality and causing the siltation of aquatic habitat for fish and
other desirable species. Eroded soil also necessitates extraordinary
maintenance and repair of storm drains and ditches and the dredging of
lakes. In addition, clearing and grading during construction cause the
loss of native vegetation necessary for terrestrial and aquatic habitat.
A.
§ 249-4 BEVERLY CODE § 249-6
1:320
§ 249-7. Drainage pattern alterations.
Many potential pollutants other than sediment are associated with
construction activities. These pollutants include pesticides, fertilizers
used for vegetative stabilization; petrochemicals (oils, gasoline, and
asphalt degreasers), construction chemicals such as concrete products,
sealers, and paints; wash water associated with these products; paper;
wood; garbage and sanitary wastes.
B.
As a result, the purpose of this section is to safeguard persons, protect
property, and prevent damage to the environment in the City of Beverly.
This section will also promote the public welfare by guiding, regulating,
and controlling the design, construction, use, and maintenance of
certain development or other activity that disturbs the topsoil or results
in the movement of earth within the City of Beverly.
C.
No person shall be granted a site development permit for landdisturbing
activity that would require the uncovering of one acre or
more (43,560 square feet) without the written approval of an erosion/
sediment control and materials management plan by the Engineering
Department. Such projects shall be required to submit an erosion/
sediment control and materials management plan with the application
when, in the opinion of the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works or his designee, the submission of such a
plan is needed to further the purpose and intent of this chapter and/or
to safeguard surrounding property and public infrastructure systems.
D.
No person shall be granted a site development permit for landdisturbing
activity that would require disturbing less than one acre but
more than 1/4 acre without the approval of an abbreviated erosion/
sediment control and materials management application by the
Engineering Department.
E.
No person shall be granted a site development permit for landdisturbing
activity that would require disturbing less than 1/4 acre
without the approval of a minor project management application by the
Engineering Department.
F.
Exemptions:
Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the
protection of life, property, or natural resources;
(1)
Repairs to any stormwater system deemed necessary by the City of
Beverly Engineering Department or its designee; or
(2)
Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a
permitted use.
(3)
G.
Changing the grading of the land surface can have an impact on
drainage characteristics of even relatively small watershed areas.
Therefore, regulating proposed grading for all projects, including minor
A.
§ 249-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-7
1:321
§ 249-8. Administration.
The Director of Engineering shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the
Director of Engineering by this chapter may be delegated in writing by the
Director to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the
employ of the City.
§ 249-9. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter or of any order or
permit issued hereunder shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and each
day during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, order
or permit is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense.
The Department or its delegated agents may issue a stop-work order to
the owner, the applicant, or the owner's or applicant's agent by certified
mail, return receipt requested, and by posting the same in a conspicuous
location on the work site. Upon conviction of any violation of this chapter,
such person shall be punished by a fine of $300 for each offense. In addition
to any penalty authorized by this section, any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be required to bear the expense of site
restoration. Nothing in this section, including the failure of the Department
or its delegated agents to issue a stop-work order, shall prevent the City
from pursuing any other remedy provided for by law, including equitable
relief, to restrain violations of this chapter.
ones, is necessary for the protection of the City of Beverly's natural
resources, and to safeguard public and private property from the
potential negative impacts due to increased peak rate run off, increase
in volume, and flooding.
A permit required by this chapter will be issued by the City Engineer to
the owner or the owner's duly authorized agent after the City Engineer
has reviewed a plan to be submitted showing the nature of the grade
change proposed, but only on such conditions, which shall be
determined by the City Engineer, that will ensure that the proposed
grade changes will not adversely affect existing drainage and
groundwater conditions that could affect the public health, safety and
welfare of any public way or adjoining real estate.
B.
It shall be unlawful for any person or other legal owner of real property
in the City to disturb the existing grade of land by more than two feet
without first obtaining the approval of the City Engineer and, where
applicable, the Conservation Commission (if the property is subject to
the Wetlands Protection Act or Chapter 287, Wetlands Protection, or
Chapter 565, Wetlands Protection Regulations, of the City Code) and
the Planning Board (if the property is being altered pursuant to a plan
subject to Chapter 375, Subdivision of Land, of the City Code).
C.
Exemption: emergency work as declared or determined by the Director
of Engineering or his designee.
D.
§ 249-7 BEVERLY CODE § 249-10
1:322
§ 249-10. Rules and regulations.
The Director of Engineering, in collaboration with the City of Beverly
Stormwater Management Advisory Committee and Stormwater
Coordinator, shall be empowered to establish rules and regulations to
govern the permitting process, including but not limited to fees, application
procedures, definitions, use of consultants, security to assure performance,
performance standards for work, and such other information the
Department and Committee deem necessary to discharge their
responsibilities. The Department and Committee may promulgate such
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter by a
majority vote of the duly appointed members of the Stormwater
Management Advisory Committee. Failure by the Department and the
Committee to promulgate such rules and regulations, or a legal declaration
of their validity by a court of law, shall not act to suspend or invalidate the
effect of this chapter.
Chapter 253
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Historic buildings and districts — See Ch.
168.
Trees — See Ch. 261.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 375.
§ 249-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 249-10
1:323

ARTICLE I
Electrical Posts, Poles and Fixtures
[Adopted as Art. XII of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 253-1. Plans for locations to be filed with City Clerk.
Any person who petitions for location of electric or other wires, poles, ducts,
conduits or manholes upon, over, through or under any public ways or over
any building shall, when such petition is filed in the office of the City Clerk,
also file a plan showing the street and number or, if there is no number,
the exact proposed location of such electric or other wires, poles, ducts,
conduits or manholes upon, over, through or under any public way or over
any building in the City.
§ 253-2. Permit from City Council for erection.
No telegraph, telephone or electric light company or any other corporation
or person shall erect any post or poles to support wires or lines for the
transmission of electricity in any public way or grounds, except by order
of the City Council, previously obtained, which shall set forth the exact
location of such post or pole proposed to be erected.
§ 253-3. Acceptance of locations.
§ 253-4. Removal of conduits and wires when required by City.
Whenever the City shall construct, enlarge, relocate, repair or alter the
streets, ways or bridges, or the sewers, water pipes or other public works,
in such streets, ways and bridges where conduits and wires are laid, which
conduits and wires, in the opinion of the City Council, should be removed or
Whenever permission shall be granted by the City Council to erect and
maintain poles, or to construct conduits or other fixtures in the public
ways, bridges or grounds, to support or carry lines, telephone wires or
for the transmission of electricity, the person to whom such permission
is granted shall, within 30 days from the date of the order granting such
permission, file in the office of the City Clerk a written acceptance of
the location of such poles, conduits or other fixtures, and the conditions
upon which the permission has been granted, and in default thereof
such grant shall be null and void.
A.
Such person may, however, at his election, file in the office of the City
Clerk a general acceptance of the location of poles, conduits or other
fixtures, and conditions upon which permission may be granted by the
City Council from time to time to the person, and such acceptance shall
constitute an acceptance of each of such orders, unless such person
shall advise the City Clerk in writing, within 30 days from the date
of the order, of his refusal to accept the locations and conditions of a
specific order.
B.
§ 253-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-4
1:325
changed in respect to their location, such removal or change shall be made
without delay at the expense of the person owning or operating the same.
§ 253-5. Permit for attaching wires to trees, buildings or fixtures.
No wire or line for the transmission of electricity for any purpose shall
be attached to any tree, building, erection or fixture of any kind, in any
public way or grounds by cross-arms or otherwise, except by permission, in
writing, of the Inspector of Wires, previously obtained, in which such tree,
building, erection or fixture shall be described.
§ 253-6. Hearing on petitions; notice.
Every petition presented to the City Council for permission to erect posts to
support wires or lines, or to attach wires or lines to trees or other fixtures,
for the transmission of electricity for any purpose, shall be accompanied
by or contain a statement of the exact location of each post proposed to
be located, and of each tree, fixture or building to which it is desired to
attach such wires or lines. The City Council, or in its discretion a committee
thereof, shall give a hearing on every petition to all parties interested,
except as to the attachment of wires and lines to fixtures other than trees.
Notice of such hearing shall be given by the City Clerk at the expense of
the petitioners to all persons owning or occupying land along the line of the
proposed location. Notice shall state briefly the streets or ways, and parts
thereof, and the lands to which such petition relates, and shall be served
by leaving an attested copy thereof at the last and usual place of abode or
business of each person, or by sending the same through the mail postpaid
and directed to each such person. Such further notice shall be given to any
parties interested as the City Council may direct.
§ 253-7. Quality and height of posts and poles; identification.
None but sound, reasonably straight, well-formed posts, smooth and free
from decay, of quality satisfactory to the Inspector of Wires, shall be erected
and maintained in any public way, bridge or grounds. Wooden poles shall
be of chestnut, cedar or hard pine, shall be not less than 25 feet above the
ground and shall be set to a depth not less than five feet, and, on corners
or dead ends where impracticable to guy, shall be set in concrete or keyed,
and the name of the company, corporation or person owning the pole and
the number thereof shall be distinctly attached thereto by means of a metal
tag.
§ 253-8. Manner of setting posts; painting.
All posts erected and maintained in the public ways for the support of wires
and other lines for transmission of electricity shall as nearly as practicable
be set and maintained in a perpendicular position, of as uniform a height as
practicable, and in line with the street or way, and shall be kept properly
painted by the owners thereof, in such colors and manner as the Inspector
of Wires may from time to time direct.
§ 253-4 BEVERLY CODE § 253-9
1:326
§ 253-9. Removal of abandoned poles and wires; transfer of
ownership.
When poles have been abandoned by the owners thereof, they shall remove
them, unless it is positively known that they will again use them within 90
days. Wires owned by others on such poles shall be removed unless the
owners of such wires assume the ownership of such poles, the same to be
transferred to them by the original owner by grant of the City Council.
§ 253-10. Time for placing or removing poles.
Except by permission of the Inspector of Wires, new poles shall not be
brought on any street more than two days in advance of the time they are to
be set; and when old poles are taken down, they shall be removed from the
street on the same day.
§ 253-11. Manner of replacing poles.
When renewing poles, the butt of the old pole shall be removed and the new
pole set in the identical or adjacent location, and the surface of the ground
around the pole shall be leveled off, filled in with material of the same kind
as the ground around the pole and left clear of all material and rubbish.
When removing or relocating poles that are set in the curbline so that a
space is left open in or between the existing curb, such shall be refilled with
cement or concrete, or with granite curbing if the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works so requires.
§ 253-12. Height of wires.
Except by permission of the City Council, no wire or other line for the
transmission of electricity, except service wires and loops to buildings, shall
be attached to any post or tree or other fixture nor run along any public
way or street at a height less than 20 feet from the ground; and except by
written permission from the Inspector of Wires, no post more than 40 feet
above the ground shall be erected for the support of such wires and lines.
Except by written permission from the Inspector of Wires, all wires from
poles to buildings, where crossing the street, shall be at a height of not less
than 20 feet from the ground.
§ 253-13. Submission of plans for underground conduits to City
Council.
Persons conducting a telegraph, telephone, electric light or power business
may construct and maintain underground conduits for cables and wires,
together with manholes and house connections, and erect and maintain
distributing poles at the termini of conduits, at suitable distributing points,
in such streets, in such manner, of such shape, size and material, and
under such regulations as the City Council shall hereafter designate upon
application. The application shall be accompanied by a plan showing the
exact location of such conduits, manholes and poles. The City Council shall
grant a hearing on the application in the manner provided in § 253-6.
§ 253-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-14
1:327
§ 253-14. Permit for change of underground conduits.
Whenever underground conduits have once been laid in the streets and
ways of the City, they shall not be removed, relocated or changed without
permission from the City Council.
§ 253-15. Permission to tear up streets; restoration.
No street, way or bridge shall be torn up or disturbed for the purpose of
laying lines, wires or conduits or erecting, altering or removing posts, poles
or other fixtures used for carrying electric lines or wires without a permit
first obtained from the City Council, indicating the time, manner and place
of disturbance and the conditions under which such is permitted. No street,
way or bridge shall be torn up or disturbed for the purpose of repairing,
changing or removing lines, wires or conduits without a permit in writing
first obtained therefor from the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works. Whenever any opening or any disturbance
is made in any street, way or bridge, it shall be promptly restored by the
person owning or operating the lines or wires to as good a condition as
it was in before such disturbance or opening, in a manner satisfactory to
the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works.
The portion of a street, way or bridge so opened or disturbed shall be kept
in and maintained in such condition by such person for one year thereafter,
and if not immediately so restored, kept and maintained, the same may be
done by the City at the expense of such person without previous notice of
the intention to do so.
§ 253-16. Space on poles for signaling systems; permits for
brackets or side fixtures; curblines; distance from hydrants.
§ 253-17. Reservation of space in underground conduits for City
signal wires.
In any underground conduit system, such sufficient and necessary space as
shall be determined by the City Council shall be reserved free of expense to
the City for the use of fire, police and other telegraph and telephone signal
One space on all poles in public streets or ways shall be reserved for fire
alarm, police signal or other signaling systems belonging to the City,
and used exclusively for municipal purposes.
A.
No line or wire shall be attached to any pole or post by means of
brackets or other side fixtures except by written permission of the
Inspector of Wires.
B.
On streets where curbstones are set, all poles shall be erected in the
sidewalks as close as possible to the inside of the curblines, and where
there are no curbstones erected, the curbline must be established
before setting the poles.
C.
D. No pole shall be set within 10 feet of any hydrant.
§ 253-14 BEVERLY CODE § 253-17
1:328
wires belonging to the City, and used exclusively for municipal purposes.
The City, by its Inspector of Wires and other proper servants, shall be
allowed access to the conduits at all times. The City shall be allowed equal
facilities and privileges with others using the same conduits in putting in,
taking out and repairing wires.
§ 253-18. Bond of person constructing electrical lines.
Every person constructing, maintaining or operating a telegraph, telephone
or other electrical line in the City shall execute a bond, with surety
satisfactory to the Mayor, in a penal sum not less than $10,000, conditioned
to indemnify and save harmless the City against all damage, cost, expense
and loss whatsoever to which it may be subjected in consequence of the
negligence of such persons, their agents, officers and servants in any
manner arising from or growing out of the use and transmission of
electricity, the privileges permitted by the City, and the construction,
maintenance, operation and the use of lines, wires, cables, conduits, posts,
poles, structures, constructions, fixtures and apparatus. The bond shall
also be conditioned to fulfill all agreements with the City, all the lawful
orders, conditions and obligations imposed by the City Council, and all
obligations and duties required by law. A new bond of like import and with
new surety may at any time be required by the City, which new bond shall
be a strengthening bond, unless the surety on former bonds is expressly
released from further liability by vote of the City Council.
§ 253-19. Trees not to be damaged.
No electric light, telephone or telegraph company shall destroy, cut, trim
or mutilate any of the trees located on any of the thoroughfares or public
grounds of the City, except by written permission of the City Arborist, or
allow the insulation to become dangerous or to injure trees on any of the
thoroughfares or public grounds of the City.
§ 253-20. Interference with television, radio and other
communication circuits.
No person shall knowingly or wantonly operate or cause to be operated any
machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any kind whatsoever within
the City between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, the operation
of which shall cause reasonably preventable electrical interference with
television, radio and other communication circuits reception, within the
municipal limits; provided, however, that X-ray pictures, examinations or
treatments may be made at any time if the machines or apparatus used
therefor are properly equipped to avoid all unnecessary or reasonably
preventable interference with television, radio and other communication
circuits reception and are not negligently operated. This section shall not be
held or construed to embrace or cover the regulation of any transmitting,
broadcasting or receiving instrument, apparatus or device used or useful
in interstate commerce or the operation of which instrument, apparatus
or device is licensed or authorized by or under the provisions of any act
§ 253-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-20
1:329
of the Congress of the United States. The Inspector of Wires and his duly
authorized assistants shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all
reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the installation and working
of all apparatus coming within the terms of this section, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to interfere with the Inspector of Wires or his duly
authorized assistants in making such inspection or to refuse to permit him
or them to enter the premises for such purposes.
§ 253-21. Permit required for outside antenna for radio or
television.
No person shall set up, install or maintain any outside antenna system
for the purpose of operating television, radio or any other similar
communications equipment without first having obtained therefor a written
permit from the Inspector of Wires.
§ 253-20 BEVERLY CODE § 253-21
1:330
ARTICLE II
Obstructions
[Adopted as Art. XXII, §§ 22.06, 22.12 and 22.20, of the Code of
Ordinances]
§ 253-22. Rude and indecent behavior; loitering; graffiti.
§ 253-23. Fences.
§ 253-24. Signs, awnings and displays.
No person shall behave himself in a rude or disorderly manner, or use
any indecent, profane or insulting language in any street, lane, alley or
public place in the City, or near any dwelling house or other buildings
therein; or in any licensed place of public amusement, or be or remain
upon any sidewalk, or upon any doorstep, portico or other projection
from any building to the annoyance or disturbance of any person.
A.
No person, with one or more other persons, shall stand in a group or
near such a number of persons, on any sidewalk, in such a manner as
to obstruct a free passage for foot passengers, for a longer time than
10 minutes, nor in the same place, nor on the same sidewalk after a
request to move on made by any police officer.
B.
No person shall make any indecent figures, nor write any indecent or
obscene words upon any fence, building or other public place within the
City.
C.
Determination of boundary before erection. No person shall erect or
cause to be erected any fence or building on the line of any street
without first ascertaining the bounds thereof from the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works.
A.
Defacing or injury. No person shall deface, injure or destroy any fence
in the City.
B.
Projecting over sidewalks. No person shall place or maintain any
awning or shade, or frame for the same, any sign, signboard,
showboard, table, stand, booth or any goods, wares or other articles so
as to project into or upon or overhang any street or sidewalk without
written permission from the City Council, which may be revoked at
any time, unless the same shall be so located and constructed as not
to interfere with travelers, and so that the lowest part of any such
awning, shade or frame shall in no case be less than seven feet above
the sidewalk and the lowest part of any sign or signboard not less than
nine feet above the sidewalk. No such permit shall be granted or issued
unless and until the applicant has filed a bond in the sum of not less
than $200, with sureties to the satisfaction of the Mayor, conditioned to
hold the City harmless from all damages occasioned by the existence of
any such signs, signboards, showboards, tables, booths, stands, goods,
wares or articles in the highways and public places of the City.
A.
§ 253-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-24
1:331
Injuring or defacing. No person shall deface, injure or destroy any
awning, building, guidepost or signboard in the City.
B.
§ 253-24 BEVERLY CODE § 253-24
1:332
ARTICLE III
Repairs to Unaccepted Streets
[Adopted 4-21-1987 by Ord. No. 32 (Art. XXVIII, § 28.03, of the Code
of Ordinances); amended 11-24-1998 by Ord. No. 360; 2-18-1999 by
Ord. No. 69; by Ord. No. 5-2013]
§ 253-25. Authority to make repairs.
Pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 6N, the Department of Public Services is hereby
authorized to make temporary repairs upon the following unaccepted
streets within the City if such streets have been opened to public use for
two or more years, provided that the Director of Engineering, Commissioner
of Public Services, Public Works determines that such repairs are required
by public necessity. The City shall bear no liability on account of damages
caused by such repairs.
§ 253-26. List of unaccepted streets.
The unaccepted streets on which said temporary repairs may be made are
as follows:
Name of Street Location
Adeline Road
Arbella Drive
Arthur Street Court
Bailey Avenue
Bartlett Street Cabot Street to Union Street
Bass Street
Beatrice Road
Beaver Street
Belmont Street Person Street to Echo Avenue
Berrywood Lane #27 to dead end
Big Rock Lane
Bisson Street Butman Street to Lothrop Street
Bonad Road
Boxwood Lane
Boyles Street Tall Tree Drive to Foster Street
Brackenbury Lane
Bradford Road
Brimbal Hill Drive
Brookhead Avenue
Brooks Circle
§ 253-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-26
1:333
Name of Street Location
Budleigh Avenue
Burley Street
Butman Street #16 to Bisson Street
Carleton Avenue
Cedar Street #25 to Middle Street
Central Court
Chapman Terrace
Chubbs Brook Lane
Church Street Park Area
Cobblers Lane
Cole Street Essex Street to #22
Colon Street Brimbal Avenue to Essex Street
Common Lane Thissell Street to #95 and #213 to
Foster Street
Conway Street
Coolidge Avenue
Cottage Lane
Cove Avenue
Cox Court School Street to dead end
Cross Lane
Cumnock Street
Dane Street Cabot Street to Essex Street
Davis Street
DiPalma Court
Douglas Avenue
Driscoll Lane
Dryer Road
Elizabeth Avenue
Ellingwood Court
Federal Street Park Street to River Street
Fieldstone Lane
Fitzgerald Way
Fossa Terrace
Foster's Point
Foster Street
Front Street
§ 253-26 BEVERLY CODE § 253-26
1:334
Name of Street Location
Gardner Street Pearl Street to Liberty Street
Gary Court
Gateway Lane
Gray Road
Harwood Street Ash Street to dead end
Haskell Street High Street to Hart Street
Hathaway Avenue Burley Street to Forest Street
Hayes Avenue #27 to dead end
Hellard Road
Hemlock Street
Hersey Avenue
Highland Terrace
High Street #29 to end
Hillcrest Road
Hillside Avenue Northern Avenue to #36
Hill Street
Holding Street #15 to Bates Park Avenue
Holmes Street
Hoover Avenue
Iverson Road #12 to dead end
Jacobs Avenue
James Street Butman Street to Pratt Avenue
Jordan Street Snell Road to Tudor Road
Juniper Street
Kathleen Drive
Kennedy Drive
Kennell Hill Drive
Kernwood Avenue Leech Street to Kernwood Bridge
Kinsman Street
Lanthorn Lane
Leather Lane
Leech Street Livingstone Avenue to Kernwood
Avenue
Livingstone Avenue Woodland Avenue to Leech Street
Longview Terrace #8 to Sonning Road
Marshall Court
§ 253-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-26
1:335
Name of Street Location
Marsh Avenue
Matthies Street #34 to dead end
McPherson Drive
Michael Road
Middle Street Victor Avenue to Cedar Street
Millbrook Road
Milton Street
Montserrat Road
Morningside Drive
Morrison Avenue
Moulton Court
Nelson Avenue #16 to Wirling Drive
Nursery Street Dartmouth Street to Andover Road
Ober Lane
Old Planters Road
Oxford Terrace
Palmer Road
Paradise Road
Park View Avenue
Parramatta Road Pearl Street extension to East Lothrop
Street
Pasture Road
Pickett Court
Pillow Lace Road
Pinehurst Avenue
Pine Road
Powers Street
Prescott Street Fillmore Street to Sargent Street
Prince Street
Putnam Street #45 to Albany Circle
Quincy Park
Red Rock Lane #19 to end
Rezza Road
Robb Road
Robin Road
Roderick Avenue
§ 253-26 BEVERLY CODE § 253-26
1:336
Name of Street Location
Rubbly Road To #2
Russell Street Jordan Street to high school
Salem Road Puritan Road to dead end
Salters Avenue
Sargent Avenue
Sargent Street #24 to Prescott Street
Scenna Road #12 to dead end
Shore Avenue
Shortell Avenue #70 to dead end
Smith Street
Snell Road
Sonning Road
South Terrace Eleanor Avenue to #15
Spring Street
Stewart Lane
Sturtevant Street From #56 to end as of February 1987
Summit Avenue #20 to Cox Court
Sunnycrest Avenue
Tall Tree Drive
Thaxton Road To #8
Thissell Street
Thomas Road
Trask Street
Tremont Street Ellsworth Avenue to Clifton Avenue
Tyler Road #16 to East Corning Street
Upland Road Livingstone Avenue to Ashton Street
Valley Street Hart Street to Hemlock Street
Vestry Street
Walcott Road #16 to dead end and Guild Road to
dead end
Waldemar Avenue
Watch Hill Lane
Wayland Road
Wentzell Avenue
West Dane Street Park Street to dead end
Westerly Road Heather Street to dead end
§ 253-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-26
1:337
Name of Street Location
Wirling Drive #14 to Nelson Avenue
§ 253-26 BEVERLY CODE § 253-26
1:338
ARTICLE IV
Construction and Use Restrictions
[Adopted as Art. XXIX of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 253-27. Notice of proposed construction or repair work;
moratorium on openings and street work.
§ 253-28. Notice of proposed excavations.
Whenever the City is about to construct a new street or to break up
the surface of any street, the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works shall, at least two weeks before beginning
work thereon, notify the Salem City Council, National Grid Gas,
National Grid Electric, the MBTA, Verizon and Comcast if the Salem
City Council or any of the companies mentioned have been authorized
to lay or place any pipes, conduits or tracks in such street. If the Salem
City Council or any of the companies mentioned have any work to be
done in the street designated in the notice, it shall consult and arrange
with the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works in order that such work may be done before the surface
of such street is prepared anew for public travel. The Director shall
also notify the abutters on such street and all other persons interested
therein by publishing a notice of the work proposed in one of the City
newspapers at least one week before beginning such work, and if any
abutter or other person desires to open such street to do any work
therein, application for a permit shall be made forthwith in order that
the work may be done before the surface of the street is prepared as
aforesaid. After such notice and opportunity have been given, no such
council, company, abutter or person shall, for the space of five years,
break up the surface of such street so prepared, except in case of
obvious necessity, to be certified to and approved by the Mayor.
A.
No street or way shall be opened by drain layers or other persons
between the first day of December and the first day of the following
April, except in case of necessity, certified to and approved by the
Mayor, but nothing in this section shall prevent connection being made
with a common sewer or drain when ordered by the Board of Health.
B.
Whenever there is to be any excavation in any street or sidewalk in
the City, the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works shall notify National Grid Gas, National Grid Electric,
Verizon and Comcast at least 48 hours before commencing the work to
determine whether or not any pipes or conduits might be endangered
by such excavation. Such excavations include water, sewer, surface
drainage, tree removals, installation of posts to a depth of over one foot,
street repairs and construction, sidewalk repair and construction, etc.
A.
If it is determined by the aforesaid companies that their services might
be endangered, then such companies shall take appropriate measures
to supervise and protect their respective services.
B.
§ 253-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-28
1:339
§ 253-29. Notice to Fire Department.
Whenever any repairs, openings of trenches or any temporary occupation
of any street, way or traveled place in the City is contemplated to be
performed by any public service corporation or by a private contractor
or corporation, at least 24 hours' notice of same shall be given by such
corporation or contractor to the Chief of the Fire Department of the City.
The notice shall set forth in general the extent and duration of the work
contemplated.
§ 253-30. Reports of accidents.137
Whenever any accident occurs upon the highways or other public places
of the City, or when for any cause circumstances arise involving possible
liability of the City to damages, it shall be the duty of the members of the
police force, including regular, reserve and special officers, the foreman
and employees of the Public Services Department and members of the Fire
Department, having knowledge of such accident or circumstances, to report
the same forthwith and without delay to the head officer of their respective
departments; and such report shall contain a sufficient statement of the
place, time and special facts under which such accident or circumstances
arose, and such head of department shall thereupon forthwith transmit such
report to the Chairman of the Legal Affairs Committee and to the City
Solicitor.
§ 253-31. Permits to make excavations and cause obstructions; fees.
[Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord. No. 108A; 5-15-1989 by Ord. No. 249]
In the event of any emergency, the provision requiring 48 hours' notice
shall not apply but the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works shall immediately notify the aforesaid
companies.
C.
No person shall break or dig up, or assist in breaking or digging up any
part of any street, or remove any gravel or other similar thing therefrom
for any purposes whatever except by permission of the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works and under
such restrictions and conditions as he may think proper.
A.
A permit in writing must first be obtained from the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works. Any and
all holders of permits as aforesaid shall provide suitable lights in and
on all obstructions or excavations placed by them in such public streets
or ways between sunset and sunrise, and shall provide a suitable
boardwalk for public use around such obstructions and excavations.
In the case of failure to so provide suitable lights, the Director shall
provide the same at the expense of the holder of the permit.
B.
137. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 253-28 BEVERLY CODE § 253-31
1:340
§ 253-32. Permits for permanent excavations; leaving openings
uncovered; grating projections.
No person shall place or maintain any grating, or make any permanent
excavation under the surface of any street for the purpose of constructing a
coal hole, or for light and air, or for an entrance, or for any other purpose
without permission from the City Council. No person shall leave such coal
hole or other aperture open or unfastened between sunset and sunrise in
any case, nor in the daytime unless actually in use and properly guarded.
No grating shall project more than two feet into the street.
§ 253-33. Maintenance of excavations under streets;
indemnification of City.
Every owner of an estate hereafter maintaining any cellar, vault, coal hole
or other excavation under the part of the street which is adjacent to, or part
of, his estate and every person maintaining a post, pole or other structure
in the street, or a wire, pipe, conduit or other structure under a street
shall do so only on condition that such maintenance shall be considered as
an agreement on his part with the City to keep the same and the covers
thereof in good repair and condition at all times during his ownership and
to indemnify and save harmless the City against any and all damages, costs,
expenses and compensation which it may sustain or be required to pay by
reason of any excavation or structure being under or in the street or being
out of repair during his ownership, or by reason of any cover of the same
being out of repair or unfastened during his ownership.
In addition, the applicant shall provide the City with a cash bond in the
amount of $1,000 or $10 per linear foot of trench, whichever is greater,
to be held by the City Treasurer.
C.
In the event that the work for which the permit under this section
is obtained is not completed in a timely manner or maintained in a
satisfactory condition as determined by the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works, then the Director shall
give the applicant 48 hours' notice by registered or certified mail to
complete the work or make the necessary repairs.
D.
If the repairs or completion ordered by the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works is not completed within
48 hours of the applicant's receipt of notice, the Director shall notify the
City Council's Committee on Public Services. The Committee on Public
Services shall have the authority to release so much of the cash bond
to the Public Services Department provided for in Subsection C above
as the Commissioner determines is necessary to complete or repair the
street so disturbed. Each and every break or digging up of any street
shall require a separate permit, fee and cash bond.
E.
§ 253-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-34
1:341
§ 253-34. Posts in streets.
No person shall place or maintain any posts in any street except by
permission of the City Council, which permit may be revoked at any time.
§ 253-35. Public meetings in streets; temporary stands for selling
goods.
No person shall hold or assist in holding gatherings or meetings in any
public street within the City or occupy or use any portion of the same with
temporary stands for the purpose of selling or attempting to sell any goods,
wares or commodities of any description without first securing a permit
from the Chief of Police, which permit shall state the day and hour or period
for which such meeting, gathering or occupancy is to be held or made, nor
without exhibiting such permit to any police officer when requested by him
to do so.
§ 253-36. Spilling or leaking loads.
No person shall, without permission from the Board of Health, carry in or
upon any vehicle through any street or way coal, sawdust, ashes or any
other material or debris which is liable to fall from such vehicle upon any
street or way, whether or not the falling is caused by the elements, unless
the same shall have been properly covered.
§ 253-37. Numbering and renumbering of streets.
The Engineering Department, subject to the control and direction of the
City Council, shall have general charge of numbering or renumbering
streets in the City, and the committee shall make all necessary rules and
regulations for the carrying out of the aforesaid powers.
§ 253-38. Moving buildings; bond.
No person shall move a building in a public street or way without
permission from the City Council, which shall be granted upon such
terms as in its opinion the public safety and convenience may require.
A.
All applications for such permission shall state the current location
and that to which the building is to be moved, its length, width and
height, and the principal material of which it is constructed, and shall
definitely describe the route over which it is to be moved, the length
of time required to move it, and whether any shade trees or branches
thereof will have to be removed and, if any, the location thereof, and
shall be accompanied by the certificate of the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works approving the desired
route. In all cases where a permit has been granted for the removing
of a building as provided in this section, the moving of which will
necessitate the cutting of electric light or power wires by any
corporation authorized to maintain the same in the City, the holder of
the permit shall, before any such building is moved from its location,
B.
§ 253-34 BEVERLY CODE § 253-38
1:342
§ 253-39. Construction of sidewalks.
notify such corporation of the granting of the permit, and thereupon
such corporation shall give not less than 24 hours' notice through some
daily newspaper published in the City, describing the wires which are
to be cut and the time when the power or light, or both, are to be
suspended.
No person shall move any such building until he has given a bond to
the City in the sum of $300 with two or more sureties, one of whom
shall be the owner of the building, to save harmless and indemnify the
City from all damages which may occur by such moving. The bond shall
be approved by the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works and filed with the City Clerk before the permit
is issued.
C.
Generally. Notwithstanding any other provisions of the City ordinances,
the City Council, under the direction of the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works, shall establish and
cause to be constructed sidewalks in public ways of such materials as it
may determine.
A.
Curbing. Any person constructing a building on an existing street shall
construct a sidewalk and curbing of material which conforms with the
general area.
B.
§ 253-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-39
1:343

ARTICLE V
Trenches
[Adopted 1-7-2009 by Ord. No. 259 (Art. XXXIII of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 253-40. Permit granting authority.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works, or his designee designated in writing, shall be the City officer to
issue permits for the purpose of creating a trench as that term is defined in
MGL c. 82A, § 4, and 520 CMR 14.00.
§ 253-41. Inspections.
Said permit granting officer may require the inspection of any proposed
trench site before the issuance of any trench permit.
§ 253-42. Police details to make trench safe.
Should the permit granting officer determine that any trench site is not
covered, barricaded, or backfilled and is unattended and the permit holder,
if any, is unavailable or refuses to take corrective action, the permit
granting officer may secure the services of a police detail officer to make
the trench site safe. The permit holder, landowner, or contractor shall be
assessed the costs of providing said police detail.
§ 253-43. Department of Public Services to make trench safe.
In addition to the securing of a police detail to make a trench site safe or,
in the alternative, should the permit granting officer determine that any
trench site is not covered, barricaded, or backfilled and is unattended and
the permit holder, if any, is unavailable or refuses to take corrective action,
the permit granting officer may have the Department of Public Services
take action to cover, barricade, or backfill said trench, and the permit
holder, landowner, or contractor shall be assessed the costs associated
with any such action, including overtime for Department of Public Services
employees.
§ 253-44. Blanket permits.
For projects involving multiple trenches, the permit granting officer may
issue a single blanket permit for such work. When a blanket permit is
issued, the permit holder shall notify the permit granting officer of the
location of each new trench as the permit holder becomes aware that such
project requires an additional trench.
§ 253-45. Fees.
The cost of a trenching permit, for entities other than the City of
Beverly, shall be $100.
A.
§ 253-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 253-45
1:345
§ 253-46. Violations and penalties.
In the case of a blanket permit, the cost for entities other than the
City of Beverly shall be $100 for each trench identified in or added to
hereunder.
B.
The City of Beverly shall be issued trenching permits hereunder without
cost.
C.
The creation of a trench without first having obtained a permit
hereunder shall be punished by a fine of $250. Said fine shall be in
addition to and not in offset of any costs associated with corrective
action taken under the foregoing sections.
A.
Failure to have properly covered, backfilled, or barricaded an
unattended trench shall be punished by a fine of $250. Said fine shall be
in addition to and not in offset of any costs associated with corrective
action taken under the foregoing sections.
B.
§ 253-45 BEVERLY CODE § 253-46
1:346
Chapter 261
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks, recreation areas and public
property — See Ch. 210.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 253.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
§ 261-1. Purpose and applicability.
§ 261-2. Interdepartmental coordination.
Due to the complex nature and often conflicting interrelationships between
living plants such as trees, shrubs, and turf, and public improvements
such as streets, sidewalks and underground facilities, it is recognized that
there is a need to manage both plants and improvements in a manner that
will minimize conflict and maximize the benefits to be realized from each.
Therefore, it is hereby declared to be the intent of the City of Beverly
that there shall exist at all times a policy of open communication and
coordination between the various departments and divisions of City
Having determined that a well-managed urban forest provides many
benefits to the City, its residents and visitors, it is hereby declared to
be the policy of the City of Beverly to regulate, finance and control
the planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of trees and shrubs
upon or in all public areas of the City in order to:
Promote and enhance the aesthetics and general welfare of the
City.
(1)
Eliminate and guard against dangerous conditions, which may
result in injury to persons using the public areas of the City.
(2)
Prevent damage to any public sewer, water main, street, sidewalk,
or other public property.
(3)
Protect trees and shrubs in public areas from undesirable and
unsafe planting, removal, maintenance and protection practices.
(4)
Protect all trees and shrubs from the damaging effects of
construction, alteration or repair of utility facilities and other
improvements in any public area.
(5)
Guard all trees and shrubs within the City against the spread of
disease, insects, or pests.
(6)
A.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all trees and shrubs
presently or hereafter planted in or upon any public area.
B.
§ 253-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-2
1:347
government regarding the management, installation and maintenance of
the plants or improvements for which they are responsible.
§ 261-3. Definitions.
In this chapter, unless the context clearly requires otherwise, the following
words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
CITY ARBORIST — The person designated under Chapter 58, Officers and
Employees, of the City Code or his/her duly authorized representative
designated to perform inspection or otherwise enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
CLEAR-VISION TRIANGLE — A triangle-shaped zone formed by the existing
or proposed curblines of two or more intersecting streets, roads, or alleys
and a third line connecting said curblines at a distance of 30 feet in
each direction from the point of curbline intersection, in order to provide
vehicular traffic an unobstructed view of cross traffic at intersections.
MAINTENANCE AND PROTECTION — Includes all operations of trimming,
pruning, spraying, injecting, fertilizing, treating, bracing, cabling and
cutting any tree or shrub above or below the ground.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation or
government entity.
PUBLIC TREES AND SHRUBS — Any tree or shrub, as herein defined,
presently or hereafter planted in or upon any public area.
PUBLIC WAY — Includes all public ways, parks, and other lands owned,
controlled, or leased by the City.
SHRUB — A woody plant, usually with multiple stems branched at or near
the base, reaching a height of less than 12 feet.
STREET TREE — Any public tree presently or hereafter located in the
public way between the curb and public sidewalk, or between the curbs
of a median strip, or in the equivalent location with respect to future
curb, sidewalk or median strips where such curbs or sidewalks are not yet
installed.
TREE — A woody plant, usually with a single stem unbranched at the base,
reaching a height of 12 feet or more.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — A zone of protected space not less than
four feet high and 10 feet square, or at a distance in feet from the tree
trunk equal to the diameter of the trunk at breast height (DBH) in inches,
whichever is greater.
§ 261-4. Standards and specifications.
The most recent versions of following documents, each in its entirety, are
hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter upon passage:
§ 261-2 BEVERLY CODE § 261-4
1:348
§ 261-5. Prohibited acts.
ANSI A300-1995, American National Standard for Tree Care
Operations - Tree, Shrub and Other Woody Plant Maintenance -
Standard Practices.
A.
B. ANSI Z60.1-1996, American Standard for Nursery Stock.
Injury to public trees and shrubs prohibited. No person shall, without
permission from the City Arborist, do or cause to be done any of the
following:
Secure, fasten, or run any rope, wire, signal, electrical installation
or other device or material to, around or through any public tree or
shrub except in an emergency such as a storm or accident.
(1)
Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill, or destroy any public tree or
shrub.
(2)
(3) Top or make topping cuts on any public tree.
Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, oil, or other injurious
substance to seep, drain, or be emptied upon or about any public
tree or shrub, except routine winter street maintenance by City
departments.
(4)
Excavate any ditch, tunnel, or trench, or lay any drive, sidewalk or
other impermeable surface within the tree protection zone of any
public tree or shrub, without permission from the City Arborist.
(5)
Erect, alter, repair, raze, or excavate within the tree protection
zone of any public tree or shrub without placing suitable guards
approved by the City Arborist around such trees and shrubs that
may be injured by such operations.
(6)
Remove any guard, stake, or other device or material intended for
the protection or support of any public tree or shrub.
(7)
Place any earth fill, rock, trash, or other material within the tree
protection zone of any public tree or shrub that may compact or
prevent the entry of air and water to the root zone.
(8)
A.
Clear-vision triangle. No tree, shrub, hedge or other growth exceeding
30 inches in height above street grade shall be permitted in any clearvision
triangle within the City.
B.
Obstruction of signs, signals or travel. All trees and shrubs located upon
any public way or upon any private premises adjacent to the public
way shall be trimmed so that the lowest projecting branches provide
a clearance height of not less than 14 feet above the travel portion of
a public street and not less than eight feet above the public sidewalk.
The City Arborist may waive the provisions of this section for newly
planted or naturally low-profile trees if he/she determines that they do
C.
§ 261-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-5
1:349
§ 261-6. City Arborist approval required; appeals; list of approved
trees and shrubs.
§ 261-7. Arboricultural specifications and standards.
The following specifications and standards are hereby established for the
planting, pruning, and removal of all public trees and shrubs within the City:
not interfere with public travel, obstruct the light of any streetlight,
obstruct the view of any traffic sign or signal, or endanger public safety.
No person shall plant, remove, maintain or protect any public tree or
shrub, or cause such work to be done, without obtaining permission
from the City Arborist.
A.
Any person desiring to plant, remove, maintain or protect any public
tree or shrub shall request in writing to the City Arborist for approval
to perform such work. Such request shall specify the location and
description of the proposed work. If the City Arborist determines that
the proposed work is necessary and in accord with the purposes of
this chapter, taking into account the safety, health, and welfare of the
public, location of utilities, public sidewalks, driveways and streetlights,
general character and aesthetic quality of the area in which the tree
or shrub is located or proposed to be located, and the soil conditions
and physiological needs of the tree or shrub, he/she shall approve the
request.
B.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Arborist to permit or
deny a request to plant, remove, maintain or protect any public tree or
shrub may request a review of that decision by the Committee on Public
Services of the City Council.
C.
The City Arborist shall develop and maintain a list of desirable trees
for planting along streets. Efforts shall be made to ensure a sufficient
diversity of tree species.
D.
Planting.
No tree shall hereafter be planted which is less than 1 1/2 inches
in diameter at six inches above the ground.
(1)
No street tree shall be planted less than 10 feet from any driveway
or fire hydrant, or within the designated clear-vision triangle or
less than 30 feet from any street corner, whichever is greater.
(2)
All street trees hereafter planted shall be spaced not less than 25
feet apart, except that a tree planted for the purpose of future
replacement of an existing declining tree may be planted less than
25 feet from the declining tree. The actual spacing, location, and
alignment of street trees shall be determined by the City Arborist
based on the mature size of the species to be planted and the
specific site limitations.
(3)
A.
§ 261-5 BEVERLY CODE § 261-7
1:350
The following shall not be planted in the public ways of the City:
any conifer, any species of the genus Populus, any Ailanthus,
Catalpa, mountain ash, box elder, silver maple, willow, white bark
birch, black locust, or such other species that shall be determined
to be unsuitable for street planting.138
(4)
Pruning.
All pruning of public trees and shrubs shall conform with the
standards set forth in ANSI A300 or the most recent version thereof
as adopted hereunder.
(1)
It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or
City department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree
on public property. "Topping" is defined as the severe cutting back
of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the
tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy
and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other
causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions,
where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted
from this chapter at the determination of the City Arborist.
(2)
B.
Removal.
The City Arborist may remove or order to be removed any tree or
part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason
of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines,
water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected with any
injurious fungus, insect, or other pest.
(1)
Trees shall be completely removed from the growing site and
disposed of in the proper manner. Any person or firm engaged in
the removal of any public tree or shrub shall have the necessary
limits of insurance and shall be held liable for any injury or damage
to persons or property.
(2)
Stumps and roots that elevate sidewalks and/or boulevards shall
be removed from the growing site by grinding or other means to a
depth suitable for the future planting of trees, shrubs, or turf. The
hole created by removal of a stump shall be filled to the level of
surrounding grade with mineral topsoil, tamped to prevent settling
and seeded with a mixture of grass species appropriate for the site.
(3)
C.
Spraying, injecting, fertilizing, bracing, cabling or other arboricultural
operations or treatments shall be performed in a neat and professional
manner according to accepted arboricultural standards and in
compliance with all laws governing the use of pesticides.
D.
138. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 261-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 261-8
1:351
§ 261-8. Cost of planting, maintenance and protection.
The entire cost of planting, removal, maintenance, and protection of trees
and shrubs in all public areas of the City, when performed by department
employees or their contractors at the direction of the City Arborist, shall be
borne by the City out of the departments' budgets, or from funds donated
or otherwise acquired for this purpose. When a private party other than the
City plants, removes, maintains, or protects public trees or shrubs pursuant
to § 261-2 of this chapter, said party shall incur all expenses connected
therewith.
§ 261-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be, upon conviction
or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000. In addition to a
fine, the City may require restitution for the fair market value of the tree(s)
and/or shrub(s) that was damaged or destroyed as a result of a violation of
this chapter.
Chapter 270
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Airport parking restrictions — See Ch. 105,
Art. I.
Skateboards and scooters — See Ch. 236.
Vehicles for hire — See Ch. 274.
§ 261-8 BEVERLY CODE § 261-9
1:352
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 270-1. Terms defined.
For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases used herein shall
have the following meanings except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
BUS STOP — An area in the roadway set aside for the berthing and parking
of buses.
CROSSWALK — That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the
prolongation or connection of curblines and property lines at intersections,
or at any portion of a roadway clearly indicated for pedestrian crossing by
lines on the road surface or by other markings or signs.
EMERGENCY VEHICLES — Vehicles of the Fire Department (fire patrol),
police vehicles, ambulances and emergency vehicles of federal, state and
municipal departments or public service corporations as are commonly
recognized as such.
FUNERAL — Any procession of mourners properly identified as such
accompanying the remains of a human body.
INTERSECTION — The area embraced within the extensions of the lateral
curblines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines, of intersecting ways as
defined in MGL c. 90, § 1, including divided ways. The rules and regulations
herein contained governing and restricting the movement of vehicles at and
near intersecting ways shall apply at any place along any way at which
drivers are to be controlled by traffic-control signals, whether or not such
place is an intersection as herein defined.
LANE — A longitudinal division of a roadway into a strip of sufficient width
to accommodate the passage of a single line of vehicles.
OFFICER — Any police officer authorized to make arrests, or any
investigator, examiner or inspector of the Registry of Motor Vehicles,
provided he is in uniform or has his badge of office displayed over his left
breast and upon his outer garment.
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNS — All signs, markings and devices, other than
signals, not inconsistent with this chapter or other ordinances of the City,
and which conform to the standards prescribed by the Department of
Transportation of the commonwealth and placed or erected by authority
of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of guiding,
directing, warning or regulating traffic.[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
013]
OFFICIAL TRAFFIC SIGNALS — All signals, conforming to the standards
prescribed by the Department of Transportation of the commonwealth, not
inconsistent with this chapter or other ordinances of the City, placed or
erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-1
1:353
purpose of directing or warning traffic.[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
013]
PARKING — The standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise
than temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or
unloading, or in obedience to an officer or traffic signs or signals, or while
making emergency repairs or, if disabled, while arrangements are being
made to move such vehicle.
PARKING REGULATION DEVICE — Any mechanical device, not inconsistent
with the provisions of this chapter, and placed or erected on any public way
within the City for the regulation of parking. Each parking regulation device
installed shall indicate by proper legend the legal parking time established
by this chapter and when operated shall at all times indicate the balance
of legal parking time permitted and at the expiration of such period shall
indicate illegal or overtime parking.[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No.
013]
PARKING REGULATION DEVICE SPACE — Any space within a parking
regulation device zone, adjacent to a parking regulation device, which is
duly designated for the parking of a single vehicle by lines painted on
the surface of the street adjacent to or adjoining each parking regulation
device.[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
PARKING REGULATION DEVICE ZONE — Any street or portion thereof
upon which parking regulation devices are installed and are in operation
and upon which parking of vehicles is permitted for a limited time subject
to compliance with the further provisions of this chapter.[Amended
2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
PEDESTRIAN — Any person afoot or riding on a conveyance moved by
human power.
ROADWAY — That portion of a street or highway between the regularly
established curblines or that part, exclusive of shoulders, improved and
intended to be used for vehicular traffic.
SERVICE ZONE — An area in the roadway set aside for the accommodation
of commercial and transient vehicular traffic.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street or highway set aside for pedestrian
travel.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between property lines of every
way open to the use of the public for purposes of travel.
TAXICAB STAND — An area in the roadway in which certain taxicabs are
required to park while waiting to be engaged.
TRAFFIC — Pedestrians, ridden animals, vehicles, streetcars or other
conveyances, either singly or together while using any street or highway for
the purpose of travel.
TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL — Any device using colored lights which
conforms to the standards as prescribed by the Department of
Transportation of the commonwealth, whether manually, electrically or
§ 270-1 BEVERLY CODE § 270-1
1:354
mechanically operated, by which traffic may be alternately directed to stop
and to proceed.[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
TRAFFIC ISLAND — Any area or space set aside, within a roadway, which
is not intended for use by vehicular traffic.
U-TURN — The turning of a vehicle by means of a continuous left turn
whereby the direction of such vehicle is reversed.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a street or highway, except devices
moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 270-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-1
1:355

ARTICLE II
General Regulations
§ 270-2. Use of vehicles for advertising restricted.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle on any street or highway for the
sole purpose of displaying advertising signs.
§ 270-3. Parades, demonstrations, block parties, road races and
walk-a-thons. [Amended 4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 049]
§ 270-4. (Reserved)139
§ 270-5. Clinging to moving vehicles.
Any event or activity, including, but not limited to, a parade,
demonstration, block party, rally, road race, or walk-a-thon, or similar
event that is expected to and/or may impede or interfere with
pedestrian sidewalk traffic, vehicular traffic, or cause pedestrian
overflow from the sidewalk into the public street, or require road
closures, shall not occupy, be held or proceed upon any sidewalk or
public street except in accordance with a permit approved by the Chief
of Police or the Police Chief’s designee.
A.
Permit applications shall be made available through the appropriate
City department and shall be completed and submitted to the Chief of
Police or the Chief’s designee.
B.
The City may charge for the actual costs of any such parade,
demonstration, block party, rally, road race, or walk-a-thon, or similar
event, including but not limited to the costs of processing permits,
cleanup costs, and/or traffic control, and also may impose narrow
insurance requirements.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any person traveling upon a bicycle, coaster,
sled, roller skates or any toy vehicle to cling to, or attach himself or
such conveyance to any other moving vehicle or streetcar upon any
roadway.
A.
Prohibited riding. No person shall ride on any train or bus upon any
portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers.
This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary
discharge of a duty.140
B.
139. Editor’s Note: Former § 270-4, Road races, walk-a-thons and marathons, was repealed
4-17-2018 by Ord. No. 049.
140. Editor's Note: Original Sec. 21.06 of the Code of Ordinances, Zones of Quiet, which
immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013.
§ 270-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-6
1:357
§ 270-6. Accident reports.
The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in the injury
or death of any person or property damage to an apparent total extent in
excess of $1,000 or more to any one vehicle or other property shall report
such accident to the Registrar of Vehicles and to the City Police Department
in conformance with the requirements of MGL c. 90, § 26.
§ 270-7. Duties of witnesses to accidents.
Witnesses and all persons involved in any traffic accident shall, upon the
request of an officer, furnish their names and addresses and such other
information relevant to such traffic accident as they possess.
§ 270-8. Owner liability for violations.
If any vehicle is found upon any street or highway in violation of any
provision of this chapter and the identity of the driver cannot be
determined, the owner or the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be held prima facie responsible for such violation.
§ 270-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-18-1989 by Ord. No.
30; 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 482]
Except as otherwise provided, any person convicted of a violation of any
provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than $25
for the first offense and not more than $35 for each subsequent offense of a
like nature committed during any period of one year.
§ 270-10. Beverly Harbor Management Authority property.
[Amended 5-2-1988 by Ord. No. 259]
No person shall park a vehicle on any of the roads or ways located on
any property under control of the Harbor Management Authority when
prohibited to do so by designated signs.
A.
No person shall operate a vehicle on any of the roads or ways above the
speed of eight miles per hour.
B.
The Police Department shall enforce all provisions of this section as
well as ensuring compliance with posted parking, pedestrian and
vehicular directions in order to eliminate hazardous conditions.
C.
§ 270-6 BEVERLY CODE § 270-10
1:358
ARTICLE III
Authority and Duties of Police Department
§ 270-11. Directing traffic.
It shall be the duty of the Police Department to enforce the provisions of
this chapter. Officers of the Police Department are hereby authorized to
direct all traffic either in person or by means of visible or audible signal in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter, provided that in the event
of a fire or other emergency, to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians,
officers of the Police or Fire Department may direct traffic, as conditions
may require, notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter or any other
ordinance of the City.
§ 270-12. Closing streets temporarily.
The Chief of Police may close temporarily any street or highway in an
impending or existing emergency, or for any lawful assemblage,
demonstration or procession, provided there is reasonable justification for
the closing of such street.
§ 270-13. Prohibiting parking temporarily.
The Chief of Police may temporarily prohibit parking on any street or
highway or part thereof in an impending or existing emergency, or for
a lawful assemblage, demonstration or procession, provided there is
reasonable justification for such prohibition. Vehicles parked in places
where parking is prohibited temporarily may be moved by or under the
direction of an officer.
§ 270-14. Obedience to police.
Drivers of vehicles shall comply with any lawful or reasonable order, signal
or direction of any police officer.
§ 270-15. Exemptions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to drivers operating in
conformity with the direction of a police officer; to drivers actually engaged
in work upon a street or highway closed to travel or under construction or
repair when the nature of their work necessitates a departure from any part
of this chapter; to officers when engaged in the performance of public duties
which necessitate a departure from any part of this chapter; nor to drivers
of emergency vehicles while operating in an emergency and in performance
of public duties which necessitate a departure from any part of this chapter.
These exemptions shall not, however, protect the driver of any vehicle from
the consequence of a reckless disregard of the safety of others.
§ 270-16. Accident record files.
§ 270-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-16
1:359
§ 270-17. Driver files.
§ 270-18. Annual traffic safety report.
The police shall submit a traffic safety report annually in the month of
January to the Mayor and City Council covering:
§ 270-19. Emergency and experimental regulations. [Amended
9-5-1989 by Ord. No. 333]
For purposes of trial, the City Council and/or the Chief of Police may
make temporary rules regulating traffic, or test under actual conditions,
traffic signs, signals, markings or other devices. No such emergency or
experimental rule regulating traffic shall remain in effect for a period of
time longer than 30 days.
The police shall maintain a suitable system of filing traffic accident
reports. Accident reports or cards referring to them shall be filed
alphabetically by location.
A.
As the accidents at any particular location become numerous, the police
shall study such accidents and inform the Mayor and City Council of
their findings and conclusions.
B.
The police shall maintain a suitable file in which a record of all traffic
accidents, warnings, arrests, convictions and complaints are filed
alphabetically under the name of the driver concerned.
A.
The police shall study the cases of all drivers having bad records,
attempt to discover the causes and take whatever steps are lawful and
reasonable to eliminate such causes or to have the driver's licenses of
such persons suspended or revoked.
B.
The number of traffic accidents, the number of persons killed and
injured and other pertinent traffic accident data.
A.
The number of traffic accidents investigated, the number of hazardous
locations studied, the number of drivers with bad records interrogated
and other pertinent data on the safety activities of the police.
B.
C. The plans and recommendations for future traffic safety activities.
§ 270-16 BEVERLY CODE § 270-19
1:360
ARTICLE IV
Traffic Signs, Signals and Markings
§ 270-20. Placement, erection and maintenance.
The Chief of Police is hereby authorized, and as to those signs and
signals required hereunder it shall be his duty, to place or cause to
be placed all official traffic signs, signals and markings. All signs,
signals and markings shall conform to the standards as prescribed
by the Department of Transportation of the commonwealth and shall
be erected and maintained under the direction of the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works of the
City.141
A.
The following sections of this chapter relating to parking shall be
effective only during such time as official signs are erected and
maintained in each block designating the provisions of such sections
and located so as to be easily visible to approaching drivers. A sufficient
number of such signs shall be provided so that a car cannot be parked
in a limited or prohibited parking place without having the legend side
of such a sign, clearly setting forth the parking regulation thereat,
visible from that location.
§ 270-12 Closing street temporarily
§ 270-13 Prohibiting parking temporarily
§ 270-41 Parking prohibited at all times
§ 270-42 Parking prohibited during certain months
§ 270-43 Parking prohibited during certain hours
§ 270-45 Fifteen-minute parking
§ 270-47 One-hour parking
§ 270-48 Two-hour parking
§ 270-49 Off-street parking
§ 270-52 Bus stops
§ 270-53 Taxicab stands
§ 270-54 Service and loading zones
B.
Section 270-36, One-way streets, shall be effective only during such
time as a sufficient number of official signs are erected and maintained
at each of the exits for each one-way street, so that at least one sign will
be clearly visible for a distance of at least 75 feet to drivers approaching
such an exit.
C.
141. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-21
1:361
§ 270-21. Display of unauthorized signs, signals and markings
prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place or maintain or to display upon or
in view of any street any unofficial sign, signal or marking which purports
to be or is an imitation of or resembles an official traffic sign, signal or
marking, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic or which
hides from view any official sign or signal. The Chief of Police is hereby
empowered to remove every such prohibited sign, signal or marking or
cause it to be removed, without notice.
§ 270-22. Interference with signs, signals and markings prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully deface, injure, move, obstruct
or interfere with any official traffic sign, signal or marking.
§ 270-23. Traffic-control signal legend.
Colors and arrow indications in traffic-control signals shall have the
commands ascribed to them in this section, and no other meanings, and
every driver of a vehicle, railway car or other conveyance shall comply
therewith, except when otherwise directed by an officer or by a lawful
traffic regulating sign (other than a stop sign), signal or device, or except
as provided in § 270-33. In no case shall a driver enter or proceed through
an intersection without due regard to the safety of other persons within the
intersection, regardless of what indications may be given by traffic-control
signals.
Green. While the green lens is illuminated, drivers facing the signal
may proceed through the intersection, but shall yield the right-of-way to
pedestrians and vehicles lawfully within a crosswalk or the intersection
at the time such signal was exhibited. Drivers of vehicles making a right
turn or left turn shall yield the right-of-way to pedestrians crossing with
the flow of traffic.
A.
Right, left and vertical green arrows. When a right green arrow is
illuminated, drivers facing such signal may turn right. When a left
green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing such signal may turn left.
When a vertical green arrow is illuminated, drivers facing such signal
may go straight ahead. When a green arrow is exhibited together with
a red or yellow lens, drivers may enter the intersection to make the
movement permitted by the arrow, but shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles and pedestrians proceeding from another direction on a green
indication.
B.
Yellow. When the yellow lens is illuminated, waiting drivers shall not
proceed, and any driver approaching the intersection or a marked stop
line shall stop at such point, unless so close to the intersection that a
stop cannot be made in safety; provided, however, that if a green arrow
is illuminated at the same time, drivers may enter the intersection to
make the movement permitted by such arrow.
C.
§ 270-21 BEVERLY CODE § 270-23
1:362
Red. Traffic facing a steady circular red signal alone shall stop at a
clearly marked stop line or, if none, before entering the crosswalk on
the near side of the intersection or, if none, then before entering the
intersection and shall remain standing until an indication to proceed is
shown except as allowed by MGL c. 89, § 8.
D.
Red and yellow. While the red and yellow lenses are illuminated
together, drivers shall not enter the intersection, and during such time
the intersection shall be reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
E.
Flashing red. When a red lens is illuminated in a traffic-control signal by
rapid intermittent flashes, and its use has been specifically authorized
by the Department of Public Services, drivers shall stop before entering
the nearer line or crosswalk of the street intersection, or at a stop
line when marked, and the right to proceed shall then be governed by
provisions of MGL c. 89, § 8.
F.
Flashing yellow. A flashing yellow lens shall indicate the presence of a
hazard and drivers may proceed only with caution.
G.
Flashing green. A flashing green lens shall indicate an intersection
or pedestrian crosswalk in use or subject to use by entering or cross
traffic. Drivers may proceed only with caution and shall be prepared to
comply with a change in the signal to a red or yellow or red and yellow
indication.
H.
§ 270-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-23
1:363

ARTICLE V
Traffic Regulations
§ 270-24. Through streets.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 89, § 9, the following streets or
parts of streets are hereby declared to be throughways:
Name of Street Location
Bridge Street From River Street to Danvers line
Hale Street From Atlantic Avenue to Lothrop
Street
Hale Street From Lothrop Street to Chapman's
Corner
Lothrop Street From Stone Street to Hale Street
Rantoul Street Entire length
§ 270-25. Stop intersections. [Last amended 3-5-2014 by Ord. No.
14]
Every driver of a vehicle or other conveyance approaching an
intersection of ways, where there exists facing him an official sign
bearing the word "STOP" or a flashing red signal indication, such
sign or signal having, apart from these rules and orders, the written
approval of the Department of Transportation, and such approval being
in effect, shall, before proceeding through the intersection, bring such
vehicle, railway car or other conveyance to a complete stop at such
point as may be clearly marked by a sign or line, or if a point is not
so marked, then at the nearer line or crosswalk of the intersection.
This section shall not apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by
an officer or by a lawful traffic-regulating sign, signal or device, or as
otherwise provided in § 270-33.142
A.
In accordance with the foregoing, the erection and maintenance of
an isolated stop sign or flashing red signal, as the case may be, are
authorized so as to face:
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Abbott Street East and west Lovett Street
Abbott Street West Cabot Street
Abbott Street West Endicott Street
(Monument Square)
Adams Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Taft Avenue
B.
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:365
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Airport Road East Cabot Street
Ames Street North and south Lyman Street
Amherst Road East McKay Street
Andover Road East Amherst Road
Appleton Avenue East Harrison Avenue
Appleton Avenue Northeast Baker Avenue
Arbella Drive South Hill Street
Aricia Lane Northeast and
southwest
Middlebury Lane, both
ends
Arthur Street East Mulberry Street
Ash Street Southeast Hull Street
Ashton Street Northwest Bridge Street
Atlantic Avenue Southeast and
northwest
Lovett Street
Baker Avenue North and south Pickett Street
Baker Avenue Northwest Odell Avenue
Baker Avenue Southeast Essex Street
Balch Street West McKay Street
Balch Street (Lower) Southeast Cabot Street
Balsam Drive Southwest Holly Lane
Bartlett Street East Lothrop Street
Bartlett Street North Cabot Street
Bartlett Street North and south Stone Street
Bass River Road Southeast Nursery Street, opposite
Beacon Street
Bass River Road Southeast Nursery Street, opposite
Clifton Avenue
Bates Park Avenue Northeast Bridge Street
Bates Park Avenue,
dead-end section
North Sylvester Avenue
Bay View Avenue Northwest Neptune Street
Beach Street Northwest Hale Street
Beach Street South West Street
Beacon Street Northwest Nursery Street
Beacon Street Southeast County Way
Beckford Street North Cabot Street
Beckford Street South Elliott Street
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:366
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Belmont Street Northeast and
southwest
Echo Avenue
Bennett Street West Beckford Street
Berrywood Lane Northwest Dodge Street
Bertram Street Northwest Odell Avenue
Bertram Street Southeast Essex Street
Beverly Hills Avenue Southwest Elliott Street
Big Rock Lane West Montserrat Road
Birch Woods Drive East Spruce Run
Birch Woods Drive North Cross Lane
Bisson Street East and west East Lothrop Street
Bisson Street Northwest Essex Street
Blake Street Northeast McKay Street
Boden Street East Cross Street
Boden Street Northwest Lothrop Street
Bow Street West Park Street
Bow Street [Added
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 390]
West Rantoul Street
Bridge Street East River Street
Brimbal Avenue Northwest and
southeast
Colon Street
Briscoe Street North Essex Street
Broadway East Cabot Street
Broadway West Cabot Street
Broadway West Park Street
Broadway West Rantoul Street
Broughton Drive Southwest Brimbal Avenue
Brown Street Northeast and
southwest
Thorndike Street
Budleigh Avenue North Laurel Street
Burley Street Northwest Essex Street
Burton Avenue Northwest Essex Street
Butman Street North and south Bisson Street
Butman Street Southwest Dane Street
Cabot Street North and south Conant Street
Cabot Street South Rantoul Street
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:367
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Carver Street East and west Livingstone Avenue
Cavendish Square West Cross Street
Cedar Street East East Street
Cedar Street Northwest Essex Street
Centerville School
Driveway
North Hull Street
Central Street East and west Lovett Street
Chapman Street North and south Federal Street
Chapman Street South Bow Street
Charles Street East Sohier Road
Charnock Street East and west Essex Street
Charnock Street Southeast Butman Street
Chase Street North and south Chestnut Street
Chase Street North and south Elliott Street
Chase Street North and south Pond Street
Chase Street North and south Roundy Street
Chase Street North and south West Dane Street
Cherry Road South Walker Road
Chestnut Street East Chase Street
Chipman Road Northeast Conant Street
Clark Avenue East Sargent Avenue
Cliff Street East Porter Street
Clifton Avenue Northwest Nursery Street
Clifton Avenue Southeast County Way
Clifton Avenue Southeast and
northwest
Tremont Street
Cogswell Avenue Southeast Essex Street
Colby Road Southeast Dartmouth Street
Cole Street Northwest Essex Street
Cole Street Southeast Foster Street
Colgate Road East McKay Street
College Lane North Presidential Circle
College Lane South Dunham Road
Colon Street East Essex Street
Colon Street North and south Brimbal Avenue
Colon Street Southwest Cabot Street
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:368
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Columbus Avenue West Cabot Street
Common Lane West Standley Street
Conant Street East and west Cabot Street
Congress Street East Cabot Street
Coolidge Court Southeast Elliott Street
Cornell Road East Dartmouth Street
Cornell Road
Extension
East Amherst Road
Corning Street East and west East Lothrop Street
Corning Street North Essex Street
County Way North Elliott Street
County Way Southeast Bridge Street
County Way
Extension
South Elliott Street
Cox Court North School Street
Cox Court South Cabot Street
Cox Court South Goat Hill Lane
Creek Street East Park Street
Creek Street [Added
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 390]
East Rantoul Street
Crescent Avenue West Kernwood Avenue
Cressey Street East Elliott Street
Cressey Street Southwest Bridge Street
Dane Street East and west Essex Street
Dane Street East and west Knowlton Street
Dane Street Northwest Cabot Street
Dane Street Northwest Hale Street, both sides
Dane Street Southeast and
northwest
Lovett Street, both sides
Dartmouth Street North Princeton Avenue
Davis Road North Guild Road
Davis Road South Elliott Street
Davis Street North Cabot Street
Dearborn Avenue Northeast Story Avenue
Dearborn Avenue Southeast Colon Street
Desmond Road South Hull Street
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:369
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Desmond Road West Sunnyvale Street
Doane Avenue North Bridge Street
Dodge Street Northwest Enon Street
Dodge Street Southwest Enon Street
Dodge Street West Cabot Street
Dolloff Avenue Northwest Bridge Street
Dolloff Avenue West Hillcrest Avenue
Douglas Avenue East Cabot Street
Driscoll Lane East Kennel Hill Drive
Driscoll Lane North Hull Street
Dunham Road West Brimbal Avenue
Dyer Road Northeast Hart Street
East Corning Street Southeast Neptune Street
Eastern Avenue North Northern Avenue
Eastern Avenue Southeast Bridge Street
East Street Southeast Lothrop Street
Eaton Avenue West Lindsey Avenue
Echo Avenue North Goodyear Street
Echo Avenue South Elliott Street
Edwards Street East Cabot Street
Edwards Street West Rantoul Street
Elliott Street East Cabot Street
Ellsworth Avenue Northwest Conant Street
Ellsworth Avenue Northwest and
southeast
Tremont Street
Ellsworth Avenue Southeast County Way
Elm Street North Vestry Street
Elnew Avenue Northwest Dodge Street
Evelyn Road Northwest Essex Street
Everett Street North Haskell Street
Everett Street Southeast Hale Street
Evergreen Drive South Ober Street
Fairview Avenue North Elliott Street
Federal Street West Rivers Street
Fern Street Southeast Holly Lane
Fielder Road Southeast Colon Street
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:370
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Folger Avenue Northwest Bridge Street
Forest Street Northwest Essex Street
Forest Street Southeast Hathaway Avenue
Foster Street Southwest Cole Street
Friend Street North and south Guild Road
Friend Street Southwest Elliott Street
Front Street West Cabot Street
Gage Street East Beckford Street
Gage Street North Mill Street
Galloupe Avenue North Elliott Street
Gardner Street Northwest Essex Street
Gardner Street Southeast Pearl Street
Garfield Avenue Southeast Western Avenue
Gateway Lane North Hull Street
Giles Avenue North Elliott Street
Giles Avenue Southwest Bridge Street
Glidden Street North and south Blake Street
Glidden Street North and south Matthies Street
Glidden Street Northeast McKay Street
Glidden Street Northwest Goodyear Street
Glidden Street Northwest and
southeast
Sturtevant Street
Goat Hill Lane West Cox Court
Goat Hill Lane West Summit Avenue
Goldsmith Avenue South Elliott Street
Goodyear Street Northeast Echo Avenue
Goodyear Street Northeast McKay Street
Grant Street East Beckford Street
Grant Street West Ropes Street
Greene Street Northeast Elliott Street
Greene Street Northwest Elliott Street
Greenwood Avenue Northeast Hart Street
Gregg Street South Bridge Street
Grover Street Northwest Essex Street
Grover Street Southeast Essex Street
Grove Street East Beach Street
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:371
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Grove Street Southeast Standley Street
Grove Street West Oak Street
Guild Road West Walcott Road
Hale Street North Hart Street
Hale Street Northeast and
southwest
Dane Street
Hale Street South West Street
Hale Street West Cabot Street
Hancock Street Northwest Essex Street
Hancock Street Southeast Butman Street
Hardy Street South Pleasant Street
Harrison Avenue West Cabot Street
Harris Street East and west Kernwood Avenue
Harris Street West Livingstone Avenue
Harwood Street Southeast Essex Street
Haskell Street North Hart Street
Haskell Street South Hale Street
Hathaway Avenue South Burley Street
Hawthorne Street Northwest Odell Avenue
Hawthorne Street Southeast Essex Street
Hayes Avenue Southeast Western Avenue
Heather Street Northwest Herrick Street
Heather Street Southeast Colon Street
Henderson Avenue West Story Avenue
Herrick Street Southwest Cabot Street
Herrick Street
Extension
Northeast Brimbal Avenue
Hersey Avenue Southwest Bridge Street
Hickory Lane Southeast Hull Street
High Street Northwest Hale Street
Hillcrest Avenue North Bridge Street
Hillside Avenue North Elliott Street
Hillside Avenue Southeast Bridge Street
Holding Street Northwest Western Avenue
Holly Lane Northeast Fern Street
Home Street West Rantoul Street
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:372
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Hull Street North Essex Street
Hull Street West Essex Street
Independence Circle South Grover Street
Iverson Road Northeast and
southwest
Parramatta Road
Iverson Road Southwest Corning Street
Jackson Street Northwest Essex Street
Jackson Street Southeast Butman Street
James Street South Pratt Avenue
Jenness Street West McKay Street
Judson Street East Mulberry Street
Judson Street West Chase Street
Juniper Street Southwest Hale Street
Kelleher Road Northwest Essex Street
Kennedy Drive North Virginia Avenue
Kennedy Drive South Hayes Avenue
Kennel Hill Drive North Hull Street
Kernwood Avenue North Bridge Street
Kernwood Avenue North and south Harris Street
Kernwood Avenue South Bridge Street
Kernwood Heights North Woodland Avenue
Kittredge Street Southwest Cabot Street
Knowlton Street North Charnock Street
Knowlton Street North and south Dane Street
Knowlton Street Southwest Cabot Street
Lake Shore Avenue Northwest Essex Street
Lake Shore Avenue Southeast Lothrop Street
Landers Drive
[Added 1-5-2015
by Ord. No. 253]
West Middlebury Lane
Larcom Avenue East and west Baker Avenue
Laurel Street North Dodge Street
Laurel Street Northwest Budleigh Avenue
Laurel Street Northwest Walnut Avenue
Lawrence Street North East Lothrop Street
Lawrence Street Northwest Lothrop Street
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:373
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Lawrence Street Southwest Bisson Street
Lee Street East Folger Avenue
Leech Street East Winthrop Avenue
Leech Street Northwest and
southeast
Kernwood Avenue
Leech Street West Winthrop Avenue
Lenox Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
West Rantoul Street
Liberty Street Northeast Corning Street
Linden Avenue East Wellman Street
Linden Avenue East and west Porter Street
Lindsey Avenue North Eaton Avenue
Lindsey Avenue Southwest Bridge Street
Livingstone Avenue North Woodlane Avenue
Livingstone Avenue North and south Bridge Street
Livingstone Avenue Northeast Upland Road
Livingstone Avenue South and north Harris Street
Locust Street South Bisson Street
Lothrop Street Northeast Stone Street
Lothrop Street Northeast and
southwest
Corning Street
Lothrop Street South Water Street
Lovett Street East and west Dane Street
Lovett Street North and south Central Street
Lovett Street Northeast and
southwest
Abbott Street
Lovett Street Northeast and
southwest
Washington Street
Lovett Street West Bartlett Street
Lowell Street Northwest Odell Avenue
Lowell Street Southeast Essex Street
Lyman Street West Cabot Street
MacArthur Road East Ellsworth Avenue
MacArthur Road Northwest Conant Street
Madison Avenue Northwest Prospect Street
Madison Avenue Southeast Essex Street
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:374
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Magnolia Street Northwest Odell Avenue
Magnolia Street Southeast Essex Street
Margin Street East River Street
Matthies Street East and west Echo Avenue
Matthies Street Northeast McKay Street
May Street North Cabot Street
McKay Street South Elliott Street
McKinley Avenue Northwest Odell Avenue
McPherson Drive South Federal Street
Meadow Road East Essex Street
Mechanic Street North Elliott Street
Meeting Place Circle Southwest Meadow Road
Middlebury Lane Northeast Grover Street
Middle Street South Bisson Street
Millbrook Road South Hull Street
Miller Road Northwest Essex Street
Mill Street East Beckford Street
Mill Street West Ropes Street
Milton Street East Cabot Street
Montserrat Road North and south Colon Street
Monument Square Northeast In front of number 2
Monument Square
Morningside Drive Southeast Dodge Street
Mulberry Street North and south Judson Street
Mulberry Street North and south Pond Street
Munroe Street Northwest Prospect Street
Munroe Street Southeast Essex Street
Nelson Avenue South Dodge Street
Neptune Street East Pickman Road
Neptune Street Northeast and
southwest
East Corning Street
Netherton Avenue Southeast Western Avenue
Newbury Street East Liberty Street
Newbury Street Northwest Essex Street
Noble Hill Road North Hull Street
Noble Hill Road Southwest Cobblers Lane
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:375
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Northern Avenue North Elliott Street
Northern Avenue Southwest County Way
Northwood Road Northwest Dodge Street
Nursery Street Northeast Ellsworth Avenue
Nursery Street West Dartmouth Street
Oakhurst Road Northwest Dodge Street
Oakmont Road Northeast Putnam Street
Oakmont Road West Brimbal Avenue
Oak Street North Hale Street
Oak Street Southwest West Street
Oceanside Drive North East Corning Street
Oceanside Drive South Ober Street
Ocean Street Southeast and
northwest
Lovett Street
Odell Avenue Northeast Spring Street
Odell Avenue South Pickett Street
Old Farm Road West Ellsworth Avenue
Old Rubbly Road Southwest Essex Street
Opal Avenue Southeast Elliott Street
Orchard Street North Bisson Street
Overlook Avenue
[Added 5-2-2016
by Ord. No. 067]
East Echo Avenue
Park Street North Elliott Street
Park Street North and south Federal Street
Parramatta Road Northwest Essex Street
Parramatta Road Southeast Lothrop Street
Parsons Drive Northwest Lothrop Street
Patti Road Northeast Grover Street
Peabody Avenue East Sargent Avenue
Peabody Avenue Southeast Essex Street
Pearl Street East Corning Street
Pearl Street North and south Parramatta Road
Pearl Street Southwest Newbury Street
Pearl Street
Extension
West Corning Street
Pearson Street Northwest Goodyear Street
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:376
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Pearson Street Northwest and
southeast
Matthies Street
Pearson Street Northwest and
southeast
Sturtevant Street
Picked Street West Cabot Street
Pierce Avenue South Charnock Street
Pillow Lace Lane North Noble Hill Road
Pine Knoll Drive North Hull Street
Pinewood Avenue Northwest Herrick Street Extension
Pleasant Street West Park Street
Pleasant Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
West Rantoul Street
Pleasant Street West River Street
Pond Street [Added
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 390]
West Rantoul Street
Porter Street North Webber Avenue
Porter Street South Congress Street
Porter Terrace Southwest Upland Road
Powers Street West Herrick Street
Pratt Avenue East Locust Street
Pratt Avenue East and west Butman Street
Pratt Avenue Northwest Essex Street
Presidential Circle West Dunham Road
Prince Street North Hale Street
Princeton Avenue East McKay Street
Princeton Avenue East and west County Way
Princeton Avenue West Nursery Street
Priscilla Road East Cabot Street
Prospect Street North Harrison Avenue
Prospect Street South Charnock Street
Putnam Street Northwest Dodge Street
Putnam Street Northwest and
southeast
Walnut Avenue
Ray Street East Cross Street
Ray Street Northwest Lothrop Street
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:377
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Red Rock Lane Northwest Dodge Street
Reservoir Road
[Added 5-2-2016
by Ord. No. 068]
East Sohier Road
Riverside Street East Park Street
Riverside Street West Park Street
River Street North Federal Street
River Street South School Street
River Street
Extension
North Elliott Street
River Street
Extension
South Federal Street
Robb Road East Wirling Drive
Robb Road West Nelson Avenue
Roderick Avenue North Bridge Street
Roderick Avenue South Sylvester Avenue
Ropes Street North Simon Street
Ropes Street South Mill Street
Roundy Street East Cabot Street
Roundy Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
East Rantoul Street
Roundy Street East and west Park Street
Route 127 (old route
in front of St.
Margaret's Church)
West Intersection of New
Route 127 (Hale Street)
and Haskell Street
Rowell Avenue North Greene Street
Roy Avenue Northwest Dodge Street
Russell Street West Cabot Street
Salem Road South Herrick Street
Salters Avenue South Crescent Avenue
Sam Fonzo Drive North L.P. Henderson Road
Sam Fonzo Drive Southwest Cherry Hill Drive
Scenna Road Southeast Hull Street
School Street East and west Wellman Street
Shannon Lane Southeast Independence Circle
Sherman Street Northwest Odell Avenue
Sherman Street Southeast Essex Street
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:378
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Simon Street Southeast Cabot Street
Simon Street West Ropes Street
Smithson Drive Northwest Lothrop Street
Sohier Road North Herrick Street
Sonning Road North Longmeadow Road
South Terrace North Sylvester Avenue
Spring Street South Essex Street
Spring Street West Colon Street
Spruce Run North Cross Lane
Stewart Avenue East Giles Avenue
Stewart Avenue West Lindsey Avenue
Stone Street East Lothrop Street
Stone Street North Bartlett Street
Stone Street Northwest Cabot Street
Stone Street South Bartlett Street
Story Avenue Southeast Colon Street
Sturtevant Street Northeast McKay Street
Sturtevant Street Southwest and
northeast
Echo Avenue
Summer Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
West Rantoul Street
Summit Avenue East Cox Court
Sunnycrest Avenue North Bridge Street
Sunset Drive Southwest Elliott Street
Swan Street Southwest Cabot Street
Sylvan Road Northeast and
southwest
Parramatta Road
Sylvan Road Southwest Corning Street
Sylvester Avenue West Bates Park Avenue
Taft Avenue Southeast Western Avenue
Temi Road South Hull Street
Thissell Street South Hale Street
Thissell Street Southeast Hale Street
Thompson Road Southeast Brimbal Avenue
Thompson Road Southwest Herrick Street Extension
Thoreau Circle Southeast Essex Street, both ends
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-25
1:379
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Thorndike Street West Cabot Street
Thorndike Street West Lovett Street
Tozer Road East Sohier Road
Trask Street Northwest and
southwest
Cabot Street
Tremont Street East Cabot Street
Tremont Street Northeast and
southwest
Ellsworth Avenue
Tremont Street Southeast Clifton Avenue
Upland Road Southeast Kernwood Avenue
Valley Street South Hale Street
Victor Avenue Northwest Corning Street
Victor Avenue West East Street
Vine Street Northwest Hale Street
Vine Street Southeast Oak Street
Virginia Avenue Northeast Bridge Street
Walker Road Southeast Essex Street
Walker Road West Grover Street
Wallis Street East Cabot Street
Wallis Street [Added
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 390]
East Rantoul Street
Walnut Avenue Northeast Putnam Street
Walnut Avenue Northeast and
southwest
Laurel Street
Walnut Avenue West Brimbal Avenue
Warren Street Southeast Newbury Street
Washington Street Southeast and
northwest
Lovett Street
Water Street West Cabot Street
Webber Avenue East River Street
Webber Avenue Southwest Porter Street
Webster Avenue North Greenwood Avenue
Webster Avenue Southeast Haskell Street
Wedgemere Road Southeast Hull Street
Wellman Street North and south School Street
Wellman Street Northwest Webber Avenue
§ 270-25 BEVERLY CODE § 270-25
1:380
§ 270-26. Yield intersections.
On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Wellman Street South Congress Street
Wentworth Drive North Hull Street
Wentzell Avenue West Bartlett Street
West Dane Street East Park Street
West Dane Street East Rantoul Street
Western Avenue Northeast Bridge Street
Western Avenue South Shortell Avenue
Western Avenue Southeast Shortell Avenue
Whitman Place North Middlebury Lane
Whitman Place South Thoreau Circle
Whitney Avenue Northwest Odell Avenue
Williams Street North and south Guild Road
Williams Street Southwest Elliott Street
Windham Lane North Thaxton Road
Windham Lane South Old Planters Road
Windsor Road South Russell Street
Winslow Road South Elliott Street
Winter Street East Essex Street
Winthrop Avenue Northwest Bridge Street
Wirling Drive Southeast Dodge Street
Woodbury Street
Extension
North Ober Street
Woodland Avenue Northwest Greene Street
Yale Boulevard East Dartmouth Street
Yale Boulevard East Nursery Street
Yankee Way Southeast Essex Street
Every driver of a vehicle or other conveyance approaching an
intersection of ways, where there exists facing him an official sign
bearing the word "yield," such sign having been erected in accordance
with the written approval of the Department of Transportation of the
commonwealth and such approval being in effect, shall surrender to
oncoming traffic his right to enter the intersection until such time as
he has brought his vehicle or other conveyance to a complete stop
at a point between the "yield" sign and the nearer line of the street
intersection; provided, however, that this requirement to stop before
entering the intersection shall not apply when a driver approaching
a "yield" sign can enter the intersection in safety without causing
A.
§ 270-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-26
1:381
§ 270-27. Right-on-red turns; care in stopping; following too
closely. [Amended 5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 143; 8-1-1995 by Ord. No.
308; 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 482]
§ 270-28. Divided roadways.
§ 270-29. Driving on road surfaces under construction or repair.143
No operator shall enter upon the road surface of any street or highway,
or section thereof, when by reason of construction, surface treatment,
maintenance or the like, or because of some unprotected hazard, such road
surface is closed to travel, and one or more signs, lights, or signals have
been erected to indicate that all or part of the road surface of the street
or highway is not to be used, or when so advised by an officer, watchman,
interference to approaching traffic. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord.
No. 013]
This section shall not apply when the traffic is otherwise directed by
an officer or by a lawful traffic-regulating sign, signal or device or as
provided in § 270-33.
B.
A. Right-on-red turns are prohibited when posted.
Care in stopping. Except as otherwise provided in 720 CMR 9.08(3), the
driver of any vehicle, before starting, stopping, turning from a direct
line, or backing, shall first see that such movement can be made in
safety. If such movement cannot be made in safety or if it interferes
unduly with the normal movement of other traffic, said driver shall
wait for a more favorable opportunity to make such a movement. If the
operation of another vehicle should be affected by a stopping or turning
movement, the driver of such other vehicle shall be given a plainly
visible signal, as required by MGL c. 90, § 14B.
B.
Following too closely. The driver of a vehicle shall not follow another
vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard
to the speed of such vehicle and the traffic upon and condition of the
highway.
C.
Upon such roadways as are divided by a parkway, grass plot,
reservation, viaduct, subway or by any structure or area, drivers shall
keep to the right of such division, except when otherwise directed by
an officer, signs, signals or markings.
A.
At any junction or crossing of ways where the roadway grades have
been separated and where the ways are connected by ramps, and at any
intersection of ways in which there are channelizing islands, drivers of
vehicles shall proceed only as indicated by signs, signals or markings.
B.
143. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-26 BEVERLY CODE § 270-29
1:382
member of a street or highway crew or employee of the City, either audibly
or by signals.
§ 270-30. Snowmobiles prohibited in certain areas.
§ 270-31. Motorized vehicles prohibited on public property.
[Amended 12-2-1996 by Ord. No. 401]
§ 270-32. Rights and duties of drivers in funeral or other
processions.
At an intersection where a traffic-control signal is operating or a stop sign
is located, the operator of the first vehicle in a funeral or other procession
shall be the only one governed by the traffic signal indication or the stop
sign.
§ 270-33. Obedience to special traffic-control devices. [Last
amended 10-9-2013 by Ord. No. 100]
No person shall operate a snowmobile in any of the following places:
(1) Property of the Beverly Golf and Tennis Club.
(2) Any land under control of the Cemetery Commission.144
A.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of $50.
B.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, moped, minibike or
motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle on public property, except
paved roads.
A.
No person shall operate any motor vehicle, moped, minibike,
motorcycle or any other motorized vehicle on or through any roadways
designated as fire roads, "Emergency Vehicle Only" roads or "No
Unauthorized Vehicles" roads. Such roads shall be properly posted with
a sign containing but not limited to the words "NO UNAUTHORIZED
VEHICLES" and a fine of $150.
B.
Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to a
fine of $150.145
C.
Generally. Where official traffic-control signals are erected directing
specific traffic to use a designated lane or designating lanes to be used
by traffic moving in a particular direction regardless of the center of
the roadway, or to prohibit a turn or to make a required turn at an
intersection of roadways, drivers of vehicles shall obey the direction of
every such device.
A.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-33
1:383
Turning movements generally.
Right lanes must turn right.
Name of Street Direction of Travel Required Turn
Colon Street
[Amended
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 390]
South Onto Cabot Street
Conant Street East Onto Dodge Street
Elliott Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
East Onto Rantoul Street
Elliott Street West Onto McKay Street
(1)
B.
Right- and left-hand turns prohibited.
Name of Street Location Prohibited
Turn
Elliott Street From the eastbound lane of
Elliott Street onto Cressy Street
Right
River Street From the southbound lane of
River Street into the westbound
lane of School Street, from 6:00
a.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Right
C.
Do not enter.
Location Days Times
Bosworth Street from
Balch Street
Monday through Friday 3:00 p.m. to 7:00
p.m.
Cressy Street at the
Elliott Street, Route
62 end of Cressy
Street
Ellsworth Avenue at
Conant Street
Monday through Friday 3:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.
MacArthur Road at
Conant Street
Monday through Friday 3:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.
Putnam Street: one
way from Oakmont
Road to Dodge Street,
traffic to proceed
northwesterly
From September
through June
7:30 a.m. to 8:30
a.m. and 1:30 p.m. to
2:30 p.m.
River Street at
Pleasant Street
Monday through Friday 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
D.
§ 270-33 BEVERLY CODE § 270-33
1:384
Location Days Times
Tremont Street from
Cabot Street
7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.
Tremont Street from
Ellsworth Avenue
4:00 p.m. to 6:00
p.m.
U-turns prohibited. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 390]
U-turns are prohibited at Route 1 median islands:
Northbound at approximately Stations 58+89, 60+03, 89+42,
90+79.
(a)
Southbound at approximately Stations 57+88, 59+45, 88+45,
90+30.
(b)
(1)
U-turns are prohibited at Cabot Street east median island:
(a) Westbound at approximately Station 100+42E.
(b) Eastbound at approximately Station 101+16E.
(2)
E.
Right turn only. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 390]
Name of Street Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Cabot Street West Rantoul Street
F.
Left lane must turn left; center lane must go straight. [Added
7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 390]
Left lane must turn left.
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Cabot Street West Balch Street
Cabot Street West Beckford Street
Colon Street South Cabot Street
Elliott Street East Rantoul Street
Elliott Street West Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street North Elliott Street
Rantoul Street South Elliott Street
(1)
Center lane must go straight.
Name of
Street
Direction of
Travel
At Intersection of
Elliott Street East Rantoul Street
(2)
G.
§ 270-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-34
1:385
§ 270-34. Railroad crossings.
No person shall stop his/her motor vehicle on the railroad tracks. Violation
of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $50.
§ 270-35. Truck traffic prohibited on certain streets. [Amended
10-16-1994 by Ord. No. 402; 6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 143]
§ 270-36. One-way streets. [Last amended 7-10-2013 by Ord. No.
117]
Upon the following streets or parts of streets, vehicular traffic shall move
only in the direction indicated below:
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Abbott Street Westerly From Lothrop Street to Cabot
Street
Arthur Street Easterly From Mulberry Street to Judson
Street
Atlantic Avenue Easterly From Hale Street to Lothrop
Street
Trucks at or above the following specified weight limits shall not travel
on the following listed streets:
Name of Street
Weight Limit
(tons) Location
Congress Street
2 1/2
From Cabot Street to
Wellman Street, except
trucks entering business on
Congress Street
Eastern Avenue 2 1/2 Entire length
Grover Street 2 1/2 From Dodge Street to Essex
Street, Route 22
Northern Avenue 2 1/2 Entire length
School Street 2 1/2 From River Street to
Wellman Street
Webber Avenue 2 1/2 From River Street to
Wellman Street
Wellman Street 2 1/2 Entire length
A.
This section does not exclude vehicles over 2 1/2 tons that may have a
legitimate purpose on any of these streets, including but not limited to
oil trucks, delivery trucks, telephone trucks, moving vans, school buses,
etc.
B.
§ 270-34 BEVERLY CODE § 270-36
1:386
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Beckford Street Northerly on the
east side of the
island
From 212 feet north of Elliott
Street to 388 feet south of Cabot
Street
Beckford Street Southerly on the
west side of the
island
From 388 feet south of Cabot
Street to 212 feet from Elliott
Street
Blaine Avenue Southerly From Cabot Street to Balch Street
Boden Street Westerly From Cross Street to East Lothrop
Street
Bow Street Westerly From Cabot Street to Rantoul
Street
Bow Street Westerly From Rantoul Street to Park
Street
Broadway Westerly From Rantoul Street to Park
Street
Central Street Easterly From Cabot Street to Lothrop
Street
Charles Street Easterly From Cabot Street to Sohier Road
Charnock Street Westerly From Butman Street to Cabot
Street
Chase Street Southerly From Chestnut Street to Elliott
Street
Chestnut Street Easterly From Rantoul Street to Cabot
Street
Cox Court Southerly From Summit Avenue to Cabot
Street
Dartmouth Street Easterly From Nursery Street to County
Way
Davis Street Southerly From Stone Street to Front Street
Elm Street Southerly From Vestry Street to Railroad
Avenue
Essex Street Northeasterly From Cabot Street to Dane Street
Fayette Street Easterly From Rantoul Street to Cabot
Street
Federal Street Easterly From Rantoul Street to Cabot
Street
Front Street Westerly From Bartlett Street to Cabot
Street
Galloupe Avenue Westerly From Elliott Street to Mechanic
Street
§ 270-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-36
1:387
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Green Street Northeasterly From Upper Elliott Street to
Lower Elliott Street
Hale Street Westerly That portion formerly part of the
main traveled way on Hale Street
and now used as an approach to
St. Margaret's Club and School
Hardy Street
[Amended
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 399]
Northerly From Pleasant Street to Railroad
Avenue
Judson Street Easterly From Chase Street to Cabot
Street
Kittredge Street Northeasterly From Cabot Street to Beverly
High School
Laurel Street Northerly From Oakmont Street to Walnut
Street
Laurel Street Northerly From Walnut Avenue to Budleigh
Avenue
Lenox Street Westerly From Cabot Street to Rantoul
Street
Lyman Street Southerly From Sohier Road to Cabot Street
Margin Street Southerly From West Federal Street to
Bridge Street
Mason Street Northerly From Cabot Street to Sohier Road
May Street Easterly From Cabot Street to Lovett
Street
Mechanic Street Northerly From Roundy Street to Elliott
Street
Mechanic Street Northerly From West Dane Street to Roundy
Street
Myrtle Street Easterly From Rantoul Street to Cabot
Street
Ocean Street Westerly From Lothrop Street to Hale
Street
Pleasant Street
[Amended
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 399]
Westerly From Cabot Street to Hardy
Street
§ 270-36 BEVERLY CODE § 270-36
1:388
Name of Street
Direction of
Travel Location
Pleasant Street
[Amended
7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 399]
Westerly From Rantoul Street to Park
Street
Railroad Avenue Easterly From Park Street to Rantoul
Street
Ray Street Easterly From East Lothrop Street to Cross
Street
Riverside Street Westerly From Rantoul Street to Park
Street
Roundy Street Easterly From Rantoul Street to Cabot
Street
Russell Street Southwesterly From property of Beverly High
School to Windsor Road
School Street Westerly From Cabot Street to Rantoul
Street
Scott Street Southwesterly From Cabot Street to Ellsworth
Avenue
Standley Street Northerly From Grove Street to Essex Street
Stewart Avenue Easterly From Giles Avenue to County Way
Summer Street Westerly From Cabot Street to Rantoul
Street
Swan Street Southerly From Sohier Road to Cabot Street
Thorndike Street Westerly From Lovett Street to Lothrop
Street
Vestry Street Easterly From Elm Street to Cabot Street
Wallis Street Easterly From Park Street to Rantoul
Street
Wallis Street Easterly From Rantoul Street to Cabot
Street
West Dane Street Westerly From Cabot Street to Rantoul
Street
Wilkins Terrace Easterly Past 127 Dodge Street
Wilkins Terrace Westerly Past 129 Dodge Street
Willow Street Northerly From Bay Street to Lovett Street
Winter Street Easterly From Cabot Street to Essex Street
§ 270-37. Bicycle lanes. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 390]
§ 270-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-37
1:389
Bicycle lanes shall be created in the following locations: [Amended
11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 482A]
Name of Street Location
Brimbal Avenue From Walnut Avenue to Route 128 Ramp
(before overpass)
Brimbal Avenue From Route 128 Overpass to Colon Street
Budleigh Avenue Entire length
Cabot Street From State DOT marker (499 Cabot Street) to
Lenox Street
Dodge Street From Whitaker Way to the Town of Wenham
Elliott Street From Cabot Street to Rantoul Street
Essex Street Evelyn Road to Route 128
Hale Street From Monument Square to Dane Street
Hale Street From Lothrop Street to Boyles Street
Old Essex Road Southbound within 200 feet of Essex Street
Rantoul Street Entire length
Sohler Road From Bomac Road to Tozer Road
Tozer Road From Sohler Road to 55 Tozer Road
A.
A bicycle lane shall be defined as a portion of the roadway that has
been designated by striping, signing, and pavement markings for the
preferential and exclusive use of bicyclists.
B.
Bicyclists, wherever practical, shall remain in a designated bicycle lane.
All other traffic shall refrain from using designated bicycle lanes.
C.
§ 270-37 BEVERLY CODE § 270-37
1:390
ARTICLE VI
Stopping, Standing and Parking Restrictions
§ 270-38. General prohibitions. [Amended 2-7-2013 by Ord. No. 6]
No person shall stand or park and no person shall allow, permit or suffer
any vehicle registered in his name to stand or park in any of the following
places:
§ 270-39. Fire lanes.
Within an intersection, except within those intersections where the
installation of parking regulation devices has been specifically
approved by the Department of Transportation of the commonwealth.146
A.
B. Upon any sidewalk.
C. Upon any crosswalk.
D. Upon the roadway in a rural or sparsely settled district.
Upon the roadway where parking is permitted, unless both wheels on
the right side of the vehicle are within 12 inches of the curb or edge
of the roadway, except upon those streets which are designated as oneway
streets. On such one-way streets, vehicles shall be parked in the
direction in which such vehicle is moving and with both wheels within
12 inches of the curb. This shall not apply to streets or parts of streets
where angle parking is required by this article.
E.
Upon any roadway where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear
and unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing traffic.
F.
G. Upon any street or highway within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
Upon or in front of any private road or driveway without the consent of
the owner of such private road or driveway.
H.
Upon any street or highway within 20 feet of an intersecting way,
except in those areas where a sign indicating a greater distance has
been erected and is in position and except at alleys.
I.
Upon any street or way or private way which is designated as a fire lane
by the erection of official signs.
J.
K. Within five feet of either side of a driveway.
Upon or within any designated parking space for disabled veterans or
handicapped persons.
L.
In any bicycle lane established under § 270-37. [Added 11-6-2017 by
Ord. No. 482A]
M.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-39
1:391
§ 270-40. Parking and storing recreational equipment.
§ 270-41. Parking prohibited at all times. [Last amended 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390147]
Upon the following streets or highways, or parts thereof, parking is hereby
prohibited at all times:
Name of Street Side Location
Abbott Street North From the fire station property 225
feet southerly and westerly
Abbott Street South From Endicott Street to Brown
Street
Access Road South From Dodge Street 150 feet easterly
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or block a private way with a vehicle or
other means so as to prevent access to any building by fire apparatus
or equipment.
A.
It shall be unlawful to obstruct or park any vehicle in any fire lane, such
fire lanes to be designated by the Chief of the Fire Department and
posted and marked as such. Such fire lanes shall be a distance of 12
feet from the curbing at a sidewalk for a mall, shopping center, hotel,
all schools, institutions, nursing homes or apartment buildings. Where
no sidewalks with curbing exist, the distance shall be 18 feet from the
building. [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
B.
The building owner of record shall provide, install and maintain signs
and pavement striping as provided in Subsection B of this section.
C.
This section shall be enforced by the Police Department in accordance
with the provisions of MGL c. 90, § 20A, except where uniformed
security officers, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 147,
§ 10F, are charged with the enforcement of this section.
D.
Any motor vehicle parked in a designated fire lane may be towed when
such removal is authorized by a police officer with the rank of Sergeant
or higher.
E.
For the purposes of this section, "recreational equipment" shall be
defined as any boat and boat trailer and any tent trailer or other similar
trailers.
A.
No person shall park or store any recreational equipment on any street
in any R (residential) District for a period of over 24 hours within the
City.
B.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of $50.
C.
147. Editor's Note: Subsequent amendments noted in the table where applicable.
§ 270-39 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:392
Name of Street Side Location
Arlington Avenue North From Dodge Street to the property
of the Beverly-Salem Water Plant
Arthur Street North From Chase Street to Mulberry
Street
Arthur Street South From Mulberry Street to Arthur
Court
Ashland Street West From Home Street to Federal Street
Atlantic Avenue North From Hale Street to Lothrop Street
Balch Street North From Blaine Avenue to McKay
Street
Balch Street North From the west side of Cabot Street
to a point 45 feet on Balch Street
Balch Street South From the west side of Cabot Street
to a point 40 feet on Balch Street
Balch Street South From McKay Street to 429 feet
easterly
Balch Street Southeast 50 feet from the North Shore
Vocational School driveway
Balch Street Southwest 50 feet from the North Shore
Vocational School driveway
Bancroft Avenue Southwest,
southeast and
northeast
From Hale Street to Hale Street
Bartlett Street East From Lovett Street to Wentzell
Avenue
Bartlett Street West From Cabot Street to 19 Bartlett
Street
Bay Street North From Lovett Street to Lothrop
Street (even-numbered side)
Bayview Avenue Southwest From Neptune Street for 80 feet
Beach Street Both From West Street to Hale Street
Beckford Street East From Cabot Street to opposite Grant
Street
Beckford Street East From Elliott Street 50 feet northerly
Beckford Street West From Cabot Street to Grant Street
Bennett Street East From Cabot Street to Beckford
Street
Bertha Avenue Both 80 feet easterly from Echo Avenue
Blaine Avenue West From Balch Street to Cabot Street
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:393
Name of Street Side Location
Blake Street South From McKay Street to Glidden
Street
Boden Street South From Cross Street to East Lothrop
Street
Bow Street North From Cabot Street to Park Street
Boyles Street Both From Hale Street to Cross Lane
Brackenbury Lane Both From Hale Street to the water
Bradford Road North Entire length
Bresnahan Court
Extension
Both From Herrick Street to 13
Bresnahan Court
Bridge Street North From County Way to 20 feet east of
Winchester Terrace
Bridge Street North From River Street to a point 40 feet
west of the Hall-Whitaker Bridge
Bridge Street North Entire length of the Ryal Side School
property
Bridge Street South From Bates Park Avenue 30 feet
easterly
Bridge Street South From River Street to a point 200
feet west of the Hall-Whitaker
Bridge
Bridge Street South From Roderick Avenue 80 feet
westerly
Briscoe Street East From Essex Street to 190 feet south
Brown Street East From Thorndike Street to Abbott
Street
Butman Street Northwest From Dane Street to Jackson Street
Butterworth Road Across from driveway at 13
Butterworth Road, one space
Cabot Street East From 111 Cabot Street to 115 Cabot
Street
Cabot Street East From 409 Cabot Street to Swan
Street
Cabot Street East From 449 Cabot Street to Kittredge
Street
Cabot Street East From Conant Street to a point 55
feet south
Cabot Street East From Conant Street to a point 85
feet north
Cabot Street East From Elliott Street to 185 feet north
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:394
Name of Street Side Location
Cabot Street East From Harrison Avenue to Pickett
Street
Cabot Street East From Stone Street to Abbott Street
Cabot Street East From the northerly driveway to a
point 120 feet north on Cabot Street
Cabot Street North From Beverly Salem Bridge to Cox
Court
Cabot Street North At approximately 10 feet past the
driveway at 413 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 419 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately the driveway of
423 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 429 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 433 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 435 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 439 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 443 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North From Colon Street to 390 feet west
beyond Charles Street
Cabot Street North From County Drive to Longmeadow
Road
Cabot Street North 40 feet from the corner of Fayette
Street
Cabot Street South From Bennett Street to Rantoul
Street
Cabot Street South At approximately 416 Cabot Street
Cabot Street South At approximately 433 Cabot Street
Cabot Street South At approximately 443 Cabot Street
Cabot Street South Opposite approximately the
intersection of Mason Street
Cabot Street South From Rantoul Street to the Boston
and Maine Railroad
Cabot Street South and
west
From Simon Street to 412 Cabot
Street
Cabot Street West From the north side of Balch Street
to a point 35 feet on Cabot Street
Cabot Street West From the south side of Balch Street
to a point 50 feet on Cabot Street
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:395
Name of Street Side Location
Cabot Street West Southerly from the driveway at
#182 Cabot Street to Milton Street
(one space)
Cabot Street West From Conant Street to a point 50
feet northerly
Cabot Street West From County Way to Tremont Street
Cabot Street West From Roundy Street to Elliott Street
Central Court East From the corner of Central Street 50
feet southerly
Central Court West From Central Street to May Street
Central Street North From Cabot Street to Lothrop Street
Central Street North From Lothrop Street to 50 feet
easterly
Chapman Street East From Bow Street to Federal Street
Chapman Street West From Bow Street to Federal Street
Chapman Terrace South Entire length
Charles Street West Entire length
Charnock Street South From Cabot Street to Butman Street
Chase Street East From Chestnut Street to Chestnut
Park
Chase Street West From Chestnut Street 60 feet south
Chase Street West From Federal Street to Elliott Street
Chestnut Street North From Chase Street to Cabot Street
Church Street North From Briscoe Street to Essex Street
Colon Street East From Cabot Street to 50 feet
northeast
Colon Street East From Sohier Road to Heather Street
Colon Street West From Heather Street to Brimbal
Avenue
Columbus Avenue South Opposite 8 Columbus Avenue
Common Lane Both From the junction of Foster Street
and Standley Street to Thissel Street
Conant Street North From Cabot Street to a point 45 feet
northerly
Conant Street South From Cabot Street to a point 100
feet easterly
Conant Street South From Cabot Street to a point 45 feet
westerly
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:396
Name of Street Side Location
Conant Street South Starting at a point 296 feet from the
intersection of Cabot Street and
Conant Street for a distance of 350
feet east
Congress Street Both From the main line of the Boston
and Maine Railroad to Porter Street
Congress Street South From Cabot Street 35 feet west
Connolly Place Both Entire length
Connor Road End of Connor Road in the cul-desac
Corning Street Northeast From 96 Corning Street to Hale
Street
Cottage Street Both Entire length, from South Street to
Bartlett Street
County Way [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 231]
East From Bridge Street to Northern
Avenue
County Way West From Cabot Street 175 feet south
County Way
Extension
East From Cabot Street 232 feet south
Cox Court East Entire length
Creek Street North From Rantoul Street to Park Street
Creek Street South From Park Street west to the
property of the City of Beverly
Dane Street Both From Essex Street to approximately
75 feet east
Dane Street North From Cabot Street to Hale Street
Dane Street South From Knowlton Street to Hale Street
Dane Street South From Lovett Street to Lothrop
Street
East Corning Street Both Entire length
East Lothrop Street West For 60 feet south from Bisson Street
East Street North From Victor Road to Cooney Athletic
Field
East Street South From Middle Street to Cooney Field
Echo Avenue East From 19 Echo Avenue
Echo Avenue West From Elliott Street to Goodyear
Street
Elliott Street Both From Park Street to Echo Avenue
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:397
Name of Street Side Location
Elliott Street East At approximately 50 Cabot Street
Elliott Street East At approximately 8 Elliott Street
Elliott Street East At approximately 44-46 Elliott Street
(loading zone)
Elliott Street East At approximately 50 Elliott Street
(loading zone)
Elliott Street North Westerly from Rantoul Street to the
first driveway entrance
Elliott Street North From the west side of Rantoul Street
to a point 30 feet on Elliott Street
Elliott Street South From Rantoul Street to a point 75
feet east
Elliott Street South From the west side of Rantoul Street
to a point 25 feet on Elliott Street
Elliott Street West Opposite approximately 22 Cabot
Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 45 Cabot Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 50 feet past the
intersection of Cabot Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 13 Elliott Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 41 Elliott Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 51-53 Elliott Street
Ellsworth Avenue North From County Way to Scott Street
Elm Street Both Entire length
Endicott Street West From Thorndike Street to Abbott
Street
Essex Bridge Either side of the Beverly end
Essex Street Both From Dane Street to 75 feet north
Essex Street East From Bisson Street to Pratt Avenue
Essex Street East From Charnock Street to 50 feet
south
Essex Street East From Church Street to Dane Street
Essex Street East From Dane Street to 60 feet south
Essex Street East From Hancock Street to Bisson
Street
Essex Street West From 254 Essex Street to Ice House
Lane
Essex Street West From Munroe Street to Baker
Avenue
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:398
Name of Street Side Location
Evereff Street Both From Hale Street 150 feet
northwest
Evergreen Drive Both Entire length
Fayette Street South From Cabot Street to Rantoul Street
Federal Street North From Cabot Street to River Street
Federal Street South From Rantoul Street to Park Street
Fielder Road Both Entire length
Folger Avenue East From Bridge Street 70 feet south
Fossa Terrace North and
west
From the east line of Bartlett Street
to the south line of Wentzell Avenue
Franklin Place Both From Cabot Street to dead end
Front Street North From No. 26 Front Street to Bartlett
Street
Gage Street West Entire length
Galloupe Avenue North From Elliott Street to Mechanic
Street
Garden Street East From Woodland Avenue to end
Giles Avenue East From Elliott Street to Bridge Street
Glidden Street South From McKay Street to Blake Street
Goodyear Street North Entire length
Grant Street South Entire length
Greenwood Avenue Both From Webster Avenue east to
Common Lane
Grove Street Both Entire length
Hale Street Both From Beach Street to West Street
Hale Street Both From 865 Hale Street to
intersection of Route 127
Hale Street East Opposite 42 Hale Street, one space
Hale Street East From 233 Hale Street to 245 Hale
Street
Hale Street East From Neptune Street to
Brackenbury Lane
Hale Street North From Orchard Street to opposite
105 Hale Street
Hale Street Northwest From 146 Hale Street to Corning
Street
Hale Street South From Cabot Street to Briscoe Street
Hale Street South From High Street to Valley Street
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:399
Name of Street Side Location
Hale Street West From Atlantic Avenue to Dane Street
Hale Street West Between the crosswalk on Hale
Street and the driveway servicing
210 Hale Street
Hale Street West Between the driveway servicing 210
Hale Street and the intersection of
Morrison Avenue
Hale Street West From High Street to Hart Street
Hardy Street Both Entire length
Hardy Street West From Pleasant Street 120 feet north
Hart Street Both From Haskell Street to Chapman's
Greenhouses (58 Hart Street)
Hart Street North From Valley Street 225 feet east
Hart Street South From Haskell Street 150 feet east
Hart Street Southwest From Hale Street northwest to 24
Hart Street
Haskell Street East Beginning at a point 270 feet from
the corner of Everett Street to 150
feet north
Haskell Street East From Hale Street 425 feet north
Haskell Street
[Amended
11-6-2017 by Ord.
No. 373]
West From Rezza Road to Hale Street
Heather Street Northeast From Colon Street to 20 feet north
of 34 Heather Street
Heather Street Southwest From Herrick Street 200 feet
southeast
Herrick Street Both From Sohier Road to 120 feet
southwest
Herrick Street Both From Sohier Road to Thompson
Road
Herrick Street East From Sohier Road to 80 feet
northeast
Herrick Street North From Cabot Street to the end
Hersey Avenue East From Bridge Street to the end
Hidden Road Both From the corner of Brackenbury
Lane to the cul-de-sac
Highland Terrace Both From Highland Avenue to dead end
Hillside Avenue Both From Elliott Street to 80 feet south
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:400
Name of Street Side Location
Hill Street Both Entire length
Home Street South From Rantoul Street to Bow Street
Hopkins Avenue West Entire length
Hull Street [Added
12-21-2015 by
Ord. No. 494B;
amended 8-1-2016
by Ord. No. 169]
North From Essex Street to Desmond
Road, except 8 parking spaces in
front of Cahill Park
Hull Street [Added
12-21-2015 by
Ord. No. 494B;
amended 8-1-2016
by Ord. No. 169]
South From Desmond Road to Essex Street
Ives Street North From Lovett Street to Lothrop
Street
Jackson Street South Entire length
Jordan Street West From Kittredge Street to Russell
Street
Judson Street North From Cabot Street to Mulberry
Street
Kathleen Drive Both Entire length
Kernwood Avenue West From Bridge Street 200 feet south
Kernwood Bridge Both Entire length
Lakeview Avenue South From Enon Street to 50 feet west
Laurel Street North and
south
Between Dodge Street and Budleigh
Avenue
Lenox Street North Entire length
Lenox Street South Entire length
Longmeadow Road East From Cabot Street to Sonning Road
Longmeadow Road West From Cabot Street to Edgewood
Road
Lothrop Street West From Stone Street to Hale Street
Lovett Street East From Bartlett Street to Smith Street
Lovett Street West From Bartlett Street to Washington
Street
Marshall Court East From dead end to Webber Avenue
Marshall Court North Entire length
Matthies Street South From McKay Street to Glidden
Street
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:401
Name of Street Side Location
May Street North From Cabot Street to Lovett Street
May Street South From Lovett Street 137 feet west
McKay Street East From Elliott Street to Sturtevant
Street
McKay Street West From Elliott Street to Goodyear
Street
McKay Street West From the main driveway of Beverly
Golf and Tennis Club 43 feet north
McPherson Drive Both Entire length
Mechanic Street West From West Dane Street to Roundy
Street
Melvin Avenue North Entire length
Mill Street South From the footbridge to Beckford
Street
Milton Court Both From Cabot Street to Broadway
Montserrat Road Both Entire length, from Spring Street
280 feet east, then 240 feet north to
Colon Street
Monument Square All sides of the monument
Monument Square East From Abbott Street to Atlantic
Avenue, north
Moulton Court Both Entire length
Mulberry Street West From West Dane Street to Federal
Street
Myrtle Street North Entire length
Neptune Street Both Entire length
Netherton Avenue North (in front
of #12 and
#14)
From Western Avenue 300 feet west
New Balch Street West From Jenness Street 600 feet north
Newbury Street
Extension
Both Entire length
Northern Avenue
[Added 1-7-2019
by Ord. No. 231]
South From County Way northeast 60 feet
Ober Street Both Entire length
Oceanside Drive Both Entire length
Ocean Street Northeast From Lovett Street northwest 100
feet
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:402
Name of Street Side Location
Ocean Street South From Hale Street to end
Odell Avenue South From Magnolia Street to Spring
Street
Old Rubbly Road Both From Essex Street 150 feet
Overlook Avenue North From Echo Avenue to 100 feet west
Park Street East From Bow Street to Elliott Street
Park Street East From Pleasant Street to Railroad
Avenue
Park Street East From Railroad Avenue 30 feet north,
and from Broadway 30 feet south
Park Street West From Elliott Street 80 feet south
Park Street West From a point approximately 300 feet
south of Federal Street for a
distance of 185 feet
Park Street West From Federal Street to Riverside
Street
Park Street West One spot across from 59 Park Street
Park Street West From Roundy Street 54 feet south
Pershing Avenue East From Dodge Street 408 feet north
Phillips Street North Entire length
Phillips Street South From Pleasant Street to 60 feet west
Pickett Court East From Hale Street to end
Pickett Street North From Cabot Street to Odell Avenue
Pickman Road Both From Hale Street to Neptune Street
Pleasant Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 399]
North From Hardy Street to Rantoul Street
Pleasant Street South From Rantoul Street to River Street
Pond Street North From Cabot Street to Chapman
Street
Pond Street North From Mulberry Street 60 feet west
Pond Street South From Rantoul Street to Chase Street
Porter Street East From School Street to Webber
Avenue
Preston Place Both From Hart Street to end
Prince Street Both Entire length
Prospect Street East From Charnock Street to Madison
Avenue
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:403
Name of Street Side Location
Quincy Park Both Entire length
Railroad Avenue South From Cabot Street to Hardy Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 75 feet prior to the
intersection of Bow Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 90 feet past the
corner of Chestnut Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the corner of
Edwards Street
Rantoul Street East Approximately 29 feet prior to the
corner of Fayette Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 82 feet prior to the
intersection of Federal Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 20 Lenox Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the corner of
Myrtle Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 50 feet past the
intersection of Railroad Avenue
Rantoul Street East At approximately 29 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 34 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 79 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 95 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 119-121 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 131 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 146 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 151 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 169 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 211 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 221 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 237 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 245 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 273-275 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 287 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 295 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the driveway at
325-329 Rantoul Street (loading
zone)
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:404
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street East At approximately 355-357 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 393 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 414-418
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 453 Rantoul Street
(loading zone)
Rantoul Street East At approximately 461 Rantoul Street
(loading zone)
Rantoul Street East At approximately the driveway at
473 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 485 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 70 feet past the
intersection of Roundy Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 50 feet prior to the
corner of Summer Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 35 feet prior to the
intersection of Wallis Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 40 West Dane
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 40 West Dane
Street (loading zone)
Rantoul Street West At approximately 30 feet prior to the
intersection of Broadway
Rantoul Street West At approximately 45 feet prior to the
intersection of Creek Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately the corner
of Edwards Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately the corner of the
intersection of Home Street (loading
zone)
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 20 Lenox
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 20 feet past the
intersection of Pleasant Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 63 feet past the
intersection of Railroad Avenue
Rantoul Street West At approximately the driveway of 4-8
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately the driveway at 30
Rantoul Street
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:405
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street West At approximately 34-38 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately the driveway
between 50 and 60 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 20 feet prior to the
driveway at 60 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 95 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 116-128 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 146 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 169 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 202 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 214 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 226 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 230 Rantoul Street
(loading zone)
Rantoul Street West At approximately 258-260 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 268 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 276-278 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 282 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 288 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 293 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 324 Rantoul Street
(loading zone)
Rantoul Street West At approximately 338-342 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 346-348 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 374 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 390 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 398-400 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 412 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 434 Rantoul Street
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:406
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately the
driveway at 461 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 28 feet past the
corner of Summer Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 25 feet prior to the
intersection of Wallis Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 40 West Dane
Street (loading zone)
Ray Street North From East Lothrop Street to Cross
Street
Riverside Street North From property of Clemenzi east 25
feet
Riverside Street South From Park Street west to the end
River Street East From Federal Street to 350 feet
south of Pleasant Street
River Street East and west From curb cut at 6 River Street to
School Street
River Street West 40 feet either side of the Beverly
Gas and Electric Company main
driveway
River Street West From Bridge Street 422 feet to 529
feet south
River Street West From Federal Street to a point 100
feet south of Bridge Street
River Street West From Pleasant Street 100 feet north
River Street West From Pleasant Street 386 feet to
446 feet north
River Street West Opposite Pleasant Street, between
the driveways of National Grid Gas
and National Grid Electric
Roosevelt Avenue
[Amended
11-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 427A]
South From Cabot Street 254 feet east,
except 1 space in front of 1
Roosevelt Avenue
Ropes Street East Entire length
Roundy Street North From Cabot Street to Park Street
Salem W.W. Road Both From Herrick Street north to
beyond New Beverly High School
property line
Salters Avenue East From Crescent Avenue 80 feet north
School Street East 30 feet from Wellman Street
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:407
Name of Street Side Location
School Street North From Rantoul Street to Cabot Street
School Street North From River Street 80 feet east
School Street South 30 feet from Wellman Street
Scott Street North Entire length, from Cabot Street to
Ellsworth Avenue
Seward Avenue North Entire length
Silver Court East Entire length
Silver Court West Entire length
Simon Street South Entire length
Smith Street Both Entire length
Sohier Road East From Colon Street to Herrick Street
Extension
Sohier Road East From Herrick Street 100 feet south
Sohier Road East From Herrick Street 370 feet south
Sohier Road South From Herrick Street 125 feet east
Sohier Road West From Herrick Street to 120 feet
north
South Hardy Street East From Fayette Street to the end
South Street East From Stone Street to Front Street
Stewart Avenue North From Giles Avenue to County Way
Stone Street North From Cabot Street to Lothrop Street
Stone Street South From Cabot Street to South Street
Stone Street South From Lothrop Street to 125 feet
west
Story Avenue Northeast From Sohier Road to the front
entrance of 65 Story Avenue
Story Avenue Southwest From Sohier Road to Dearborn
Avenue
Sturtevant Street South From McKay Street to Glidden
Street
Summer Street North In front of 9 Summer Street
Summer Street South Entire length
Summit Avenue Both Entire length, from Cabot Street to
Cox Court
Thorndike Street One space between the entrance
and exit to the City Hall parking
area
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-41
1:408
Name of Street Side Location
Tozer Road North From a point 375 feet north of the
railroad crossing and continuing
north to a point 10 feet south of the
present fire hydrant
Tozer Road South Entire length
Vestry Street North From Cabot Street to Vestry Terrace
Vestry Street South From Cabot Street to the end
Vine Street North From Oak Street to Hale Street
Wallis Street North From Cabot Street to 49 Wallis
Street
Wallis Street South From Park Street to Rantoul Street
Washington Street North From Cabot Street 140 feet east
Water Street North Opposite 122 Water Street at Silver
Court (one space)
Water Street North Beginning at a point 300 feet west of
Lothrop Street west to Front Street
Water Street South From Cabot Street to 77 Water
Street
Water Street South From Lothrop Street to the Ocean
Webber Avenue South From 6 Webber Avenue to River
Street
Webber Avenue Southeast From Porter Street to 40 feet
northeast
Wellman Street East 30 feet from School Street
Wellman Street West 30 feet from School Street
Wentzell Avenue Both From Bartlett Street to Smith Street
West Dane Street Both From Rantoul Street to Park Street
West Dane Street South From Cabot Street to Mulberry
Street
West Dane Street South From Chase Street to Park Street
West Dane Street South From the entrance of Clemenzi
Industrial Park to Park Street
West Federal Street From McPherson Drive to a point 30
feet west
Wilkins Terrace North Along the grass center divider,
entire length
Wilkins Terrace South Opposite side of the grass center
divider, house side
Willow Street East From Bay Street to Lovett Street
§ 270-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-41
1:409
Name of Street Side Location
Winter Street North From Knowlton Street to Essex
Street
Woodbury Street Both From Ober Street to the water
Woodbury Street Northeast From Woodbury Drive to Hale Street
Woodbury Street South From Hale Street to Ober Street
Woodland Avenue South From Kernwood Heights to 100 feet
east
§ 270-42. Parking prohibited during certain months. [Amended
8-3-1987 by Ord. No. 358; 9-21-1987 by Ord. No. 411; 9-19-1988 by
Ord. No. 476A; 12-4-1995 by Ord. No. 435; 5-6-1996 by Ord. No.
139A; 7-1-1997 by Ord. No. 196; 5-1-1998 by Ord. No. 153;
10-8-2003 by Ord. No. 262]
Upon the following streets and highways, or parts thereof, parking is
prohibited during the periods specified:
From May 1 until October 1.
Name of Street Side Location
Bayview Avenue Both
Brackenbury Lane Both
Hale Street Both From Oak Street to Beach Street
Hale Street Both From Ober Street to Neptune
Street
Hale Street West To Neptune Street
Ober Lane Both
Water Street North From the junction of Bartlett
Street, Lothrop Street and Water
Street to the water
A.
From July 1 until September 1.
Name of Street Side
Atlantic Avenue North
Ocean Street North
B.
From December 1 to April 1.
Name of Street Side Location
Heather Street Northeast From Herrick Street to 34
Heather Street
C.
D. From June 1 to October 1.
§ 270-41 BEVERLY CODE § 270-42
1:410
§ 270-43. Parking prohibited during certain hours. [Last amended
2-7-2013 by Ord. No. 6]
No person shall park a vehicle in the following locations between the hours
and on the days indicated:
Name of Street Side Location Hours/Days
Abbott Street From Lothrop east
to the end
10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Arthur Street East Between Judson
Street and Arthur
Street Court
6:00 p.m. to 11:00
p.m.
Ash Street Both Entire length 8:00 p.m. to 1:00
a.m.
Ash Street
[Added
12-21-2015 by
Ord. No. 494B]
West Entire length 7:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Bayview Avenue Both Entire length 9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Boyles Street Both From Hale Street to
31 Boyles Street
8:00 p.m. to 8:00
a.m.
Colon Street West From Sohier Road to
Fielder Road
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./All, except
Saturday, Sunday and
holidays
Columbus
Avenue
South Entire length 8:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
Cross Street West From Ray Street to
opposite 45 Cross
Street
7:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m./Monday through
Friday
Edwards Street South Entire length 12:00 midnight to
7:00 a.m./Sunday
night through Friday
morning, during
school months
Elliott Street Both Between the Boston
and Maine Railroad
crossing of the
Portland Division
and McKay Street
11:45 a.m. to 12:15
p.m., and 3:45 p.m.
to 4:30 p.m./All,
except Sunday and
public holidays
Name of Street Side
Grove Street Both
§ 270-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-43
1:411
Name of Street Side Location Hours/Days
Fitzgerald Way North Beginning at New
Balch for 90 feet
east
7:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Sunday only
Hale Street East From 233 Hale
Street to 245 Hale
Street
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Hale Street East From Pickman Road
to Brackenbury Lane
10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Lothrop Street In the small parking
lot near the front of
the monument at
Sally Mulligan Park
9:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Lothrop Street East From Dane Street to
Hale Street
10:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
New Balch
Street
East Beginning at
Fitzgerald Way for
100 feet north
7:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Sunday only
Ocean Street Both From Lothrop Street
to the water
8:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Parramatta Road South From Essex Street to
Pearl Street
Extension
6:00 a.m. to 9:00
p.m.
Rantoul Street West From the southern
junction of Cabot
Street and Rantoul
Street to a point 250
feet north
7:00 a.m. to 5:00
p.m.
River Street East From Webber
Avenue to driveway
curb cut at 6 River
Street
6:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
Sohier Road West From Colon Street
to Mason Street
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m./All, except
Saturday, Sunday and
holidays
Stone Ridge
Road
Both Entire length 10:00 p.m. to 7:00
a.m.
Swan Street From Jenness Street
to 134 New Balch
Street
7:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m./Sunday
§ 270-43 BEVERLY CODE § 270-43
1:412
Name of Street Side Location Hours/Days
Swan Street
[Amended
11-16-2015 by
Ord. No. 482;
2-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 033]
East From Sohier Road
200 feet south,
except 1 space in
front of 34 Swan
Street
8:00 a.m. to 4:00
p.m.
Union Street North From Cabot Street
to Bartlett Street
6:00 p.m. to 6:00
a.m.
Webber Avenue Both From River Street to
Pleasant View Park
6:00 a.m. to 10:00
a.m.
§ 270-44. (Reserved)148
§ 270-45. Fifteen-minute parking. [Last amended 7-7-2015 by Ord.
No. 390]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than 15 minutes at any time on the
following streets or parts thereof where not otherwise prohibited:
Name of Street Side Location
Bridge Street South From Western Avenue 40 feet east
Broadway South From Rantoul Street to the post office
limits between the hours of 8:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and
holidays
Cabot Street Beginning at southwesterly corner of
294 Cabot Street thence north for 50
feet
Cabot Street In front of 273 Cabot Street (1 space)
Cabot Street West South from a point 30 feet south of
Broadway to the first driveway at 182
Cabot Street (3 spaces)
Cabot Street West From Pleasant Street 150 feet north
Cabot Street West In front of 146 Cabot Street (1 space)
Cabot Street West Extending south from corner of Bow
Street to the corner of Wallis Street,
8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
East Lothrop Street East From Hale Street 50 feet north
Elliott Street North From Rantoul Street 100 feet west
Elliott Street North In front of 61 Elliott Street
148. Editor's Note: Former § 270-44, permitting parking in the driveways of North Shore
Volkswagen, was repealed 9-6-2016 by Ord. No. 181.
§ 270-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-45
1:413
Name of Street Side Location
Front Street South From Cabot Street 100 feet east
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and
holidays
Hale Street Area of 151 Hale Street
Hale Street North From East Lothrop Street 75 feet east
Hale Street South From Ocean Street 60 feet west
between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., except on Sundays and
holidays
Lothrop Street East From Bay Street 150 feet north
Ocean Street North 200 feet east
Parramatta Road Both From Essex Street to Pearl Street
Extension, between the hours of 6:00
a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
Porter Street
[Repealed
6-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 405]
Rantoul Street
[Added 2-1-2016
by Ord. No. 035]
East At the intersection of Fayette Street,
beginning 20 feet south of Fayette
Street (2 spaces)
Rantoul Street East At approximately 50 feet past the
intersection of Railroad Avenue
Rantoul Street East At approximately 151 Rantoul Street,
towards Broadway
Rantoul Street East At approximately 273-275 Rantoul
Street (loading zone) (see § 270-54)
Rantoul Street East At approximately 277 Rantoul Street
(loading zone) (see § 270-54)
Rantoul Street West At approximately 40 Rantoul Street,
towards Edwards Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 151 Rantoul Street,
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
Rantoul Street West At approximately 412 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 398-400 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 50 feet past the
intersection of Railroad Avenue,
between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.
§ 270-45 BEVERLY CODE § 270-45
1:414
Name of Street Side Location
Webster Avenue
[Repealed
12-3-2018 by Ord.
No. 225-2018]
West Street In front of 1 West Street, between the
hours of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., seven
days a week (3 spaces)
West Street In front of 36 West Street (2 spaces)
§ 270-46. Thirty-minute parking. [Last amended 12-18-2013 by Ord.
No. 218]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than 30 minutes on the following
streets or portions of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bow Street South Extending 115 feet west of Cabot
Street, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (5
spaces)
Cabot Street East Adjacent to 369 to 371 Cabot Street,
extending 45 feet from crosswalk ramp
northerly to first curb cut at driveway
entrance (2 spaces)
Cabot Street South From 378 to 380 Cabot Street
Elliott Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
East At approximately 70 feet past the
intersection of Cabot Street
Elliott Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
East At approximately 16 Elliott Street
Elliott Street South From Galloupe Avenue to a point 60
feet easterly toward Cabot Street
Front Street South In front of 1 to 3 Front Street (2
spaces)
Goat Hill Lane South From Cox Court to Cabot Street
Hale Street In front of 723 Hale Street (1 space)
Hale Street South From Lothrop Street to Ober Street
Hale Street West From 724 Hale Street to Pickett Court
Oak Street South In front of 15 Oak Street (1 space)
Pond Street
[Amended
11-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 458]
North From Chase Street to Rantoul Street,
except for 1 space in front of 45 Pond
Street
§ 270-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-46
1:415
Name of Street Side Location
West Street From 25 to 31 West Street, 8:00 a.m.
to 5:00 p.m.
§ 270-47. One-hour parking. [Last amended 7-7-2015 by Ord. No.
390]
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour at any time,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. of any day, except
Saturday, and then between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.,
on any of the following streets or parts thereof where not otherwise
prohibited; except that on Sundays and public holidays there shall be
no restrictions on parking time:
Name of Street Side Location
Beckford Street West From Cabot Street to Grant Street
Cabot Street Both From Judson Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Cabot Street East From Bartlett Street 120 feet north
Cabot Street North From Boston and Maine Crossing at
Congress Street, extending 80 feet
easterly
Cabot Street North From Pickett Street to the Boston and
Maine Railroad at Gloucester Crossing
Cabot Street South From Gloucester Crossing to Simon
Street
Cabot Street South From Lenox Street to Rantoul Street
Cabot Street West From Highland Avenue 75 feet north
Elliott Street South In front of 8 Elliott Street
Essex Street West From Dane Street to Winter Street
Highland Avenue North From Cabot Street 60 feet west
Highland Terrace South Entire length
Park Street West From Roundy Street to West Dane
Street, southerly
Pickett Street South From Cabot Street to opposite Odell
Avenue
Riverside Street South 65 feet west of Rantoul Street to first
curb cut (2 spaces)
Thorndike Street North From the City Hall parking lot to
Brown Street
Vine Street South From Hale Street 200 feet east
West Street North In front of 8 to 16 West Street
A.
§ 270-46 BEVERLY CODE § 270-47
1:416
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour, Monday
through Saturday from 7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. on the following streets
or parts thereof where not otherwise prohibited:
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street West At the north side of the MBTA Depot
parking garage, across from 101
Rantoul Street, to the right
Rantoul Street West Across from approximately 116
Rantoul Street, south of the driveway
for 125 Rantoul Street
B.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour from 8:00
a.m. to 5:00 p.m. on the following streets or parts thereof where not
otherwise prohibited:
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street East At approximately 363-393 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 390 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 406 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately the area
between 412 and 414-418 Rantoul
Street
C.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than one hour on the following
streets or parts thereof:
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street East At approximately 45 feet past the
intersection of Edwards Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 50 feet prior to the
intersection at Fayette Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 95 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 119-121 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the driveway at 131
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the driveway at 131
Rantoul Street (after center driveway)
Rantoul Street East At approximately 169 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 198-200
Rantoul Street
D.
§ 270-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-47
1:417
§ 270-48. Two-hour parking. [Last amended 7-7-2015 by Ord. No.
390]
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street
[Added
10-17-2016 by
Ord. No. 222]
East In front of the business at 491 Rantoul
Street, 20 feet north of Lenox Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 50 feet past the
intersection of Broadway
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately the
intersection of Edwards Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 40 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 136 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West Between approximately 142 and 146
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 198-200 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 202 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 202-212 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 268 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 276-278 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 282 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 288 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 380 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 390 Rantoul Street
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on the following streets or portions of
streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Cabot Street East In front of number 27 Cabot Street (2
spaces)
Edwards Street North Entire length
Gardner Street South From Essex Street 100 feet east
Hale Street Northwest From Everett Street to West Street
Mill Street North From Ropes Street east to Beckford
Street
Oak Street North From West Street (1 space)
A.
§ 270-47 BEVERLY CODE § 270-48
1:418
Name of Street Side Location
Park Street West In front of 90 Park Street (2 spaces)
Railroad Avenue South At 146 Rantoul Street
Ropes Street West From Mill Street to Simon Street
Washington
Street
South From MPL-F (Washington Street/
Franklin Place municipal parking lot)
to Lovett Street
West Street East In front of 40 West Street (2 spaces)
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours between the
hours of 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. from Monday through Friday on the
following streets or portions of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Balch Street Both From Cabot Street to Blaine Avenue
Bow Street
[Added
7-7-2015 by
Ord. No. 391;
amended
2-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 034]
South Between Rantoul Street and Park
Street, 5 feet west from the driveway
curb cut (4 spaces)
Gage Street East Entire length
Spring Street East From Essex Street to Odell Avenue
Spring Street West From Colon Street to the railroad
tracks
B.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours on the
following streets or portions of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Cabot Street North At approximately 415-417 Cabot
Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 419 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 423 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 429 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 433 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 435 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 439 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 443 Cabot Street
Cabot Street South Opposite approximately 415-417
Cabot Street
C.
§ 270-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-48
1:419
Name of Street Side Location
Cabot Street South Opposite approximately 433 Cabot
Street
Cabot Street South Opposite approximately the
intersection of Herrick Street and
Cabot Street
Cabot Street South Opposite approximately the
intersection of Mason Street and
Cabot Street
Elliott Street East At approximately 8 Elliott Street
Elliott Street East At approximately 50 Elliott Street
Elliott Street West Opposite approximately 22 Elliott
Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 41 Elliott Street
Elliott Street From 100 feet west of Rantoul Street
to the Gloucester Branch of the Boston
and Maine Railroad
Hull Street
[Added
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 169]
North 8 parking spaces in front of Cahill
Park
Rantoul Street East At approximately 55 feet past the
intersection of Bow Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 20 Lenox Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 211 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the driveway at 211
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 237 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 245 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the driveway at 253
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 273-275 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 277 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 473 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 480 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 485 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 100 feet past the
intersection of Chestnut Street
§ 270-48 BEVERLY CODE § 270-48
1:420
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 20 Lenox
Street
Rantoul Street West At the north side of the MBTA Depot
parking garage
Rantoul Street West At approximately 226 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 230-236 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 240-244 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 258-260 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 457 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 478 Rantoul
Street
River Street West In front of 60 River Street (3 spaces)
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, Monday through Friday, on the
following streets or portions of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Bow Street South From Rantoul Street to a point 60 feet
west
Bridge Street North From 40 feet west of Hall-Whitaker
Bridge to paved walkway into Ayers
Ryal Side School
Broadway Both Cabot Street to Rantoul Street, except
regulation device portions and
15-minute zone
Edwards Street Both Entire length
Fayette Street North Entire length
Federal Street South From Cabot Street to Rantoul Street
Federal Street South From Rantoul Street to Chase Street
Hawthorne
Street
Both Entire length
Highland Avenue West From 16 Highland Avenue to Railroad
Avenue
Home Street North Entire length
Jewett Road Both From Lakeshore Avenue to Bonad
Road
D.
§ 270-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-48
1:421
Name of Street Side Location
Jordan Street East From Kittredge Street to Russell
Street
Kittredge Street Both From Cabot Street to Jordan Street
Lakeshore
Avenue
Both From Essex Street to Bonad Road
Lowell Street Both Entire length
Magnolia Street Both Entire length
Odell Avenue North From Spring Street to Sherman Street
Pleasant Street Both From Cabot Street to Rantoul Street
Railroad Avenue North From 43 to 49 Railroad Avenue
Russell Street Both From Jordan Street to Windsor Road
Wallis Street North From Park Street to Rantoul Street
Wallis Street South From 46 to 22 Wallis Street
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours, between
the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 12:00 noon, Monday through Friday, from
September to June, on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Jordan Street West From Russell Street to 35 Jordan
Street
Snell Road Both Entire length
Tudor Road North Entire length
E.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than two hours, between the
hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., on the following streets:
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 4-6 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 26 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately the area
between 45 Rantoul Street and
Edwards Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite the corner of Fayette Street
and Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 8 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 26 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West Between approximately 50-60 Rantoul
Street
F.
§ 270-48 BEVERLY CODE § 270-48
1:422
§ 270-49. Off-street parking; handicapped parking. [Amended
3-25-1998 by Ord. No. 95; 6-10-2004 by Ord. No. 193; 5-8-2012 by
Ord. No. 68; 2-7-2013 by Ord. No. 6]
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 95 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite 101 Rantoul Street, to the
left
In the public parking lots identified in § 270-69A, there shall be no
parking between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m.
A.
In the parking area at the YMCA McPherson Youth Center, 4 McPherson
Drive, there shall be three handicap spaces and the remainder of the
lot shall be marked "Parking for McPherson Youth Center Only."
B.
Handicapped parking. In the following locations, space(s) shall be
reserved for handicapped parking: [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No.
390149]
Name of Street Side Location
Bow Street
[Added
8-1-2016 by
Ord. No. 172]
South Across the street from the Elks Club
and also at approximately 42 Bow
Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 419 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 429 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 435 Cabot Street
Cabot Street North At approximately 443 Cabot Street
Cabot Street South Opposite approximately 433 Cabot
Street
Cabot Street South Opposite approximately the
intersection of Mason Street
Chase Street
[Added
11-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 519]
West At approximately 2 Chase Street
Chestnut Street
[Added
9-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 200]
South In front of 14 Chestnut Street
C.
149. Editor's Note: A handicapped parking spot at approximately 18 Porter Street, not
originally found in this subsection, was repealed 6-5-2017 by Ord. No. 405.
§ 270-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-49
1:423
Name of Street Side Location
Church Street
[Added
9-19-2016 by
Ord. No. 199]
West Behind the Cabot YMCA
Elliott Street East Opposite approximately 49 Elliott
Street
Elliott Street East At approximately 50 Elliott Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 49 Elliott Street
Elliott Street West At approximately 51-53 Elliott Street
Emerson Circle
[Added
12-3-2018 by
Ord. No.
226-2018]
Grant Street
[Added
6-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 070A;
repealed
10-17-2016 by
Ord. No. 225]
Middlebury
Lane [Added
12-3-2018 by
Ord. No.
226-2018]
South At approximately 52 Middlebury Lane
Parsons Drive
[Added
4-3-2017 by
Ord. No. 346]
West At approximately 15 Parsons Drive
Pleasant Street
[Added
11-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 519]
South At approximately 46 Pleasant Street
Porter Street
[Added
5-21-2018 by
Ord. No. 079]
At approximately 9 Porter Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the corner of
Edwards Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 30 feet prior to the
intersection of Fayette Street
§ 270-49 BEVERLY CODE § 270-49
1:424
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 26 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 29 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 60 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 95 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Between approximately 95 and 97
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 142 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 146 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 151 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 198-200
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 202 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 211 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 226 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 245 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately the driveway at
265-267 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 273-275 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 295 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 355-357 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately 390 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 393 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately the driveway
at 398-400 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 406 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Approximately between 461 and 465
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 465 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 485 Rantoul Street
§ 270-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-49
1:425
§ 270-50. Public hearing prior to acquisition of off-street parking
areas.
No vote authorizing the establishment or acquisition of any municipal offstreet
parking area shall be effective until after the City Council has held a
public hearing thereon after seven days' published notice thereof and such
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street East At approximately 30 feet prior to the
intersection of Wallis Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 65 feet past the
intersection of Edwards Street and
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 75 feet after the
intersection of Edwards Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 26 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately the driveway at 30
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 116-128 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 142 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 146 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 151 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 198-200 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 202-212 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 214 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 252 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 258-260 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 294-300 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 352 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 390 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 398-400 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 457 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West Opposite approximately 461 Rantoul
Street
§ 270-49 BEVERLY CODE § 270-50
1:426
vote has remained on file with the City Clerk for public inspection for at
least one week before the final passage.
§ 270-51. Angle parking. [Amended 2-7-2013 by Ord. No. 6]
§ 270-52. Bus stops.
§ 270-53. Taxicab stands.
§ 270-54. Service and loading zones.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any street in any loading zone for a
period of time longer than 15 minutes, except while actually engaged in
loading or unloading, provided that such loading and unloading does not
exceed a period of time longer than 1/2 hour.
§ 270-55. Snow/Ice emergency parking ban. [Amended 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 97; 12-6-1993 by Ord. No. 218; 12-31-1998 by Ord. No.
361]
The following streets and ways or parts thereof are hereby designated
as streets or ways upon which angle parking shall be permitted:
Name of Street Side Location
Briscoe Street West From Essex Street 80 feet south
Pond Street North From 49 Pond Street to Rantoul Street
A.
Upon these streets, which have been marked or signed for angle
parking, vehicles shall be parked with one wheel within 12 inches of
the curb and at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks or official
signs.
B.
A. No person shall park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop.
No person shall park a bus upon any street within a business district at
any place other than a bus stop, when a nearby bus stop is available for
use.
B.
No person shall park a vehicle other than a taxicab upon any street
within a business district in any taxicab stand for a period of time
longer than 15 minutes, except while actually engaged in loading and
unloading, provided that such loading and unloading does not exceed a
period of time longer than 1/2 hour.
A.
No person shall park a taxicab upon any street within a business district
at any place other than the taxicab stand or stands designated for
the use of his taxicab, except while engaged, or while waiting for an
opportunity to use a taxicab stand designated for his use.
B.
The purpose of the emergency parking ban shall be to provide for the
safe movement of police, fire and emergency medical service vehicles
A.
§ 270-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-55
1:427
during snow and ice storms and otherwise provide for public safety
during winter weather conditions. The parking ban shall also serve
to enhance the capability of the Department of Public Services to
effectively and efficiently remove snow and ice from the roadways.
The parking ban shall be implemented in a manner that provides for
public safety while inconveniencing the smallest number of residents
for the shortest possible time.
B.
Emergency declaration of the parking ban. Snow/Ice emergencies shall
automatically be enacted upon occurrence of the following and be
reaffirmed by a declaration by the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works:
(1) Snow or freezing rain has fallen or is imminent.
National and/or local television and/or radio stations are predicting
a snow or ice storm.
(2)
C.
Duration of emergency parking ban. The parking ban shall remain
in effect for a minimum of 48 hours. The Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works shall consult with the
Police Chief, Fire Chief or his/her designees before the ban is rescinded.
D.
Ticketing and towing pursuant to parking ban. The Chief of Police shall
develop procedures which ensure that motor vehicles are not ticketed
and/or towed unreasonably during the emergency ban.
Parking shall be prohibited on all City streets for the duration of
the parking ban.
(1)
Vehicles parked in residential areas shall be subject to ticketing
and/or towing from 8:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.; vehicles parked in
business areas shall be subject to ticketing and/or towing from
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. In severe storms, blizzards, or other
occasions, parking may be restricted on all public streets 24 hours
a day.
(2)
(3) Winter parking ban violators shall be charged a fine of $50.
E.
Notification of public parking ban.
Announcements of the snow emergencies shall be made by as many
ways possible, some of which may be by telephone messages, local
radio stations, local newspapers, or on cable television stations.
Announcements that the snow emergency has ended will be made
by the same means.
(1)
The City will have a telephone number available that may be called
24 hours per day, with a recorded message that informs callers of
the status of the snow emergency.
(2)
F.
§ 270-55 BEVERLY CODE § 270-56
1:428
§ 270-56. Parking of vehicle for sale prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park upon a street or highway any
vehicle displayed for sale.
§ 270-57. Stopping or standing for purposes of selling goods.
Pursuant to the above objective, the following restrictions shall apply:
§ 270-58. Parking on hill.
No person having charge of any motor vehicle shall allow it to remain
standing unattended in any street or highway upon any gradient or hill
without first setting the wheels of such vehicle toward the curb and in such
a position as to prevent the vehicle from rolling down the roadway should
the brakes loosen.
§ 270-59. Towing of vehicles parked in special areas. [Last amended
2-7-2013 by Ord. No. 6]
Any vehicle parked in any of the following areas shall be towed at the
owner's expense to the property of the tow car operator, under the direction
of the Police Department:
Name of Street Side Location
Arthur Street Both From Judson Street to 140 feet
southerly
Arthur Street North From Chase Street to Mulberry Street
Bridge Street South From Folger Avenue to Kernwood
Avenue
Briscoe Street East In front of 3 Ellis Square
Briscoe Street West From Hale Street to 30 feet northerly
East Street Both Between Victor Avenue and the fence
at Cooney Field
Elliott Street South From Park Street to Rantoul Street
Essex Street East From Church Street to Dane Street
Essex Street South From Route 128 to Miller Road
Heather Street Both From Colon Street to Westerly Road
No person shall stand or stop any vehicle upon any public way in the
City for a period of more than five minutes for the purpose of selling
or offering for sale any food, beverage or goods, wares or merchandise,
therein or therefrom.
A.
This section, however, shall not apply to sales by hawkers and peddlers
and others from house to house of any of the articles mentioned in
Chapter 101 of the General Laws in accordance therewith and with the
regulations of the City Council relating thereto.
B.
§ 270-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-59
1:429
Name of Street Side Location
Highland Avenue North From 80 feet west of Cabot Street to
Railroad Avenue
Highland Avenue South From Cabot Street 90 feet westerly
Judson Street North From Chase Street to Cabot Street
Kittredge Street From property of City of Beverly,
Beverly High School, 100 feet
southwesterly
Liberty Street Northwest From Newbury Street to the end of
Liberty Street, from September 1 to
November 30
McPherson Drive 4 McPherson Drive (vehicles not
identified as McPherson Youth Center
patrons)
Mulberry Street West From Federal Street to West Dane
Street
Park Street West From Federal Street 58 feet
Rantoul Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
West Opposite approximately the corner of
Edwards Street
Rantoul Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
West At approximately the driveway
between 50 and 60 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
West At approximately 20 feet prior to the
driveway at 60 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street
[Added 7-7-2015
by Ord. No. 390]
West Opposite approximately 95 Rantoul
Street
Russell Street From property of High School 100 feet
southwesterly
Russell Street Both From Cabot Street to Windsor Road
Spring Street East From Colon Street to the railroad
tracks
Spring Street West From Odell Avenue to Essex Street
Winter Street South Opposite exit of library parking lot,
roughly in front of 11 Winter Street (2
spaces)
§ 270-60. Commercial vehicles in residential districts.
For the purposes of this section, "commercial vehicle" is defined as
any vehicle registered for commercial purposes and designed and used
A.
§ 270-59 BEVERLY CODE § 270-60
1:430
§ 270-61. City Hall parking regulations. [Amended 6-7-1993 by Ord.
No. 273]
primarily for the transportation of goods, wares or merchandise, as
defined by the Department of Transportation's rules, Article 1, Section
1, Subparagraph (JJ).150
No commercial vehicle having a gross weight of six tons (12,000
pounds) shall be allowed to park on any street in any R (residential)
District within the City, except for the purpose of receiving or
discharging passengers or for loading or unloading goods. Any vehicle
not actually engaged in receiving or discharging passengers or loading
and unloading goods shall be subject to the penalties provided by MGL
c. 90, § 20C, and MGL c. 40, § 22D, and shall be liable to charges for
the removal and storage of the vehicle.
B.
Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be subject to
a fine of $50.
C.
Authorized parking defined. "Authorized parking" is defined as parking
within the marked spaces solely for the purposes of access to and
egress from motor vehicles by persons whose space is specifically
designated, whether it be by signs, markings or painted-on surfaces of
the lot.
A.
Authorized entrance and exit. Entry or access into the City Hall parking
lot shall be at the most easterly driveway on the northerly side of
Thorndike Street. Exit or egress shall be at the most westerly driveway
nearer Cabot Street on the same northerly side of Thorndike Street.
Thus, both access and egress will constitute one-way traffic through the
parking lot.
B.
Unauthorized obstructions. No person shall willfully obstruct the City
Hall parking lot or any of the designated parking spaces, whether by
motor vehicles, bicycles, snow, articles, or anything that will prevent
free movement or emergency vehicles, both police and fire, motorists
or pedestrians from using the parking lot.
C.
Unauthorized parking. Unauthorized parking is defined as follows:
(1) Not parking within marked lanes.
Parking in a space that is specifically designated by office or other
reason, either by signs, markings or painted-on surface, or knowing
that such space is used for such designated office or purpose,
should such sign be unlawfully removed, destroyed or obliterated.
(2)
(3) Parking in a visitor's space in excess of time limit.
D.
150. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-61
1:431
§ 270-62. Parking and traffic regulations on public school grounds.
§ 270-63. Violations and penalties. [Last amended 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 013151]
Time. The City Hall parking regulations are effective when City Hall is
open during the usual business hours.
E.
Offenses; fines.
Offenders of any of the regulations set forth in this section may be
penalized under § 270-63 of this chapter and MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2.
(1)
Fines under this section shall not exceed those imposed under this
article and MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2.
(2)
F.
Towing provisions. Vehicles found in violation of this section may be
towed under the provisions of Article IX of this chapter by the directions
of the commanding officer of the Police Department. Liability for the
cost is set forth in Article IX.
G.
The owner shall be subject to penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/
2.
H.
Commercial activity, soliciting or selling of any kind will not be allowed
in the City Hall parking lot.
I.
The following parking and traffic regulations shall be in effect on all
roads and ways of the City public school.
No person shall park a vehicle on any of the roads and ways
located on any public school grounds when prohibited to do so by
designated signs.
(1)
No person shall operate a vehicle on any of the roads and ways
above the limit of eight miles per hour.
(2)
The Police Department shall enforce all provisions of this section as
well as ensuring compliance with posted parking, pedestrian and
vehicular directions in order to eliminate hazardous conditions.
(3)
A.
Offenders of any of the regulations set forth in this section may be
penalized under § 270-63 of this chapter and MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2.
B.
Fines under this section shall not exceed those imposed under § 270-63
of this chapter and MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2.
C.
Vehicles found in violation of this section may be towed under the
provisions of Article IX of this chapter by the directions of the
commanding officer of the Police Department. Liability for the cost is
set forth in Article IX. The owner shall be subject to penalties provided
in MGL c. 90, § 20A 1/2.
D.
§ 270-61 BEVERLY CODE § 270-63
1:432
Any person who violates any parking provision of this article shall be
subject to the penalties provided by MGL c. 90, § 20C, and this section
as follows: [Amended 11-6-2017 by Ord. No. 482A]
Violation Fine
Within 10 feet of a hydrant $100
Within 10 feet of a fire station entrance $20
Across street from fire station $20
Fire lane $100
Obstruction of public transportation $20
Prohibited area, including tow zone $50
Within 20 feet of intersection $20
Less than 10 feet of unobstructed lane $20
Across private road to driveway or within 5
feet of either side of a driveway
$20
Winter parking ban $50
Wrong direction $20
Handicapped zone $200
Left wheels to curb $20
On crosswalk or sidewalk $20
Bus stop or taxi stand $100
Double parking $15
Upon a roadway in a rural district $15
Overtime (non-regulation device) $15
Regulation device violation, including
regulation device feeding
$20
Improper angle parking $15
Vehicle for sale $15
Safety zone $15
Over 1 foot from curb $15
Loading or service zone $15
Snow removal $20
Street cleaning $15
Not within designated space $15
Bicycle lane $50
A.
151. Editor's Note: Subsequent amendments noted where applicable.
§ 270-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-63
1:433
A citation issued for an offense under this article may be returned by
mail, personally, or by an authorized person. A hearing may be obtained
upon the written request of the registered owner.
B.
Failure to obey the citation issued for an offense under this article
within 21 days after the date of violation may result in the nonrenewal
of the license to drive and the certificate of registration on the
registered owner.
C.
A surcharge of $5 shall be imposed by the City of Beverly after the first
21 days.
D.
If any person shall have failed to appear in accordance with five or
more notices, the Parking Clerk may notify the Chief of Police that
such vehicle is involved in multiple violations. Such vehicle will then be
towed and stored at the expense of the owner until such time as the
matter has been disposed of in accordance with law.152
E.
152. Editor's Note: Original Subsection (aa), School traffic zone, of the Code of Ordinances,
which immediately followed this section, was repealed 2-7-2013 by Ord. No. 6.
§ 270-63 BEVERLY CODE § 270-63
1:434
ARTICLE VII
Parking Regulation Devices
[Amended 6-28-1989 by Ord. No. 302; 3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 207A;
3-19-1990 by Ord. No. 207B; 6-18-1990 by Ord. No. 98; 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 385; 2-16-1991 by Ord. No. 385A; 11-18-1991 by Ord.
No. 427; 6-24-2004 by Ord. No. 196; 2-9-2011 by Ord. No. 23;
2-7-2013 by Ord. No. 6; 4-18-2013 by Ord. No. 461]
§ 270-64. Acquisition and maintenance.
The Mayor is hereby empowered to contract in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22A, for the acquisition and installation of
parking regulation devices provided for by this article and to maintain such
regulation devices in good workable condition.
§ 270-65. Installation and operation.
The City Council is hereby authorized and directed to install parking
regulation devices within the areas described in this article or cause the
same to be so installed.
§ 270-66. Collection and disposition of fees.
All fees received by the City Treasurer-Collector from the operation and use
of parking regulation devices shall be used by the City as authorized by
MGL c. 40, § 22A.
§ 270-67. Public hearing required to establish zones.
No parking regulation device zone may be established until after the City
Council has held a public hearing thereon after seven days' published notice
thereof.
§ 270-68. Thirty-minute zones.
No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than 1/2 hour,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, on
streets designated in this section. This restriction shall not apply to Sundays
or legal holidays.
Name of Street Side Location
Cabot Street West From Wallis Street to 58 feet southerly
Wallis Street Both From Cabot Street 58 feet westerly
§ 270-69. Long-term zones.
Locations. Long-term parking regulation devices shall be installed in
the following locations:
A.
§ 270-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-69
1:435
Name of Street Side Location
Broadway North From Rantoul Street in a
westerly direction
approximately 140 feet
Broadway South From Rantoul Street to Park
Street
Federal Street Opposite St. Mary's School
Hale Street North Adjacent to MPL-G (municipal
parking lot at the corner of
Hale Street and Briscoe Street)
Margin Street North At 4 McPherson Drive (Map 10,
Lot 204)
MPL-A Rear of 218 Cabot Street
MPL-B Corner of Chapman Street and
Federal Street
MPL-C Pond Street and Chapman
Street
MPL-D Pond Street
MPL-F Between Washington Street
and Franklin Place
MPL-G Corner of Hale Street and
Brisco Street
Park Street East From Railroad Avenue to
Broadway
Park Street West From Railroad Avenue to
Pleasant Street
Pleasant Street North Adjacent to 1 Park Street (Map
4, Lot 95)
Railroad Avenue Opposite Hardy Street to
Rantoul Street
Railroad Avenue North From Park Street to 49
Railroad Avenue in an easterly
direction
Railroad Avenue South At 3 Park Street (Map 4, Lot
89)
Rantoul Street From 302 to 324 Rantoul Street
River Street West From Bridge Street to 60 River
Street
§ 270-69 BEVERLY CODE § 270-69
1:436
§ 270-70. One-hour zones.
No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than one hour,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
on the below-listed streets. Sundays and holidays are free.
Name of Street Side Location
Cabot Street At 296 Cabot Street (1 space)
§ 270-71. Two-hour zones.
No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than two hours,
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday,
on the below-listed streets. Sunday and holidays are free.
Name of Street Side Location
Abbott Street Both From Cabot Street 200 feet east
Bow Street South From Cabot Street to opposite
Chapman Street
Briscoe Street East In front of 5 and 7 Briscoe Street for a
distance of approximately 80 feet
Briscoe Street West From Hale Street to Church Street
Broadway North From Cabot Street to Rantoul Street
Broadway South From Cabot Street to the post office
limits
Cabot Street South From police and fire alarm box
opposite Colon Street to Simon Street
Charnock Street North From Cabot Street to Pierce Avenue
Dane Street South From Cabot Street 200 feet east
Elliott Street North From end of loading zone near Rantoul
Street 210 feet west
Elliott Street South From end of loading zone near Rantoul
Street 210 feet west
Essex Street West From Church Street 210 feet north
Name of Street Side Location
River Street West From 56 River Street to
Webber Avenue, with the
exception of approximately 150
feet from the Pleasant Street
intersection
Hours of operation: Monday through Saturday, 9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
Sundays and holidays are free.
B.
§ 270-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-71
1:437
Name of Street Side Location
Essex Street West From the intersection of Winter Street
to the intersection of Dane Street in
front of the Beverly Library at 32
Essex Street
Federal Street South From Cabot Street to Chapman Street
Hale Street South From Cabot Street 200 feet east
Highland Avenue North From Cabot Street 80 feet west
Judson Street South From Cabot Street 115 feet west
Knowlton Street Both From Cabot Street 170 feet north
Knowlton Street North From Cabot Street 200 feet west
Railroad Avenue North From Cabot Street 200 feet west
Rantoul Street East From Federal Street to opposite Creek
Street
Rantoul Street West From Creek Street 50 feet north
Thorndike Street North From Cabot Street 200 feet east
Thorndike Street South From Cabot Street 425 feet east
Wallis Street South From Park Street to Rantoul Street
Washington Street South From Cabot Street 200 feet east
West Dane Street North From Cabot Street 200 feet west
§ 270-72. Establishment and marking of spaces.153
The City Council is hereby authorized and directed to establish parking
spaces to be regulated by a regulation device, in such parking zones, as are
specified in §§ 270-68, 270-69, 270-70 and 270-71 or as may be hereafter
fixed by ordinance, and to indicate the same by white markings upon the
surface of the highway.
§ 270-73. Use of spaces and devices.154
Whenever any vehicle shall be parked at a space regulated by device
(i.e., a parking regulation device such as a parking meter, pay station or
similar payment collection mechanism), the owner or operator of such
vehicle shall park within the space designated by street markings and,
upon entering such space, shall immediately deposit into the device the
required coin of the United States sufficient for the duration of the stay.
A.
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or cause to be deposited
in a parking regulation device, pay station or similar payment collection
B.
153. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-71 BEVERLY CODE § 270-73
1:438
§ 270-74. Commercial vehicles.155
Operators of commercial vehicles may park in a parking regulation device
space or other space regulated by device without depositing a coin for
a period not to exceed 15 minutes for purposes of loading or unloading.
Parking in excess of this time limit, without depositing the proper coin, shall
be deemed a violation of the provisions of this article.
§ 270-75. Pay for parking. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No. 390]
No person shall park a vehicle for a period of time longer than allowed at
the posted sign at the below-listed locations. Sundays and holidays are free.
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street East Opposite approximately the
intersection of Creek Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 295 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 313-321 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 325-329 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 355-357 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street East Between approximately 445 and 453
Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 453 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East At approximately 461 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street East Between approximately 461 and 465
Rantoul Street
mechanism any coin for the purpose of permitting the vehicle of which
he is in charge to remain in a parking space beyond the maximum
period of time allowed in a particular zone.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle within a parking
regulation device space regulated by device unless such vehicle is
wholly within the painted lines demarcating the space.
C.
It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to tamper with, break,
injure or destroy any parking regulation device, pay station or similar
payment collection mechanism or to deposit or cause to be deposited in
such device, pay station or similar payment collection mechanism any
slug, device or metallic substance or any other substitute for the coin
required.
D.
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-75
1:439
Name of Street Side Location
Rantoul Street West At approximately 294-300 Rantoul
Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 324 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 360 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 374 Rantoul Street
Rantoul Street West At approximately 45 feet past the
intersection of West Dane Street
§ 270-76. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of police officers to enforce the provisions of this
article.
A.
Civilian parking enforcement officers appointed by the Chief of Police
may enforce all parking regulations within the City of Beverly.
B.
§ 270-75 BEVERLY CODE § 270-76
1:440
ARTICLE VIII
Pedestrian Control Regulations
§ 270-77. Pedestrians crossing ways or roadways.
Pedestrians shall obey the direction of police officers directing traffic, and
whenever there is an officer directing traffic, a traffic-control signal or a
marked crosswalk within 300 feet of a pedestrian, no such pedestrian shall
cross a way or roadway except within the limits of a marked crosswalk,
and as hereinafter provided in these regulations. For the purpose of these
regulations, a marked crosswalk shall only be construed to be that area of a
roadway reserved for pedestrian crossing located between two solid white
reflectorized twelve-inch pavement markings in rural areas or markings not
less than six inches wide in urban areas, such markings or lines being no
less than six feet apart.
§ 270-78. Actuation of traffic-control signals.
§ 270-79. Obedience to traffic-control signals.
Traffic-control signal color indications and legends shall have the
commands ascribed to them in this section and no other meanings, and
every pedestrian shall comply therewith, except when otherwise directed by
an officer:
At a traffic-control signal location where pedestrian indications are
provided, but which are shown only upon actuation by means of a
pedestrian push button, no pedestrian shall cross a roadway unless or
until the pedestrian-control signal push button has been actuated, and
then cross only on the proper pedestrian signal indication. At trafficcontrol
signal locations where no pedestrian indication is provided,
pedestrians shall cross only on the green indication. If necessary, the
green indication shall be actuated by the pedestrian by means of a push
button.
A.
At a traffic-control signal location, pedestrians shall yield the rightof-
way to vehicles of a funeral or other procession or authorized
emergency vehicle while in performance of emergency duties
regardless of the signal indication given, and they shall not attempt
to cross the roadway until such vehicles or procession has passed, at
which time pedestrians shall then cross the roadway only as provided
in these regulations.
B.
Red and yellow or the word "Walk." Whenever the red and yellow lenses
are illuminated together, or the single word "Walk" is illuminated,
pedestrians facing such indication may proceed across the roadway and
in the direction of such signal only.
A.
Red alone or "Don't Walk." Whenever the words "Don't Walk" or any
indication other than red and yellow shown together are illuminated
in a traffic-control signal where pedestrian indications are provided,
B.
§ 270-77 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-79
1:441
§ 270-80. Pedestrian crossings and use of roadways.
pedestrians approaching or facing such indication shall wait on the
sidewalk, edge of roadway or in the pedestrian refuge area of a traffic
island and shall not enter upon or cross a roadway until the proper
indication is illuminated in the traffic-control signal, but any pedestrian
who has partially completed his crossing on the walk indication shall
proceed or return to the nearest sidewalk or safety island on the yellow
indication, the red indication or when the words "Don't Walk" are
illuminated by rapid intermittent flashes.
Green alone. At traffic-control signal locations where no pedestrian
indication is given or provided, pedestrians facing the signal may
proceed across the roadway within any marked crosswalk in the
direction of the green indication.
C.
Yellow alone, red alone or flashing "Don't Walk." Pedestrians
approaching or facing a yellow or red indication or a flashing "Don't
Walk" illuminated indication shall not start to cross the roadway.
D.
Flashing red, yellow or green At any traffic-control signal location
where a flashing red, flashing yellow or flashing green indication is
being given facing a crosswalk, pedestrians shall actuate, where
provided, the pedestrian signal indication and cross the roadway only
on the red-yellow or "Walk" indication when such indication is in
operation. If no pedestrian signal is provided, pedestrians shall cross
within crosswalks with due care.
E.
No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a sidewalk or safety island and walk
or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close that it is impossible
for the driver to yield the right-of-way.
A.
Pedestrians shall at all times attempt to cross a roadway using the right
half of crosswalks.
B.
Sidewalks.
Where sidewalks are provided, it shall be unlawful for any
pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway whenever
the sidewalk is open to pedestrian use.
(1)
Where sidewalks are not provided, any pedestrian walking along
and upon a highway shall, when practicable, walk only on the left
side of the roadway on its unfinished shoulder facing traffic which
may approach from the opposite direction.
(2)
C.
Persons alighting from the roadway side of any vehicle parked at the
curb or edge of roadway shall proceed immediately to the sidewalk or
edge of roadway adjacent to vehicle, and shall cross the roadway only
as authorized by these regulations.
D.
§ 270-79 BEVERLY CODE § 270-80
1:442
§ 270-81. Crossings at nonsignaled locations.
Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the
roadway. At a point where a pedestrian tunnel or overpass has been
provided, pedestrians shall cross the roadway only by the proper use of the
tunnel or overpass.
§ 270-82. Operators to exercise due care.
The provisions of these regulations shall in no way abrogate the provisions
of MGL c. 90, §§ 14 and 14A, which provide precautions for safety of
other travelers and for the protection of blind persons crossing ways.
Furthermore, notwithstanding the provisions of these regulations, every
operator of a vehicle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian upon the roadway, and shall give warning by sounding the horn
when necessary and shall exercise proper precautions which may become
necessary for safe operation.
§ 270-83. Soliciting rides or business.
No person shall stand in a roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride,
employment or business from the operator or occupant of any vehicle
without the written permission of the City Council or officer having control
of such roadway or highway.
§ 270-84. Enforcement.
These pedestrian-control regulations shall be enforced by all officers of the
City.
§ 270-85. Exemptions.
The provisions of these rules and regulations governing the use of ways by
pedestrians shall not apply to pedestrians actually engaged in work upon a
roadway closed to travel or under construction or repair, to municipal, state,
federal or public service corporation employees while in the performance of
their duties, to officers engaged in the performance of their public duties or
to pedestrians acting in an emergency when such emergency necessitates
departure from any part of these rules and regulations.
§ 270-86. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this article which deal with the
proper use of ways by pedestrians shall be punished as provided in MGL
c. 90, § 18A. Any person convicted of a violation of any other provisions of
It shall be unlawful for any person to actuate a pedestrian-control signal
or to enter a marked crosswalk unless a crossing of the roadway is
intended.
E.
§ 270-80 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-86
1:443
these regulations relative to the operation of vehicles shall be punished by
a fine not exceeding $20 for each offense.
§ 270-86 BEVERLY CODE § 270-86
1:444
ARTICLE IX
Tow-Away Zones
§ 270-87. Legislative authority; exempted vehicles.156
In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 22D, as amended, the
provisions of which were accepted by the City Council on October 21,
1968, and again on December 13, 1976, there are hereby enacted the
following regulations authorizing the removal to a convenient place of
vehicles parked or standing in such a manner or in such areas as are
hereinafter described, on any way, under the control of the City. Vehicles
specifically exempted by MGL c. 40, § 22D, shall not, however, be subject to
such removal.
§ 270-88. Authority of police.
The moving or towing of any vehicle under the provisions of this article shall
be by and at the direction of the Chief of Police, or such other officers of the
rank of Sergeant or higher as he may from time to time designate.
§ 270-89. Fees.
The City Council hereby imposes upon the owner of any vehicle moved or
towed to a convenient place, under the provisions of this article, such fees
as are set from time to time by the Department of Telecommunications and
Energy.
§ 270-90. Liability for damage during removal or storage.
The contractor shall be liable to the owner for any damage arising out of
negligence caused to a vehicle in the course of removal and storage.
§ 270-91. General prohibition; towing zones.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park in any of the places listed in this
section. Vehicles found in violation of the provisions of this section, except
those specifically exempt by law, shall be removed to a convenient place
under the direction of an officer of the Police Department; and the owner of
a vehicle removed or towed away shall be liable to the cost of such removal
and storage, if any, as set forth in § 270-88 of this article. The owner of any
vehicle removed or towed away under the provisions of this section shall
also be subject to the penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A.
Upon any way in such a manner as to impede the removal or plowing of
snow or ice.
A.
156. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-91
1:445
§ 270-92. Parking prohibitions.
No person shall stand or park or allow, permit or suffer any vehicle
registered in his name to stand or park on any of the ways described and
during the periods of time set forth in this article. Vehicles found in violation
of the provisions of this section, except those specifically exempt by law,
shall be removed to a convenient place under the direction of an officer of
the Police Department, and the owner of the vehicle so removed or towed
away shall be liable for the cost of such removal and storage, if any, as
set forth in § 270-88 of this article. The owner of any vehicle removed or
towed away under the provisions of this section shall also be subject to the
penalties provided in MGL c. 90, § 20A.
§ 270-93. Official traffic signs.
The provisions of § 270-91 shall be effective only during such time as a
sufficient number of official traffic signs bearing the legend "tow-away
Within an intersection, except in those areas where the installation and
erection of parking regulation devices have been approved by the state
Department of Transportation.157
B.
C. Upon any sidewalk.
D. Upon any crosswalk.
E. Upon any way within 20 feet of an intersecting way, except alleys.
F. Upon any way within 10 feet of a fire hydrant.
On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of the way.
G.
H. In front of a public or private driveway.
Upon any way where the parking of a vehicle will not leave a clear and
unobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide for passing.158
I.
J. Upon any way within 10 feet of a fire station.
Upon any bridge or viaduct or within a highway tunnel or underpass;
provided signs are erected providing notification of such regulation or
restriction.
K.
Upon any roadway in such a manner as to obstruct the movement of
any bus or railroad train.
L.
At any place where official signs have been placed or erected
prohibiting stopping, standing or parking.
M.
157. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
158. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-91 BEVERLY CODE § 270-93
1:446
zone" are installed, erected, maintained and located so as to be visible to
approaching drivers, said signs to be appended above or incorporated into
the legend of parking prohibition signs.
§ 270-94. Record of towed vehicles.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles towed or removed
under the provisions of this article. Such record shall be retained for one
year and shall contain the following information:
A. The registration of the vehicle.
The location from which it was towed, and the time and date of the tow
order.
B.
C. The location to which it was moved.
D. The fee charged for towing.
E. Name of towing contractor, if any.
F. Name and rank of officer who authorized towing.
§ 270-93 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-94
1:447

ARTICLE X
Storage of Vehicles
[Amended 4-18-1995 by Ord. No. 182; 5-8-2000 by Ord. No. 51]
§ 270-95. Definitions.159
For the purpose of this article, a "motor vehicle" shall mean a machine
propelled by a power other than human power, designed to travel along the
ground by use of wheels, treads, runners, or slides and transport persons
or property or pull machinery, and shall include, without limitation, an
automobile, truck, motorcycle, trailer, tractor, buggy and wagon.
§ 270-96. Registration and inspection required.
§ 270-97. Boats, recreational and seasonal vehicles.
No person shall park, store, keep, or leave, or allow to be parked,
stored, kept or left, any unregistered motor vehicle(s) or registered
vehicles not displaying the proper license plate(s) or any registered
motor vehicle(s) without a valid windshield inspection sticker as
required by MGL c. 90, § 7A, or any disassembled parts thereof, on any
land within the City for a period in excess of 30 days.
A.
For the purpose of this section, motor vehicles must:
(1) Be properly registered; and
(2) Display the proper license plate(s); and
(3) Display a valid windshield inspection sticker.
B.
No person shall park, store, keep, or leave, or allow to be parked,
stored, kept or left, on any lot in any residential district of the City
more than one boat, recreational or seasonal vehicle, either alone or
in combination, except by permit issued by the City Council, with the
approval of the Chief of Police.
A.
Any person wishing to park, store, keep or leave one such vehicle in
excess of 30 days or to park, store, keep, or leave more than one boat,
recreational or seasonal vehicle on any lot in any residential district
must first apply for and obtain written approval from the City Council,
with the approval of the Chief of Police. Such approval shall be on such
terms and conditions as the City Council deems to be necessary and
appropriate under the particular circumstances, and shall not exceed
one calendar year (365 days); however, upon reapplication, the City
Council may reissue such approval for an additional calendar year.
B.
159. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 270-95 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-98
1:449
§ 270-98. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to vehicles owned by the commonwealth, the
county or the City; to vehicles within a completely enclosed structure,
including side walls and a roof; to vehicles on property operating under
a license issued in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 140 of the
General Laws for use in connection with the motor vehicle business or junk
business; or to farm vehicles on property where same are necessary in an
agricultural use.
§ 270-99. Purpose; violations and penalties.
This article is for the protection of public health and welfare, and any
violation hereof is deemed to be a public nuisance. The prohibitions of this
article may be enforced by the City in any court of competent jurisdiction
through an action for injunctive relief. Further, any person violating any
provision of this article shall be subject to a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $100. Each day such violation continues after a conviction shall
constitute a separate offense. Violations of this article shall be administered
pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1, Article II, Fees and Fines, of the
City Code and MGL c. 40, § 21D.
§ 270-98 BEVERLY CODE § 270-99
1:450
Chapter 274
VEHICLES FOR HIRE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Licenses and business regulations — See Ch.
192.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 270.
§ 270-99 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-99
1:451

ARTICLE I
Motor Buses and Hackney Carriages
[Adopted as Art. XVIII of the Code of Ordinances]
§ 274-1. License required.
No person shall operate any motor bus upon any public way or street in
the City for the carriage of passengers for hire, in such manner as to
afford a means of transportation similar to that afforded by a street railway
company, by the indiscriminate receiving and discharging of passengers
along the route on which the vehicle is operated or may be running, or for
transporting passengers for hire as a business between fixed and regular
termini, without first obtaining a license therefor from the City Council,
subject to the approval of the Mayor in writing endorsed thereon.
§ 274-2. Application for license.
Every applicant for a license under this article shall file with the City Clerk
a written application which shall set forth:
§ 274-3. Compliance with laws, rules and regulations.
The license required by this article shall not become operative until the
licensee named therein shall have complied with all the provisions of the
General Laws applicable thereto, and all rules, terms and conditions for the
operation of motor vehicles for the carriage of passengers for hire adopted
by the Department of Public Utilities and such amendments and additions
thereto as may be made from time to time so far as the same are applicable.
§ 274-4. Operation on designated routes; amendments.
Persons making applications for the license to operate the vehicle
hereunder shall designate the route over which they desire to operate, and
the licensee shall operate such motor vehicle only over such route as shall
be approved by the City Council. Such route may be changed only with the
A. Name and business address of owner.
B. Description of each route in detail by highways.
C. Termini of each route.
A list of all bridges of 10 feet or more clear span over which buses are
to be operated.
D.
Motor busses to be operated, with a description of each as follows:
(1) Number of buses.
(2) Make and type of buses.
(3) Weight of heaviest bus to be operated.
E.
§ 274-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-4
1:453
consent or approval of the City Council; except in the case of an emergency
the route may be changed by the Chief of Police, who shall be the sole judge
as to whether an emergency exists.
§ 274-5. Qualifications of operators.
No person shall operate any such motor vehicle licensed under this article
within the City unless he shall be at least 21 years of age, and unless he
shall hold, in effect at the time of such operation, a license from the proper
authorities of the commonwealth.
§ 274-6. Solicitation of passengers.
No person operating any motor vehicle licensed under this article shall
solicit passengers by outcry or make any noise for the purpose of soliciting
passengers.
§ 274-7. Refusal to transport passengers.
No person operating any motor vehicle licensed under this article shall
refuse to carry any person offering himself to be carried as a passenger
therein unless the seats of the same are fully occupied and the number of
passengers thereon is the number allowed the operator to be carried at one
time, or unless such person is intoxicated or disorderly.
§ 274-8. Conduct of operators and passengers.
§ 274-9. Stopping at railroad tracks.
Every motor vehicle licensed under this article shall come to a full stop 30
feet immediately before crossing the tracks of any railroad grade.
§ 274-10. Maintenance of vehicles.
Every motor vehicle licensed under this article shall be kept in a safe
and proper condition for use in such operation, and to that end the Chief
No person operating any motor vehicle licensed under this article shall
collect fare, make change or discharge passengers while such vehicle is
in motion; nor shall he have a lighted cigarette, lighted cigar or lighted
pipe in his possession while any passenger is being carried therein, nor
drink any intoxicating beverage of any kind, or be under the influence
thereof, while engaged in operating such vehicle. No person, while a
passenger, shall talk to nor engage in conversation with the operator
of any such motor vehicle while the same is in operation; nor shall any
person be allowed to smoke a pipe, cigar or cigarette or spit upon the
floor of the motor vehicle while a passenger therein.
A.
No passenger shall ride upon any fender, dash, top, step or running
board of any motor vehicle licensed under this article.
B.
§ 274-4 BEVERLY CODE § 274-10
1:454
of Police, or any of his representatives or agents, shall have the right to
examine any such motor vehicle at any time.
§ 274-11. Revocation of license.
Any license granted under this article may be revoked by the City Council
after public notice and a hearing, for good and sufficient reasons to be
stated in the order therefor, subject to the provisions of MGL c. 159A, § 4,
or any other provision of the General Laws applicable thereto.
§ 274-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-11
1:455

ARTICLE II
Taxicabs and Liveries
[Adopted 11-21-2011 by Ord. No. 186 (Art. XIX of the Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 274-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEVERLY POLICE OFFICER — An individual appointed by the Police Chief
to carry out the functions of the Beverly Police Department, including, but
not limited to, the preservation of the public peace, the protection of life and
property, the prevention of crime, the arrest and prosecution of violators
of the law, the property enforcement of all laws and ordinances and the
effective delivery of police services.
CHIEF OF POLICE OR HIS DESIGNEE — The Police Chief or a person or
persons designated by him who holds the rank of Sergeant or above in the
Beverly Police Department and is assigned by the Police Chief to oversee
the regulation of taxis and liveries.
LICENSED DRIVER — A person, also referred to as a "driver," granted a
license by the Chief of Police to operate a taxi or livery.
LIVERY — A passenger motor vehicle bearing a livery registration issued
by the Registry of Motor Vehicles and that is hired for general passengercarrying
use. The services provided by this type of vehicle may be secured
only by request made to a dispatcher no less than two hours before pickup
of passengers within the City of Beverly or under a standing contract/
agreement to provide transportation services from time to time.
MEDALLION or VEHICLE LICENSE — The license issued by the City
Council permitting a single, identified vehicle to be used as a taxi or livery.
MEDALLION OWNER or LICENSED OWNER — An individual, also referred
to as an "owner" or "vehicle owner," who has been deemed a suitable
individual by the City Council to own a taxi medallion and who has been
issued one or more medallions.
POLICE CHIEF — An individual appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Beverly who commands the Beverly Police Department and has powers over
licenses granted by such department.
TAXI — A private passenger motor vehicle bearing a taxi registration issued
by the Registry of Motor Vehicles, and that is hired for general passengercarrying
use, and is equipped with a taximeter. The service provided by this
type of vehicle may be secured by a call to a dispatcher without restriction
as to time or may be "hailed" on any public way within the City
WAY or PUBLIC WAY — Any public way or private way laid out for public
use, any way dedicated to public use, or any place to which the public has a
right of access as invitees or licensees.
§ 274-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-13
1:457
§ 274-13. Vehicle and operator licenses required.
Vehicle licenses.
Each vehicle operated as a taxi or livery in Beverly must be duly
licensed by the City Council. The City Council may issue, grant
upon condition, withhold or revoke any such license at its
discretion.
(1)
Each vehicle license (medallion) shall expire on the first business
day of January each year.
(2)
A.
Operator's license.
Each operator/driver of a taxi or livery shall obtain an operator's
license from the Chief of Police or his designee. The Chief of Police
or his designee shall only issue operators' licenses to persons 18
years of age or older whom he, in his singular discretion, deems
appropriate persons to operate such vehicle. Such licenses and
their issuance shall be subject to the following:
Possession of a valid Massachusetts driver's license required.
Any person who wishes to obtain a temporary or permanent
taxicab license must first possess a valid Massachusetts
driver's license.
(a)
Outstanding fines. No taxicab driver's license shall be issued to
any applicant who owes outstanding fines for parking tickets,
excise taxes, or any other fines that would cause that person's
Massachusetts driver's license to be placed in a status of
"nonrenewable," until all matters have been cleared by the
Registry of Motor Vehicles.
(b)
License. Persons who wish to be employed as taxicab drivers
shall first obtain a license. A license may be issued after the
Chief of Police or his designee has investigated the applicant
therefor and reviewed his record from the Board of Probation
and conducted a personal interview. Such license may be
granted to suitable persons by the Chief of Police or his
designee.
(c)
Background investigation. All applicants for a hackney
carriage, taxi, livery or limousine license shall first be subject
to a background investigation to determine suitability for the
position.
(d)
Record of service. All operators of vehicles licensed under this
section shall maintain with the vehicle a record of calls for
service indicating the date and time of pickup and drop-off, the
starting point and destination of the passenger. The operator
of the vehicle shall offer for inspection said record forthwith
upon demand from any Beverly police officer. Such operator's
(e)
(1)
B.
§ 274-13 BEVERLY CODE § 274-13
1:458
§ 274-14. Operating restrictions.
All taxi licenses/medallions shall be subject to the following:
records shall be maintained and preserved by the medallion
owner for a period of 90 days and shall be subject to inspection
by and made accessible to the Chief of Police or his designee
at his request.
No driver under this section shall pick up or initiate a
conveyance for hire unless he is issued a license to do so by the
City of Beverly.
(f)
Revocation. Any driver found in violation of any of the provisions of
this article, after a hearing by the Chief of Police or his designee
on the alleged violation, shall be subject to a fine of $50 and his
license to operate shall be revoked at the discretion of the Chief of
Police.
(2)
The Chief of Police may, but shall not be required to, establish
additional guidelines for the issuance of operators' licenses.
(3)
A. One off-street parking space shall be required per license granted.
Each parking space for each vehicle shall be a minimum of nine feet
in width by 18 feet in length, or the length and width of the vehicle
licensed, whichever is greater.
B.
The applicant's principal place of business for the licensed activity
along with the telephone number and mailing address (other than post
office box rental) shall be the same address.
C.
The applicant shall provide the City Council with a certificate of
insurance in the amount of $1,000,000, which must include a statement
of the insurance company indicating that the policy shall not be
cancelled without a minimum of 14 days' notice to the City Council or
City Clerk.
D.
E. All taxi vehicles must be safe and clean.
All taxi vehicles shall be conspicuously marked as a taxi, and include
the name of the medallion owner on each side in letters not less than
two inches high and further must have an illuminated sign on the roof
for use during hours of darkness indicating that such vehicle is a taxi.
F.
The name of the owner and the name of the driver, his address, together
with a picture of the driver as well as a schedule of rates as set by
ordinance shall be posted conspicuously in every such vehicle.
G.
Each taxi shall be equipped with an operational taximeter capable of
calculating separate fares for at least four passengers simultaneously.
H.
§ 274-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-14
1:459
§ 274-15. Livery licenses.
§ 274-16. Taxi rates.
It shall be the duty of every medallion owner operating a taxi, and also
the driver thereof, to keep the taximeter operating at all times within
such standard of accuracy as may be prescribed from time to time by
the Sealer of Weights and Measures of the City of Beverly. Any taxi
operating without a taximeter, sealed and inspected by the Sealer of
Weights and Measures, shall be in violation of this section.
I.
Every taximeter shall be inspected and tested for accuracy by the
Sealer of Weights and Measures at least once every 12 months. Upon
the completion of the inspection and of any adjustments necessary
to cause the taximeter to operate within the standards of accuracy
approved by the Sealer of Weights and Measures, the Sealer of Weights
and Measures shall cause to be placed upon the meter a seal or other
device with the date of inspection and any other information that he
may require.
J.
In addition to Subsection J, every taximeter shall be subject to
inspection at any time by the Sealer of Weights and Measures. Upon
discovery of any inaccuracy of the taximeter, the operator shall remove
or cause to be removed from service the vehicle equipped with the
taximeter until the taximeter has been repaired and the accuracy
attested to by the Sealer of Weights and Measures.
K.
No person shall set up, use or drive any livery for the purpose of hire
within the City without a license for such livery from the City Council.
A.
All licenses granted under this article shall expire on the first day of
January in the year following the date of the license, and no license
shall be sold, assigned or transferred without the approval of the City
Council and the appropriate transfer fee. The City Council may issue,
issue with conditions, or revoke all such licenses so granted at its sole
discretion.
B.
The applicant shall provide the City Council with a certificate of
insurance in the amount of $1,000,000, which must include a statement
of the insurance company indicating that the policy shall not be
cancelled without a minimum of 14 days' notice to the City Council or
City Clerk.
C.
D. All livery vehicles must be safe and clean.
The minimum and maximum rates of fares to be charged by taxis
licensed under the provisions of this article shall be as follows:
(1) For 6/10 of one mile or fraction thereof: $5.50.
For each additional 1/5 mile: $0.60. [Amended 11-7-2013 by
Ord. No. 90]
(2)
A.
§ 274-14 BEVERLY CODE § 274-16
1:460
§ 274-17. Livery rates.
Fees for livery services must be fair and reasonable. The charging of unfair
or unreasonable fees may result in revocation of a livery license.
§ 274-18. Operator conduct.
§ 274-19. Inspections; appeals.
(3) For each additional passenger over two; $0.50.
Any person 59 years of age or older, with proper identification of same,
shall receive a discount of 20% from the amount registered on the
taximeter.
B.
The fixed rate for waiting time shall be $20 per hour, $5 for every
15 minutes or portion thereof. "Waiting time" shall mean the time
consumed while the taxicab is not in motion at the direction of the
passenger; provided, however, no charge shall be made for time lost
through traffic interruptions or for delays caused by the inefficiency of
the taxicab or its driver.
C.
Any operator licensed according to the provisions of this article shall
at all times conduct himself/herself in a courteous manner. Use of
indecent, profane or insulting language toward any person is
prohibited. Every driver shall be suitably dressed, neat and clean in
appearance.
A.
No operator of any taxi licenses under this article shall refuse to carry
any person offering himself/herself to be carried as a passenger therein
unless the seats of same are fully occupied, unless such person is
intoxicated or disorderly, or the operator of the taxi has good cause to
believe that such person is acting in an unlawful manner.
B.
Operators of taxis and liveries shall obey all laws, and ordinances, rules
and regulations, and rules of the road pertaining to the operation of
vehicles on public ways.
C.
Operators of taxis and liveries shall not use tobacco products or
consume alcoholic beverages while operating said vehicles.
D.
No operator of a taxi shall park or permit such vehicles to stand for hire
in any place other than the taxi stands designated by the City from time
to time. No livery shall stand or park in any space designated a taxi
stand.
E.
All taxis and liveries may be inspected and are subject to inspection by
the Chief of Police or his designee once each quarter or at any time
upon reason to believe that such vehicle is not being operated and/or
maintained in compliance with this Article II.
A.
§ 274-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 274-19
1:461
§ 274-20. License fees.
§ 274-21. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions of this Article II shall subject the offender to
a fine of $300 and may result in the revocation of any operator's, taxi, or
livery license previously issued by the Chief of Police or City Council.
Failure to submit to such inspection shall be cause for the immediate
revocation by the Chief of Police or his designee of the vehicle license/
medallion issued to such vehicle. Appeals of such action by the Chief of
Police or his designee shall be made to the City Council.
B.
Until such time as such appeal is heard by the City Council, such license
shall remain revoked. Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Chief of
Police or his designee from restoring a vehicle license/medallion before
such appeal is heard by the City Council.
C.
A nonrefundable fee of $10 shall be paid to the City of Beverly at
the time of initial application and any subsequent reapplication for an
operator's license to the Chief of Police.
A.
A fee of $50 shall be paid to the City of Beverly at the time of issuance
of any medallion, taxi license or livery license approved by the City
Council.
B.
§ 274-19 BEVERLY CODE § 274-21
1:462
Chapter 282
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 130.
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 143.
Sewers — See Ch. 227.
Board of Health regulations — See Ch. 400.
§ 282-1. Duties of Senior Civil Engineer.
The Senior Civil Engineer, in addition to having charge of all engineering,
shall, under the jurisdiction of the Director of Engineering, Commissioner
of Public Services, Public Works, have the general charge and supervision
of the water distributing plant and pipes and all the property of the City
pertaining thereto, shall maintain the same in good condition, shall use
and operate the same, and shall exercise a general supervision over all the
water business of the City, and shall lay and maintain all pipes, conduits
and other fixtures and appliances necessary for distributing water to the
inhabitants of the City.
§ 282-2. Records of meters.
In all cases where meters are furnished and attached, the Director of
Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works shall record,
in a book kept for the purpose, the style, size and number of each meter,
date when purchased, location, date when set, reading at such date, a
detailed statement of test and percentage of error shown and the reading
and date when reset, as well as a description of all defects and repairs of
such meters.
§ 282-3. Repairs; notice requirements; records of height of water.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
shall repair all leaks and breaks from any cause in the main pipes, hydrants,
gates or services attached to the distributing plant; and when in the
performance of these repairs, or for any other purpose, it becomes
necessary to shut off the water from any pipe, the Director shall duly notify
all takers thus to be deprived of water, except in cases of emergency; and
shall sufficiently repair all injuries to any street, sidewalk, highway or other
public property caused by the distributing plant. The Director shall keep a
detailed record of the height of water in the reservoir and sources of supply
of the City.
§ 282-4. Water and sewer rates; collection of bills.
The Director of Finance shall have the power to prescribe such water
and sewer rates as may be approved by the City Council, subject to such
§ 274-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-4
1:463
changes as the City Council may from time to time adopt. He shall commit
all bills for water and sewer rates and the use of water to the Collector of
Taxes for collection.
§ 282-5. Mandatory charges; metering of all premises.
All water used in the City shall be charged for, and all premises of every
person or organization taking water shall be metered.
§ 282-6. Water used by private contractors.
All City water used by private contractors under City contract shall be
charged for and the regular schedule of rates for the same collected in the
manner provided in this chapter. The payment therefor by each contractor
shall be provided for in the specifications of each contract.
§ 282-7. Restrictions on use of public water supply. [Amended
4-4-2002 by Ord. No. 98]
Authority. This section is adopted by the City of Beverly under its police
powers to protect public health and welfare and its powers under MGL
c. 40, § 21 et seq., and implements the City of Beverly's authority to
regulate water use pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 69B. This section also
implements the City of Beverly's authority under MGL c. 40, § 41A.
A.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to protect, preserve and
maintain the public health, safety and welfare whenever there is in
force a state of water supply conservation or state of water supply
emergency by providing for enforcement of any duly imposed
restrictions, requirements, provisions or conditions imposed by the City
of Beverly.
B.
Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, trust, partnership or
association, or other entity.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY CONSERVATION — A state of water supply
conservation declared by the City of Beverly pursuant to Subsection D
of this section.
STATE OF WATER SUPPLY EMERGENCY — A state of water supply
emergency declared by the Department of Environmental Protection
under MGL c. 21G, §§ 15 through 17.
WATER USERS or WATER CONSUMERS — All public and private users
of the City of Beverly's public water system, irrespective of any person's
responsibility for billing purposes for water used at any particular
facility.
C.
Declaration of a state of water supply conservation. The Mayor, acting
through the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
D.
§ 282-4 BEVERLY CODE § 282-7
1:464
Public Works, may declare a state of water supply conservation upon a
determination by said Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works that a shortage of water exists and that
conservation measures are appropriate to ensure an adequate supply of
water to all water consumers. Public notice of a state of water supply
conservation shall be given pursuant to Subsection F of this section
before it may be enforced.
Restricted water uses. A declaration of a state of water supply
conservation may include one or more of the following restrictions,
conditions, or requirements limiting the use of water, as well as any
other restriction, condition or requirement that the City of Beverly
determines to be necessary to protect the water supply. The applicable
restrictions, conditions or requirements shall be included in the public
notice required hereunder.
Odd/Even day outdoor watering. Outdoor water use, whether by
hose or automatic sprinklers, by water users with odd-numbered
addresses is restricted to Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Outdoor
watering by water users with even-numbered addresses is
restricted to Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday. There shall be no
outdoor watering on Sunday.
(1)
(2) Outdoor watering ban. All outdoor water use is prohibited.
Outdoor watering hours. Outdoor water use, whether by hose or
automatic sprinklers, is permitted only during daily periods of low
demand, to be specified in the declaration of a state of water supply
conservation and public notice thereof.
(3)
(4) Filling swimming pools. Filling of swimming pools is prohibited.
Automatic sprinkler use. The use of automatic sprinkler systems is
prohibited.
(5)
E.
Public notification of a state of water supply conservation; notice to
DEP. Notification of any provision, restriction, requirement or condition
imposed by the City of Beverly as part of a state of water supply
conservation shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the City of Beverly, or by such other means reasonably calculated
to reach and inform all users of water of the state of water supply
conservation. Any restriction imposed under Subsection E shall not be
effective until such notification is provided. Notification of the state of
water supply conservation shall also be simultaneously provided to the
Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection.
F.
Termination of a state of water supply conservation; notice. The Mayor,
acting through the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works, may terminate a state of water supply
conservation upon a determination by the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works that the water supply
shortage no longer exists. Public notification of the termination of a
G.
§ 282-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-7
1:465
§ 282-8. Examination of fixtures.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
shall, as often as twice in each year, cause the premises of every person
taking water to be visited, and the water meter therein to be examined by a
properly qualified inspector, and shall exercise a constant supervision over
the use of water.
§ 282-9. Separation between water pipes and sewer line.
The Director of Municipal Inspections shall cause the entrance of all water
pipes hereafter laid to any building in the City to be at least 10 feet distant
horizontally for its entire length from any house sewer line or a distance of
at least 18 inches above such house sewer line.
§ 282-10. Laying of pipes in streets; assessment of abutting owners.
When a water pipe is laid in any public or private street or way of the City,
the City Council shall assess upon owners of estates abutting on such street
or way the cost thereof, based upon the estimated average cost of the water
pipes in the water supply system adopted by the City by the following fixed
uniform rate: $1 per foot of frontage which such estates have upon any
street or way where a water pipe is constructed and $0.01 per square foot
of area which such estates contain within 100 feet from such street or way.
Such assessments shall be ascertained, assessed and certified by the City
Council, to the Board of Assessors for assessment, and notice thereof shall
be given to the party to be charged or his tenant or lessee.
state of water supply conservation shall be given in the same manner
required hereunder.
State of water supply emergency; compliance with DEP orders. Upon
notification to the public that a declaration of a state of water supply
emergency has been issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection, no person shall violate any provision, restriction,
requirement, or condition of any order approved or issued by the
Department intended to bring about an end to the state of emergency.
H.
Enforcement. The Commissioner of Public Services, the Director of
Municipal Inspections, the Fire Chief and the Chief of Police, or their
designees, shall be authorized to issue citations for violations of this
section.
I.
Violations and penalties. Any person violating this section shall be
liable to the City of Beverly in the amount of $50 for the first violation
and $100 for each subsequent violation. Each day of violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
J.
§ 282-7 BEVERLY CODE § 282-11
1:466
§ 282-11. Assessments for estates abutting on more than one
street.
When estates abut upon more than one street or way, assessment for water
pipes based upon frontage shall be assessed upon the frontage of one
such street or way, and upon so much of such other street or streets as
is not exempted by the City Council. The City Council may exempt from
assessment so much of the frontage on such other street or streets as it
deems just and equitable.
§ 282-12. Water pipes laid by landowners.
If any water pipes are laid in a public or private way or land at the total
expense of the owner thereof, his land shall not be assessed for such
water pipes, except for the cost of connecting it with water pipes already
established. The pipes thus laid become public and available for use by
future residents.
§ 282-13. Large meter testing; demand charges. [Amended
1-26-1993 by Ord. No. 67]
All meters two inches in size and larger shall be tested at the following
frequencies:
Meter Size
(inches)
Testing Frequency
(years)
2 to 3 5
4 to 6 3
Above 6 1
A.
The users of large meters shall pay for the actual cost of testing plus
a fifteen-percent charge for overhead costs. Any meters found to be
more than 3% in error shall be repaired or replaced. The actual cost
of repairing or replacing the meter shall be paid for by the user of the
meter. A fifteen-percent charge shall be added to this cost for overhead.
B.
Demand charge. The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public
Services, Public Works is hereby authorized to collect a one-time
demand charge from all newly constructed and newly created
residential, commercial, and industrial units, including new residential
condominium, commercial and industrial units within existing
buildings, according to the schedule of charges appearing below. The
purpose of such demand charge is to fund a portion of the cost of
supplying sufficient water at adequate pressure to meet the increasing
demands for water by the cumulative effect of new residential,
commercial, and industrial units being supplied with water. Such
demand charge shall be separate and distinct from the application for
water permit fee and shall be paid after approval of the application for
C.
§ 282-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-13
1:467
§ 282-14. Water meter service fees. [Amended 10-17-1988 by Ord.
No. 412]
Fees shall be collected by the Public Services Department for the following
water meter services:
§ 282-15. Water and sewer permit application fee. [Amended
10-17-1988 by Ord. No. 412; 6-9-2004 by Ord. No. 193]
The Public Services Department shall collect a fee for each application for
water and sewer permits.
§ 282-16. Fire flow testing fee. [Amended 2-21-1989 by Ord. No.
108B]
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works
is hereby authorized to collect a fee for each fire flow test on hydrants
within the City, to be charged to the person or entity so requesting such fire
flow test.
Chapter 287
water but prior to the initiation of water service and issuance of the
building permit.
Water Demand Fee
Schedule of Charges [Added 6-6-2016 by Ord. No. 101]
Pipe Size at
Building
(inches)
Cubic Inches/
Foot
Domestic Use Fire
Suppression
1 9.43 $2,500 $2,000
1 1/4 14.7 $4,677 $3,118
1 1/2 21.2 $6,744 $4,496
2 37.7 $11,994 $7,996
4 150.8 $47,975 $31,983
6 to 8 339.3 to 603.2 $149,920 $99,947
10 to 12 942.5 to 1,357.2 $365,806 $243,870.50
Seasonal removal and resetting of water meters, for each removal or
resetting.
A.
Repair of frozen meters due to the negligence of the owner or occupant
of the property: price of meter, plus labor to remove and install.
B.
Meter tests if the meter is found to be working and measuring correctly,
per test.
C.
§ 282-13 BEVERLY CODE § 282-16
1:468
WETLANDS PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Boating and waterways — See Ch. 124.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 249.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 375.
Wetlands protection regulations — See Ch.
565.
§ 287-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to provide more protection to the wetland
resource areas of the City of Beverly than is already granted by the Wetland
Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and the regulations in 310 CMR 10.00.
It is intended to be more protective than the existing regulations and
therefore more beneficial to the specific needs and values of this
community. It provides the Conservation Commission (Commission) more
authority to regulate activities that might have a harmful effect on the
following important interests: public or private water supply, groundwater,
flood control, erosion and sedimentation control, storm damage prevention,
water pollution control, fisheries, shellfish, wildlife and rare species habitat,
agriculture, aquaculture and recreation.
§ 287-2. Jurisdiction.
Except as permitted in writing by the Conservation Commission, or
as provided in this chapter, no person shall engage in the following
activities ("activities"): removal, filling, dredging, discharging into,
building upon, or otherwise altering or degrading the City's wetland
resource areas, consisting of:
(1) Any isolated vegetated wetland.
(2) Any vernal pool.
Any vegetated wetland bordering on any creek, river, stream, pond
or lake.
(3)
Any bank, beach, freshwater or saltwater marsh, wet meadow, bog
or swamp.
(4)
(5) Any land under any creek, river stream, pond or lake.
Any one-hundred-foot buffer zone of wetland areas in Subsection
A(1) through (5) listed above.
(6)
Any land subject to storm flowage or flooding by groundwater or
surface water.
(7)
(8) The two-hundred-foot riverfront area.
A.
§ 282-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-2
1:469
§ 287-3. Exemptions.
§ 287-4. Application to perform work; consultant services.
(9) Ocean.
The wetland resource areas listed in Subsection A(1) through (9) above
may also be protected under the Massachusetts Wetlands Protection
Act, MGL c. 131, § 40 ("the Act"), and its accompanying regulations,
310 CMR 10.00.
B.
The Commission shall not grant such permission without receiving
written notice of the intention to conduct such activity and without
issuing written permission to do so, all in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
C.
This chapter shall not apply to the following activities:
(1) Emergency projects as defined in the Commission's regulations; or
Maintenance, repair, or replacement, without substantial change or
enlargement, of existing and lawfully located structures or facilities
used in the service of the public and used to provide electric, gas,
water distribution, telephone, or other telecommunication services
to the public; or
(2)
Normal maintenance of land in active agricultural use, as defined
in the Commission's regulations; or
(3)
(4) Maintenance and repair of existing public ways.
A.
All appropriate measures should be undertaken to prevent damage to
any resource areas that would have a detrimental effect on the interests
of this chapter and the Act.
B.
All applications to perform activities in the City's resource areas shall
be either in the form of a request for determination of applicability
(RFD) or a notice of intent, or both. Such applications shall contain data
and plans as specified in the Commission's regulations, and shall be
submitted in complete written form to the Commission as required by
this chapter, the regulations, and the application checklist (Appendix
A of the regulations). The date which serves to commence the
Commission's deliberation period is the date of receipt of the
application at its offices, during regular office hours. The City's
Conservation Administrator shall be authorized to make determinations
of completeness for applications submitted to the Commission and shall
reject, within two business days, those applications that do not meet
the minimum submittal requirements of this chapter, the regulations,
and the application checklist. In order to provide sufficient review time,
the Commission may continue a public hearing or public meeting if
new information is submitted by the applicant, or the applicant's agent,
A.
§ 287-2 BEVERLY CODE § 287-4
1:470
§ 287-5. Hearings; review and investigation of application.
fewer than seven business days before the scheduled public hearing or
public meeting.
The applicable forms may be obtained from the Commission and must
be signed by the applicant or the applicant's agent where required. The
Commission may require further information by regulations, guidelines,
or as otherwise deemed necessary by the Commission. No such
application shall be accepted as complete before all permits, variances,
and approvals required by the ordinances of the City with respect to the
proposed activity, at the time of such notice, have been applied for or
obtained. Such application shall also include any information submitted
in connection with such permits, variances, and approvals which is
necessary to describe the effect of the proposed activity on the resource
area(s).
B.
Upon receipt of a permit application or RFD for complex projects such
as subdivisions, the Commission is authorized to require the applicant
to pay, with a reasonable cost determined by the Commission (not
to exceed 0.5% or $5,000), for specific expert engineering and other
consultant services deemed necessary by the Commission to finalize
the decision on the application. Any unused portion will be returned to
applicant.
C.
Combination with state law hearing. The Commission, in its discretion,
may hear any oral presentation under this chapter at the same public
hearing required to be held under the provisions of MGL c. 131, § 40.
Notice of the time and place of such hearing(s) shall be given as
required below.
A.
Notice. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at
the applicant's expense, not less than seven calendar days prior to the
public hearing, by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in
Beverly and by mailing a copy of such notice to all landowners within
300 feet of the land on which the work is proposed. All publications
and notices shall contain the name of the applicant, a description of
the area where the activity is proposed by street address, if any, or
other adequate identification of the location of the area or premises
which is the subject matter of the hearing, and the nature of the action
or relief requested, if any. Public notice requirements for continued
public hearings under this chapter shall be the same as the notification
requirements set forth in 310 CMR 10.05(5)(b)3.
B.
Proof.
The applicant shall have the burden of providing by a
preponderance of credible evidence that the activity proposed in
the notice of intent will not cause adverse impacts to any of the
interests and values intended to be protected by this chapter.
Failure to provide the Commission adequate evidence for it to
(1)
C.
§ 287-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-5
1:471
§ 287-6. Orders and decisions; security.
determine that the proposed activity will not cause adverse impacts
shall be sufficient cause for the Commission to deny permission
or to grant such permission with such conditions as it deems
reasonable, necessary, or desirable to carry out the purposes of this
chapter; or to postpone or continue the hearing to another date
certain to enable the applicant and others to present additional
evidence, upon such terms and conditions as deemed by the
Commission to be reasonable.
Due consideration shall be given to the possible effects of the
proposal on all interests and values to be protected under this
chapter and to any demonstrated hardship on the petitioner by
reason of a denial, as brought forth at the public hearing.
(2)
Filing fees are nonrefundable. Review fees not totally expended by the
Commission shall be refunded.
D.
Continuances.
The Commission may continue a public hearing or public meeting
in the following situations:
With the consent of the applicant, to an agreed-upon date
which shall be announced at the hearing; or
(a)
Without the consent of the applicant, to a specific date for
the reasons stated at the hearing, including but not limited to
receipt of additional information from the applicant or others.
(b)
(1)
(2) Any application that expires requires refiling of the notice of intent.
E.
Investigations. The Commission, its agents, officers, and employees
may enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of carrying out
its duties under this chapter and may make or cause to be made such
examination or survey as deemed necessary.
F.
All orders and decisions.
If the Commission determines that the proposed activity does not
require the imposition of conditions to preserve and protect the
interests of this chapter, the applicant shall be so notified in
writing.
(1)
If, after the hearing, the Commission determines that the proposed
activity is significant to one or more interests and values of this
chapter, the Commission may vote to issue written orders of
conditions within 21 days of the close of the public hearing. The
Commission may impose such conditions, safeguards, and
limitations on time and use upon such activity as it deems
necessary to protect those interests and values.
(2)
A.
§ 287-5 BEVERLY CODE § 287-6
1:472
The Commission may prohibit such activity altogether, in the event
that it finds that the interests and values of this chapter cannot
be preserved and protected by the imposition of such conditions,
safeguards, or limitations.
(3)
Security to assure performance. The Commission may, as part of its
order of conditions, require, in addition to any security required by
any other City or state board, commission, agency, or officer, that
the performance and observance of the conditions, safeguards, and
limitations imposed under this chapter on the applicant and owner be
secured by one, or both, of the following methods:
Deposit: by the deposit of money, sufficient to complete the work as
proposed, to secure performance of the conditions and observance
of the safeguards of such order of conditions. Such security, if filed
or deposited, shall be approved as to form and manner of execution
by City Counsel or the City Treasurer.
(1)
Land restriction(s): by a conservation restriction, easement, or
other covenant running with the land, executed and properly
recorded (or registered, in the case of registered land).
(2)
B.
Duration of orders. All orders of conditions shall expire three years
after the date of issuance. An order of conditions may be extended for
one year upon the request of the applicant. The request for an extension
of an order of conditions shall be made to the Commission at least 30
days prior to the expiration of the order of conditions. The Commission
may grant only two extensions for an individual order of conditions.
C.
No activity governed by an order of conditions shall be performed
unless and until all permits, approvals, and variances required by the
ordinances of the City shall have been obtained, such order of
conditions or notification shall have been recorded or registered at
the Essex South District Registry of Deeds, and all applicable appeal
periods have expired. The Commission shall have the right to record or
register its order of conditions with said Registry of Deeds. No work
shall proceed until proof is provided that the order of conditions has
been properly recorded at the Registry of Deeds. In the event that an
order of conditions issued pursuant to this chapter is identical to a final
order of conditions issued pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 131, §
40, only one such order need be recorded or registered.
D.
Modifications, amendments and revocations. The Commission shall
have the authority (on its own motion or upon the petition of the
applicant, or any person interested) to modify, amend, or revoke an
order of conditions. In revoking an order of conditions, the Commission
shall officially notify the interested parties through certified mail and
hold a public hearing within 21 days of the notification date. In the
case of an amendment to an order of conditions, the Commission shall
have the discretion to decide if a public hearing is warranted. This
decision shall be based on the potential impact of the proposed work
E.
§ 287-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-6
1:473
§ 287-7. Certificates of compliance.
The Commission shall, upon receiving a written request and weather
permitting, inspect the resource areas where the activity governed by an
order of conditions was carried out and issue a certificate of compliance (or
partial certificate of compliance) to the owner of the property, applicant, or
applicant's representative, in a form suitable for recording or registering,
if it shall determine that all of the activity(ies), or portions thereof, limited
thereby have been completed in accord with said order.
§ 287-8. Rules and regulations.160
§ 287-9. Enforcement and investigations; violations and penalties.
and its effect on the ability of the identified wetland resource areas to
provide those interests as defined under the Act and this chapter. No
public hearing is required for a modification to an order of conditions.
Written notification to the applicant by certified mail is required in all
cases where the Commission initiates a modification, amendment, or
revocation of an order of conditions.
The Commission shall be empowered to establish rules and regulations
to govern its affairs, including but not limited to fees, definitions, use
of consultants, security to assure performance, performance standards
for work in wetland resource areas, and such other information the
Commission deems necessary to discharge its responsibilities. After
due notice and public hearing, the Commission may promulgate such
rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this chapter, by a
majority vote of the duly appointed members.
A.
Failure by the Commission to promulgate such rules and regulations,
or a legal declaration of their validity by a court of law, shall not act to
suspend or invalidate the effect of this chapter.
B.
In accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, §§ 21D and 31, as
well as every other authority and power that may have been or may
hereafter be conferred upon it, the City may enforce the provisions
of this chapter, restrain violations thereof, and seek injunctions and
judgments to secure compliance with its orders of conditions. Without
limiting the generality of the foregoing:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or of any
condition of a permit issued pursuant to it may be punished by
a fine pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 21. Each day or portion thereof
during which a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense; if more than one, each condition violated shall constitute
a separate offense. This chapter may be enforced pursuant to
MGL c. 40, § 21D, by a City police officer, other persons having
(1)
A.
160. Editor's Note: See Ch. 565, Wetlands Protection Regulations.
§ 287-6 BEVERLY CODE § 287-9
1:474
police powers, Conservation Commissioners, or the Conservation
Administrator.
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D, violators shall, at the
discretion of the enforcement authorities, be charged a penalty.
The penalties for violations of this chapter or regulations
promulgated hereunder may be assessed as follows:
Violation
Penalty
(per violation, per day)
Alteration of any wetland resource
area identified in § 287-2, Jurisdiction,
of this chapter
$100
Violation of any order of conditions $100
Depositing any refuse, debris, yard
waste in a wetland or water body
$100
Depositing any construction material
in a wetland or water body
$100
Alteration of any stream or water
body
$100
Violation of any section of this chapter
that occurs in the Watershed Overlay
District
$100
(2)
In the event of a violation of this chapter or of any order issued
thereunder, the Commission or its agents may issue a stop-work order
to the owner, the applicant, or the applicant's agent by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or by posting the same in a conspicuous
location on said site. Any person who shall violate the provisions of a
stop-work order shall be deemed in violation of this chapter; but the
failure of the Commission to issue a stop-work order for any reason
shall not prevent the City from pursuing any other legal remedy at
law or in equity to restrain violations of this chapter or promulgated
regulations and to secure compliance with its orders.
B.
The City shall be the beneficiary of all fines imposed on account of the
violation of this chapter or promulgated regulations in order to defray
the expense of enforcing the same.
C.
Upon request of the Commission, the City Council and City Solicitor
shall take such legal action as may be necessary to enforce this chapter
or promulgated regulations and permits issued pursuant to it.
D.
Upon recommendation of the Commission, the City Council may employ
Special Counsel to assist the Commission in carrying out the legal
aspects, duties, and requirements of this chapter and promulgated
regulations.
E.
§ 287-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 287-10
1:475
§ 287-10. Responsibility for compliance upon transfer of ownership.
After the recording of a notice of violation or order, any person who
purchases, inherits, or otherwise acquires real estate upon which work has
been done in violation of the provisions of this chapter or in violation of any
order issued under this chapter shall forthwith comply with any such order
or restore such land to its condition prior to any such violation; provided,
however, that no action, civil or criminal, shall be brought against such
person unless such action is commenced within three years following the
recording of the deed or the date of death by which such real estate was
acquired by such person.
Chapter 300
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 130.
Historic buildings and districts — See Ch.
168.
Sewers — See Ch. 227.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 249.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 287.
Planning Board regulations — See Ch. 315;
Ch. 350; Ch. 375.
§ 287-10 BEVERLY CODE § 287-10
1:476
ARTICLE I
Title, Purpose and Interpretation
§ 300-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Beverly, Massachusetts," referred to herein as "this chapter."
§ 300-2. Purpose.
This chapter is designed for the following purposes:
§ 300-3. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, and general welfare. Wherever the
requirements of this chapter are at variance with the requirements of
any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, and ordinances, the most
restrictive or that imposing the higher standards shall govern.
A. To lessen congestion in the streets.
B. To secure safety from fires, panic, and other dangers.
C. To promote health and the general welfare.
D. To provide adequate light and air.
E. To avoid undue concentration of population.
F. To prevent the overcrowding of land.
To facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage,
schools, parks and other public requirements.
G.
H. To prevent pollution of air and water.
I. To encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the City.
J. To conserve and protect land values and amenities.
K. To encourage orderly development of land.
To encourage the appropriate use of our existing built environment,
including the adaptive reuse of older buildings.
L.
§ 300-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-3
1:477

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 300-4. Interpretation of terms.
For the purposes of this chapter, words used in the present tense include
the future; the singular number includes the plural, and the plural includes
the singular. The word "lot" shall include "plot" or "parcel." The word
"structure" shall include the word "building," where the context requires.
The word "used" shall include the words "arranged," "designed," "rented,"
"leased," "intended to be used" and "occupied." The word "shall" is
mandatory; and the word "may" is permissive.
§ 300-5. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY APARTMENT — A dwelling unit located within an owneroccupied
single-family dwelling with one or more rooms, including kitchen
and bathroom facilities that are separate from those of the principal
dwelling. The unit shall be constructed so as to maintain the appearance
and essential character of a single-family dwelling. Only relatives, i.e.,
brothers, sisters, parents, grandparents, in-laws, children and/or
grandchildren, of the residing owners of the principal dwelling unit may
occupy the unit.[Amended 6-26-1987; 7-5-2012 by Ord. No. 72]
ACTIVATED GROUND FLOOR USE[Added 7-31-2017 by Ord. No. 374A]
—
Uses that encourage and support pedestrian activity on the ground
floor of buildings and meet the activated ground floor development
standards in § 300-40I. They include:
Nonresidential uses permitted by right in § 300-40B except not:
(11) funeral home; (14) data processing center, etc.; (15) printing
and publishing establishments; (16) taxi, rail, bus passenger
terminal;
(1)
Nonresidential uses permitted by special permit according to
§ 300-40C, only including: (1)(g) hotel or motel; (1)(h) place of
commercial recreation; (1)(m) maker space; and (2)(a) bed-andbreakfast;
(2)
Lobby and circulation space serving a multifamily dwelling,
pursuant to § 300-40I; and
(3)
Open space or area that is accessible to the general public (e.g.,
pocket park, plaza).
(4)
A.
In the Core Pedestrian Area, this use does not include any other uses
accessible only to residential tenants, or their management, of the same
building, including single-unit residential entrances, trash/recycling
B.
§ 300-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:479
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION — A right, either in perpetuity or
for a specified number of years, whether or not stated in the form of a
restriction, easement, covenant or condition in any deed, mortgage, will,
agreement, or other instrument executed by or on behalf of the owner of
the land appropriate to:[Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 103]
AFFORDABLE HOUSING UNIT — A dwelling unit that is affordable to
and occupied by a low- or moderate-income household and meets the
requirements of the local initiative program (LIP) for inclusion on the
Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory.[Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 103]
AIRPORT APPROACH ZONE — An area of 500 feet in width at the end of
an airport runway or landing strip and 2,500 feet in width at a distance of
10,200 feet. The center line of this zone shall coincide with the center line
of the runway or landing strip extended.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure, tree, or aerial emission which
obstructs the aerial approaches of a publicly owned airport or impairs
the reasonable visibility in the vicinity thereof, electrical impulses and
disturbances which interfere with radio aids or communications, and lights
which might result in glare in the vision of aircraft pilots or be confused
with airport lights.
ANIMAL FEEDLOT — A plot of land on which 25 or more animals per acre
are kept exclusively for the purpose of feeding. This definition shall not
be construed as prohibiting farming lawfully being conducted under the
provisions of this chapter and/or MGL c. 40A, § 3.[Amended 3-5-1990;
2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
AQUIFER — A geologic formation composed of rock or sand and gravel
that contains significant amounts of potentially recoverable potable
water.[Amended 3-5-1990]
AREA MEDIAN INCOME (AMI) — The median family income for the
metropolitan area that includes the City of Beverly, as defined in the annual
schedule of low- and moderate-income limits published by the U.S.
areas, metering stations and utilities (except fire service stand pipes),
delivery and service bays, and other typically back-of-house functions
for residential. Drive-through uses are not permitted.
Limiting the use of all or part of the land to occupancy by persons or
families of low or moderate income in either rental housing or other
housing;
A.
Restricting the resale price of all or part of the property in order to
assure its affordability by future low- and moderate-income purchasers;
or
B.
In any way limiting or restricting the use of enjoyment of all or any
portion of the land for the purpose of encouraging or assuring creation
or retention of rental and other housing for occupancy by low- and
moderate-income persons and families.
C.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:480
Department of Housing and Urban Development, and adjusted for
household size.[Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 103]
ARTIST LIVE/WORK — The use of all, or a portion of, a building for an art
use, or creative work, and habitation by artists whereas units include both
working space and residential dwelling space. An artist live/work unit is
distinguished from a home occupation, otherwise defined by this chapter,
in that the work use is not required to be incidental to the dwelling unit;
more than one nonresident employee may be present on the premises;
and customers may be served on site. The work use may include the sale,
display, commission, consignment, or trade by artists or artisans; or classes
held for art instruction.[Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
ART USE — The production of art or creative work within the fields of fine
and applied arts, including but not limited to painting, drawing, sculpture,
graphic arts, photography, printmaking, mixed media, writing, publishing,
poetry, photography, theater, film or video production, architecture, interior
design, recording studio, culinary arts; and performing arts, including but
not limited to musicians, music composition, acting, or dancing.[Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
AUTO BODY SHOP — A business establishment engaged in motor vehicle
painting, body and collision repair, frame straightening or any combination
of the above.
BASELINE NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES — The total number of parking
spaces required by zoning pursuant to § 300-59.[Amended 7-17-2013 by
Ord. No. 52]
BASEMENT — An area partly underground but having at least 1/2 of its
clear ceiling height above the mean finished grade level at the foundation.
A basement shall be considered as a story if used for dwelling or business
purposes.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — The renting of not more than
five rooms as a lodging, without separate cooking facilities and for not more
than eight persons for a term of residence of less than eight days. These
establishments shall be residential in both character and appearance, and
off-street parking areas shall be screened from abutting residential uses in
a manner defined by the definition of "screening" in this section. The owner
of a bed-and-breakfast establishment shall be required to reside either
on the premises of the establishment or on an abutting parcel.[Amended
3-19-1991, 6-18-1991, 5-13-1996]
BOARD OF APPEALS — The Board of Appeals of the City of Beverly.
BREWERY, DISTILLERY, WINERY — Establishment primarily engaged in
the on-site manufacture, blending, fermentation, processing, and packaging
of alcoholic beverages, for wholesale or retail distribution, as allowed by
state law. While manufacturing is the primary use, the establishment may
include accessory uses such as: tasting room for on-site consumption (or
"taproom"), retail sales of the product produced on-site and related goods,
and/or tours of the production facility; provided the following:[Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:481
BUILDING — Any independent structure having a roof with structural
supports for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A building subordinate to and located on the
same lot with a main building, the use of which is clearly incidental to that
of the main building, such as a detached garage or barn.
CANNABIS CONTROL COMMISSION or CCC — A commission created
by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts to have general supervision and
regulatory authority over the conduct of the business of marijuana
establishments as defined in MGL c. 94G.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No.
213A]
CANNABIS or MARIJUANA — All parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis,
not excepted below and whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; and
resin extracted from any part of the plant; clones of the plant; and every
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the
plant, its seeds or resin including tetrahydrocannabinol as defined in MGL
c. 94G, § 1; provided that cannabis shall not include:[Added 1-7-2019 by
Ord. No. 213A]
CANNABIS OR MARIJUANA ACCESSORIES — Equipment, products,
devices, or materials of any kind that are intended or designed for use
in planting, propagating, cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, preparing, testing,
analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing, ingesting, inhaling,
or otherwise introducing cannabis or marijuana into the human
body.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
CELLAR — An area partly underground having more than 1/2 of its clear
ceiling height below the mean finished grade level at the foundation.
A tasting room or retail component shall front the street at sidewalk
level or have a well-marked and visible entrance at sidewalk level, and
be open to the public.
A.
All production, processing, distribution, and storage activities are to
be conducted within an enclosed building. Production waste shall be
disposed of off-site.
B.
Adequate parking and loading is provided on site in accordance with
the provisions of Article XVI of this chapter.
C.
The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil,
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature
stalks, fiber, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant or the
sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination;
A.
B. Hemp; or
The weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis or
marijuana to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or
other products.
C.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:482
CMR — Code of Massachusetts Regulations.[Added 8-27-1996 by Ord.
No. 169; amended 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 76]
CO-LOCATED MARIJUANA OPERATION — An entity operating under both
a RMD registration pursuant to 935 CMR 501.000: Medical Marijuana, and
under at least one marijuana establishment license pursuant to 935 CMR
500.000: Adult Use of Marijuana, in compliance with 935 CMR 502.000:
Co-located Adult-Use and Medical-Use Marijuana Operations, on the same
premises. Co-located marijuana operations pertain to cultivation, product
manufacturing, and retail, but not any other adult-use license.[Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which meets the definition
of "commercial vehicle" as defined in 540 CMR 2.05, as may be
amended.[Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 169]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A document prepared and/or adopted by the
Planning Board to guide the long-range development of the City, and which
considers the type, location, arrangement, and/or density of land uses,
streets, and necessary community services.
CONGREGATE ELDERLY HOUSING — An alternative housing arrangement
for elderly or handicapped persons choosing to share a living arrangement
with others. Residents have their own dwelling unit or bedroom, and share
areas such as living rooms, dining areas, and kitchens. Support services
such as house cleaning, meals, transportation, and minor health care are
provided on-site. This definition excludes nursing homes and halfway
houses.[Amended 7-20-1987]
CONSTRUCTION — Those lot improvements including foundations, the
erection of new buildings, expansion of footprints or existing structures,
and the addition of impervious surface(s). The term "construction" shall not
include fences, stone walls, and walks or paths made with solely porous
materials.[Amended 5-20-1993]
CORE PEDESTRIAN AREA — Refers to those parcels within the CC Central
Business District that front on: (a) either side of Cabot Street (a "primary
street") from Elliott Street to Highland Avenue; or (b) either side of Rantoul
Street (a "primary street") from Bow Street to Edwards Street; or (c) lower
Railroad Avenue and Broadway (both "primary streets") only where they
face Odell Park. This area need not be shown on the Zoning Map.[Added
7-31-2017 by Ord. No. 374A]
CORNICE — Any permanent continuous horizontally projecting feature
surmounting a wall or other portion of a building.[Amended 4-10-1990]
COVERAGE — The ratio of the total ground floor area of buildings to the
total area of the lot, expressed as a percentage.
CRAFT MARIJUANA COOPERATIVE — A marijuana cultivator comprised
of residents of the Commonwealth and organized as a limited liability
company, limited liability partnership, or cooperative corporation under
the laws of the Commonwealth. A cooperative is licensed by the CCC
to cultivate, obtain, manufacture, process, package and brand cannabis
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:483
or marijuana products to transport marijuana to marijuana
establishments.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
DOMESTIC EMPLOYEE — A person actually employed upon a premises
for monetary compensation by the resident family thereof for not less
than 30 hours per week and who provides domestic services to such
family.[Amended 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 43]
DWELLING — A building used only for permanent habitation by one or
more families. The term shall not include an hotel, motel, rooming house,
hospital, or other accommodation used for transient lodging.
ELDERLY — Persons 55 years or older, or those persons permanently
disabled.
FAMILY — [Amended 3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 43]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living and sleeping rooms providing
complete living facilities for the use of one or more individuals
constituting a single family, with permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. The term shall not include
an hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast, rooming house, hospital, or other
accommodation used for transient lodging. [Amended 3-14-2000 by
Ord. No. 43]
A.
DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY OR SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached dwelling,
other than a stationary trailer or mobile home, containing only one
dwelling unit.
B.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — Two attached dwelling units in one
building.
C.
DWELLING, SEMI-DETACHED — A one-family dwelling attached by no
more than one common wall to another one-family dwelling; and each
dwelling may be on a separate lot.
D.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A dwelling containing three or more
dwelling units.
E.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE GROUP — A group of two or more multifamily
dwellings occupying a parcel of land in one or common ownership and
having common open space.
F.
One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit and living and cooking
together on the premises as a single, nonprofit housekeeping unit and
further defined as one of the following:
Any number of persons related by blood, by adoption, by foster
home placement, and/or by marriage.
(1)
Up to and including four persons not related to each other by blood,
by adoption, by foster home placement, and/or by marriage.
(2)
A combination of persons related by blood, by adoption, by foster
home placement, and/or by marriage (such groups so related being
(3)
A.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:484
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — A food service establishment with a drive-in
window.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of the areas of the several floors of a
building, including areas used for human occupancy in basements, attics,
and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does
not include cellars, unenclosed porches, or attics not used for human
occupancy or any floor space in accessory buildings or in the main building
intended and designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet
the parking requirements of this chapter, or any such floor space intended
and designed for accessory heating and ventilation equipment.
FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The ratio of the gross floor area of the
building to the total lot area.[Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
FRONTAGE — [Amended 7-17-1991 by Ord. No. 43; 3-14-2000 by Ord.
No. 161; 6-24-2004]
one for the purpose of this definition) and no more than three other
individual persons without consideration of the relationship that
such three persons might have, if any, to each other.
Irrespective of the requirements of Subsection A above, domestic
employees, as herein defined, need not occupy the same dwelling unit
nor live and cook together in the same premises as a single, nonprofit
housekeeping unit with their employer family, but nonetheless for the
purposes of this chapter shall be deemed members of a resident family
in accordance with and as restricted by Subsection A(3) above.
B.
The distance between either (1) the points of intersection of the side lot
lines and the street right-of-way, measured along the street line, being
an unbroken distance along the street; or (2) the points of intersection
of the side lot lines and the rear line of the required front yard extended
to the street right-of-way, being an unbroken distance along the rear
line of the required front yard, whichever is smaller. For the purposes of
this chapter, there shall be both rights of access and potential safe year
A.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:485
GASOLINE STATION — A building and premises where gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires, automobile accessories, and incidentals are sold at retail
and where minor servicing and repairs take place. Major mechanical and
body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding, storage of
automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving noise, glare,
fumes, or smoke are not included in this definition.
GROUNDWATER — Water located beneath the ground surface in soil pore
spaces and in the fractures of rock formations.[Amended by Ord. No. 169;
6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 76-2013]
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance or mixture of physical, chemical,
or infectious characteristics posing a significant, actual, or potential hazard
to water supplies or other hazards to human health if such substance or
mixture were discharged to land or water. Hazardous materials include,
without limitation: synthetic organic chemicals; petroleum products; heavy
metals; radioactive or infectious wastes; acids and alkalis; solvents and
thinners in quantities greater than normal household use; and all
substances defined as hazardous or toxic under MGL c. 21C and c. 21E and
310 CMR 30.00.[Amended by Ord. No. 169-2012; 6-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 76-2013]
round practical vehicular access, unimpeded by: (1) wetlands, unless a
wetlands crossing has been approved by the Conservation Commission;
or (2) topography which prevents a proposed driveway from meeting
the requirements of § 300-64B(6), unless the Board of Appeals has
granted an exception as provided in Article XIII; or (3) other natural or
man-made barriers between the frontage line and a potential building
site. Only sufficient frontage on one of the following types of ways shall
be recognized for zoning purposes:
A public way or a way certified by the City Clerk that is maintained
and used as a public way;
(1)
A way shown on a plan approved and endorsed by the Beverly
Planning Board in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law; or
(2)
A way physically in existence when the Subdivision Control Law
became effective in Beverly having, in the opinion of the Planning
Board, sufficient width, suitable grades, and adequate construction
to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in relation to the
proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby, and
for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the
buildings erected or be erected thereon.
(3)
When a lot is bounded by more than one street, any one of them,
but only one, may be designated as the frontage street by the owner,
provided that that street provides sufficient frontage as required by this
chapter; however, in the case of a lot bounded by two streets forming
an interior angle of more than 135°, their combined frontage between
lot lines may be used to satisfy the lot frontage requirement.
B.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:486
HAZARDOUS WASTE — A waste, or combination of wastes, which because
of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, an increase in
mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible
illness or pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human, health,
safety, and welfare, or to the environment when improperly treated, stored,
transported, used or disposed of, or otherwise managed. These substances
are further defined in 310 CMR 30.010.[Amended by Ord. No. 169-2012;
6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 76-2013]
HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the lower of:[Amended 8-27-1996
by Ord. No. 169]
HEMP — The plant of the genus Cannabis or any part of the plant, whether
growing or not, with a delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol concentration that does
not exceed 0.3% on a dry weight basis of any part of the plant of the
genus Cannabis, or per volume or weight of cannabis or marijuana product,
or the combined percent of delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol and
tetrahydrocannabinolic acid in any part of the plant of the genus Cannabis
regardless of moisture content.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
HOME OCCUPATION or HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The use of
a room in a dwelling as an office, studio, or workroom for occupation
at home by a person residing on the premises and in connection with
which the primary use is not the sale of commodities on the premises and
which:[Amended 3-25-1996 by Ord. No. 49]
A. The average grade of the footprint of the building; or
The average grade at the front of the building to the top of the highest
roof beams of a flat or pitched roof.
B.
Shall not have more than one employee (other than the owner/
occupant) engaged on the premises at any one time.
A.
Shall provide off-street parking spaces on site at the following ratio:
one space for each vehicle owned by the occupants of the home, up
to a maximum of two spaces; one space for the employee of the home
occupation or home professional office, if there is one; and one space
for a client if the nature of the occupation or office warrants such space,
as determined by the Building Inspector. In any case, no more than four
spaces shall be provided on site and the portion of the lot serving as the
parking area shall be screened from abutting properties in accordance
with the requirements of Subsection B, C, D or E of the definition of
"screening" below.
B.
Shall not have more than one commercial vehicle parked on the
premises at any one time.
C.
Shall have no exterior display or storage of materials beyond that
permitted by this chapter.
D.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:487
HOTEL — An establishment providing transient lodging accommodations
to the general public for compensation and which may include, but is not
limited to, ancillary facilities and services such as restaurants, meeting
rooms, and recreational facilities.[Added 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Material or structure on, above, or below the
ground that eliminates rainwater infiltration and groundwater
recharge.[Amended by Ord. No. 169-2012; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No.
76-2013]
INDEPENDENT TESTING LABORATORY — A laboratory that is licensed by
the Massachusetts Cannabis Control Commission and is:[Added 1-7-2019
by Ord. No. 213A]
LANDFILL — A facility established in accordance with a valid site
assignment pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 150A, for the purposes of disposing
solid waste into or on the land.[Amended by Ord. No. 169-2012;
6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 76-2013]
LEACHABLE WASTES — Waste materials including solid wastes, sewage,
sludge, and agricultural wastes that are capable of releasing waterborne
contaminants to the surrounding environment.[Amended 3-5-1990]
LINEAL FRONTAGE — The length in feet an establishment faces a street
or public right-of-way at the first floor or entrance level.[Amended
4-10-1990]
LOCAL INITIATIVE PROGRAM — A program administered by the
Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD) pursuant to 760 CMR 56.00 to develop and implement local
housing initiatives that produce affordable housing.[Amended 7-17-2007
by Ord. No. 103; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
LOT — A parcel of land in identical ownership throughout of at least
sufficient size to meet the minimum requirements of this chapter for use,
frontage, coverage, and area and to provide required yards and other open
spaces. The area of a lot is that area, in square feet or acres, enclosed by
the lot lines of a single lot. In calculating the area of a lot for purposes of
determining such lot's conformance with the minimum area requirements
of this chapter (but not for any other dimensional calculations), no portion
of such lot shall be included which: (i) is subject to an easement or right-ofway
that is recorded (or shown on a plan that is recorded or to be recorded)
Accredited to the International Organization for Standardization 17025
(ISO/IEC 17025:2017) by a third-party accrediting body that is a
signatory to the International Laboratory Accreditation Accrediting
Cooperation mutual recognition arrangement or that is otherwise
approved by the Cannabis Control Commission;
A.
Independent financially from any medical marijuana treatment center
(RMD) or marijuana establishment for which it conducts a test; and
B.
Qualified to test marijuana in compliance with 935 CMR 500.160 and
MGL c. 94C, § 34.
C.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:488
and that serves property outside the lot, or (ii) is subject to a restriction
that by its terms prevents or prohibits the owner of such lot from making
any substantial use of that portion of the lot; but neither (i) or (ii) above
shall apply to any easement, right-of-way, or restriction that is either for
utility or conservation purposes or that is held by or generally open to
governmental agencies or the public. Additionally, for lots created after
July 15, 1996, no more than 20% of that portion of a lot classifiable as
freshwater or coastal wetlands under the provisions of MGL c. 131, § 40, as
amended, shall be included in the calculation of a lot's area for purposes
of determining conformance with this chapter.[Amended 3-25-1996 by
Ord. No. 49; 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 169; 6-24-2004 by Ord. No. 161;
12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 206]
LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — A household with income
at or below 80% of area median income, adjusted for household size. In
a development with affordable housing units, "eligible low- or moderateincome
household" means the household that purchases or rents an
affordable housing unit as its principal residence.[Amended 7-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 103]
MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT — Boat and boat trailers, travel
trailers, pickup campers or coaches, motorized dwellings, tent trailers, and
similar devices.
MAKER SPACE — Uses that process, fabricate, assemble, treat, or package
finished parts or products without the production or use in large quantities
of hazardous or explosive materials. Due to the nature of operations and
products, little or no noise, offensive odors, undue vibration or glare, and/
or environmental pollution is produced, and, therefore, there is minimal
impact on surrounding properties. Operations may include the storage of
materials and the loading and unloading of new materials and finished
products. Activities common to this use include, but are not limited to,
food and beverage production, electronics and other electrical equipment
assembly, furniture and other woodworking, printing and publishing
operations, computer hardware manufacturing, and the fabrication of metal
products except machinery and transportation equipment.[Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
MARIJUANA CULTIVATOR — An entity licensed by the CCC to cultivate,
process and package marijuana, and to transfer marijuana to other
marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 213A]
LOT, CORNER — A lot with frontage on two or more streets at their
intersection, where the interior angle of the intersection is less than
130°.
A.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — A lot of record at the time this chapter
becomes effective but which does not conform with the regulations for
the district in which it is located.
B.
C. LOT WIDTH — See "frontage" definition in this section.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:489
MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT — A marijuana retailer, marijuana product
manufacturer, marijuana cultivator, marijuana testing facility, marijuana
research facility, marijuana transporter, or any other type of CCC licensed
marijuana-related business.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
MARIJUANA PRODUCT — Marijuana and its products unless otherwise
indicated. These include products have been manufactured and contain
marijuana or an extract from marijuana, including concentrated forms of
marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other ingredients that
are intended for use or consumption, including edible products, beverages,
topical products, ointments, oils and tinctures.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord.
No. 213A]
MARIJUANA PRODUCT MANUFACTURER — An entity licensed by the CCC
to obtain, manufacture, process and package marijuana products and to
transfer these products to other marijuana establishments, but not to
consumers.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
MARIJUANA RESEARCH FACILITY — An entity licensed by the CCC to
engage in research projects.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
MARIJUANA RETAILER — An entity licensed by the CCC to purchase and
transport marijuana product from marijuana establishments and to sell
or otherwise transfer this product to marijuana establishments and to
consumers. Retailers are prohibited from delivering marijuana products to
consumers, and from offering marijuana products for the purposes of on-site
social consumption on the premises of a marijuana establishment.[Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
MARIJUANA TRANSPORTER — An entity that is licensed by the CCC to
purchase, obtain, and possess marijuana product solely for the purpose
of transporting, temporary storage, sale and distribution to marijuana
establishments, but not to consumers.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No.
213A]
MARKET-RATE HOUSING — In a development with affordable housing,
"market-rate housing" means all units other than the affordable housing
units as defined in this chapter.
MAXIMUM AFFORDABLE PURCHASE PRICE OR RENT — For
homeownership units, a purchase price that is affordable to a low- or
moderate-income household paying not more than 30% of gross monthly
income for a mortgage payment, property taxes, insurance and
condominium fees where applicable; and for rental units, a monthly rent
that is affordable to a low- or moderate-income household paying no more
than 30% of its gross monthly income for rent and utilities. The household
income used to compute the maximum affordable purchase price or rent
shall be adjusted for household size, considering the household size for
which a proposed affordable unit would be suitable under guidelines of
the local initiative program or, where no such guidelines exist, under
regulations adopted by the Planning Board.[Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 103]
MEAN — A number or point which is halfway between two extremes.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:490
MEDICAL MARIJUANA TREATMENT CENTER, also known as a
REGISTERED MARIJUANA DISPENSARY (RMD) — An entity registered
under 935 CMR 501.000: Medical Marijuana that acquires, cultivates,
possesses, processes (including development of related products such as
edible cannabis or marijuana products, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or
ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or
administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or
educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal
caregivers. Unless otherwise specified, RMD refers to the site(s) of
dispensing, cultivation, and preparation of marijuana.[Added 1-7-2019 by
Ord. No. 213A]
MGL — Massachusetts General Law.[Added by Ord. No. 169-2012;
amended 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 76-2013]
MICROBUSINESS — A co-located marijuana establishment that can be
either a marijuana cultivator or marijuana product manufacturer or both,
in compliance with the operating procedures for each license by the CCC.
A microbusiness that is a marijuana product manufacturer may purchase
no more than 2,000 pounds of marijuana per year from other marijuana
establishments.[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
MINING OF LAND — The removal and relocation of geologic materials such
as topsoil, sand and gravel, metallic ores, or bedrock.[Amended 3-5-1990]
MIXED USE — Two or more compatible uses on a single parcel pursuant
to a single development plan which may include, without limitation, office,
retail, residential, medical, educational, recreational and/or civic
uses.[Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
MOBILE HOME — A detached residential dwelling unit designed for
transportation after fabrication on streets or highways on its own wheels or
on flatbed or other trailer, and arriving at the site where it is to be occupied
as a dwelling complete and ready for occupancy, except for assembly
operations, location on jacks or other temporary or permanent foundations,
connections to utilities, etc. A travel trailer is not to be considered as a
mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — Any lot used to accommodate two or more
individual mobile homes, including all necessary buildings, tents, or other
appurtenances; and regardless of whether a charge is made for such
accommodations. A mobile home park does not include the parking of
unoccupied homes for inspection and sale as a commercial business.
OFF-STREET PARKING — Parking spaces provided outside of the right-ofway
of a street or highway.[Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 52]
ON-STREET PARKING — Parking spaces provided within the right-of-way of
a street or highway.[Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 52]
PARKING AISLE — The driving portion of a parking lot, which provides
access to each parking space.[Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 52]
PARKING LOT — That portion of a lot set aside, marked, and posted for
the parking of vehicles which may include, in addition to parking spaces
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:491
and aisles, circulation areas, loading and unloading areas, landscaped areas
and islands intended to channel traffic, bikeways and walkways.[Amended
7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 52]
PARKING SPACE — A space in which a single vehicle may be
parked.[Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 52]
PLANNING BOARD — The Planning Board of the City of Beverly.
PRIMARY FACADE — The length in feet of that side of an establishment's
structure that faces a street or public right-of-way at the first floor or
entrance level.[Amended 5-29-2003 by Ord. No. 59]
PRIVATE PASSENGER MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle which meets
the definition of "private passenger motor vehicle" as defined in 540 CMR
2.05, as may be amended.[Amended 8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 169]
PUBLIC OPEN SPACE — Space left without a structure of any kind and
without parking lots which is dedicated to the City via an easement obtained
from the property owner. This space may be beaches, pedestrian walkways,
picnic areas, landscaping, or other green space.
RECHARGE AREAS — Areas composed of permeable stratified sand and
gravel and certain wetlands that collect precipitation or surface water and
carry it to aquifers.[Amended 3-5-1990]
RECREATIONAL BOATING FACILITY — A facility on and abutting tidal
waters for berthing of recreational vessels at which all berths and accessory
uses thereto are available for patronage by the general public on a seasonal
or transient basis. Such facility may be either publicly or privately owned,
and may include town piers, or community sailing centers or yacht clubs
offering open membership to the public. Nothing in this provision shall
be construed as allowing the storage of recreational vessels and/or
recreational and marine equipment off the premises of the facility, nor as
prohibiting the adoption of minimum eligibility criteria of broad, objective
applicability, such as basic knowledge of boating safety or a willingness to
make regular work commitments; nor as prohibiting the reservation of a
berth for the operation of said facility.[Amended 11-23-1994 by Ord. No.
254; 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
SCREENING — A visual barrier which may be:[Amended 6-26-1987;
7-1-1992]
SETBACK — A line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any enclosed
covered porch or other enclosed portion of a building shall not project. In
A masonry wall, brick veneer, tilt-wall concrete, or poured-in-place
concrete, minimum height of six feet.
A.
B. A five-foot-wide and five-foot-high evergreen landscaping strip.
C. A landscaped earthen berm at least five feet in height.
D. A wood fence with permanent slats, not less than six feet in height.
E. A combination of the above.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:492
the case of private easements that serve as legal frontage for, or provide
vehicular access to, any lot, minimum yard setbacks required by this
chapter shall be measured from the side line of the private easement or the
property line, whichever is closest to the location of the building.[Amended
5-4-2006 by Ord. No. 10]
SHARED PARKING — A parking arrangement within a mixed-use
development which allows for the sharing of parking spaces by more than
one use, each with different parking occupancy demand
patterns.[Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
SIGN — [Amended 4-10-1990; 5-29-2003 by Ord. No. 59]
The definitions specific to signs shall control where there is any
inconsistency between the definitions specific to signs and the general
definitions of this chapter.
ABANDONED SIGN — A sign which no longer identifies or
advertises a bona fide business, owner, lessor, lessee, service,
product, or activity, or for which no legal owner can be found or, if
found, disclaims any interest in the sign.
(1)
ANIMATED SIGN — Any sign with visible moving parts which
includes any illuminated sign on which the artificial light is not
maintained stationary or constant in intensity and color at all times
when such sign is in use. For this purpose, any revolving,
illuminated sign shall be considered an "animated sign."
(2)
ADVERTISING SIGN — A sign which directs attention to a
business, profession, commodity, service, or entertainment
conducted, sold, or offered elsewhere than upon the same
premises.
(3)
ALTERATION TO SIGN — Any enlargement, rewording (other than
in the case of theater or cinema signs or other sign boards with
automatically changing messages), redesign or alteration in any
way, other than routine maintenance, including repainting in a
different color, or any work on a sign that has deteriorated to such
an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed 30% of the
replacement cost of the sign at time of restoration. Any alteration
to a sign and all altered signs must conform to the requirements of
this chapter.
(4)
AREA OF SIGN — The area of a sign shall be considered to be that
of the smallest rectangle or other convex shape which encompasses
all the letters and symbols of the sign message or such message
together with any frame, background, trim, or other integral part
of the display on which such message is placed.
(5)
AWNING SIGN — Any sign placed on the face of an awning. An
awning is a flexible, woven cloth fabric mounted above and/or
projected above a window or door.
(6)
A.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:493
CANOPY SIGN — A sign located on a rigid structure erected over
gas pumps at gas filling stations or over other automobile services
areas.
(7)
CLUSTER SIGN — Two or more signs integrated into one
freestanding sign structure.
(8)
DEFUNCT SIGN — A sign which advertises an activity, business,
project, or service no longer produced or conducted on the
premises upon which the sign is located.
(9)
DIRECTORY SIGN — A sign located on a building, or freestanding
within the area between the building and 1/2 the distance to the
nearest property line, which identifies the occupants and their
location within a building.
(10)
FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign, including the supporting device,
not part of or attached to any building but located elsewhere on a
lot.
(11)
OBSTRUCTING SIGN — A sign which obstructs a fire escape,
window, door, or other opening, or which prevents free passage
from one part of a roof to any other part thereof.
(12)
OFF-PREMISES SIGN — A sign which advertises or announces a
use conducted or goods available elsewhere than on the lot on
which the sign is located.
(13)
PORTABLE SIGN — A freestanding sign not permanently affixed,
anchored, or secured to the ground or structure on the lot it
occupies.
(14)
PROJECTING SIGN — Any sign which is attached to a building or
other structure which projects more than 12 inches from the wall
surface of the building or structure in front of which the sign is
positioned.
(15)
ROOF SIGN — Any sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon
or over the roof of any building.
(16)
SANDWICH BOARD SIGN — An "A-frame" shaped sign that
identifies or advertises a place of business and that consists of
two sign boards that are hinged together at the top and on which
an establishment's name has been factory-imprinted. [Amended
6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 57]
(17)
TEMPORARY SIGN — Any sign intended to be maintained for a
continuous period not to exceed 14 days.
(18)
WALL SIGN — A sign or letters placed on the building which
projects no more than 12 inches from and is parallel to the face of
the building.
(19)
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:494
SOLAR ACCESS — The access of a solar energy system to direct
sunlight.[Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A device or structural design feature, a
substantial purpose of which is to provide daylight for interior lighting
or provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for
space heating and cooling, electricity generation, or water heating.[Added
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
SOLID WASTES — Useless, unwanted, or discarded solid material with
insufficient liquid content to be free flowing. This includes, but is not limited
to, rubbish, garbage, scrap, junk, refuse, inert fill material and landscape
refuse.[Amended 3-5-1990]
STORY — That portion of a building included between the floor and the floor
or roof next above. A half-story is a partial story under a sloping roof, the
wall plates of which, on two exterior walls, are not more than two feet above
the floor of such partial story.
STRUCTURE — A construction including, but not limited to, buildings as
hereinbefore defined, stadiums, radio towers, fences, freestanding signs,
projecting sign and other structural facilities.[Amended 5-29-2003 by
Ord. No. 59]
SUBSIDIZED ELDERLY HOUSING — [Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord. No.
206]
WINDOW SIGN — A sign painted or posted on an interior
translucent surface, including windows or doors. In the case of
individually lettered signs, sign area shall be the smallest
geometrical shape which contains the letters.
(20)
Any exterior design feature of a building or structure that is associated
with the corporate image or identification of a business which
effectively results in extending the area of a sign shall be considered
a sign and subject to regulation under this chapter. The term "exterior
design features" shall include but not be limited to rigid canopies,
feature strips, roofs, graphics, and color.
B.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, GROUND-MOUNTED — A solar energy
system, including, but not limited to, panels, electrical equipment, and
accessory structures, that is structurally mounted to the ground and is
not roof-mounted; may be of any size.
A.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, LARGE-SCALE — A solar energy system that
occupies more than 1,000 square feet of surface area.
B.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, ROOF-MOUNTED — A solar energy system
that is structurally mounted to the roof of a building or structure; may
be of any size.
C.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM, SMALL-SCALE — A solar energy system
that occupies 1,000 square feet or less of surface area.
D.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:495
SUBSIDIZED HOUSING INVENTORY — The Department of Housing and
Community Development Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing
Inventory.[Amended 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 103]
TASTING ROOM — An accessory use located within a brewery/distillery/
winery establishment that allows patrons to taste samples of alcoholic
beverages that are produced on-site, provided that any such facility that
serves samples of alcoholic beverages has a Commonwealth of
Massachusetts issued farmer series pouring permit, per MGL c. 138
§ 19B(n), Farmer winery, 19C(n), Farmer-brewery, or 19E(o), Farmerdistillery.[
Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
USE — The principal purpose for which a lot or the principal building
thereon is designed, occupied, maintained, or intended to be used.
A residential development in which:
At least 80% of the units are occupied by at least one person age
55 and over;
(1)
At least 15% of the units ("the affordable units") are designated for
occupancy by persons of low or moderate income as determined by
the Federal Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD)
for the Boston, MA/New Hampshire PMSA; and
(2)
At least 10% of the constructed units are designed and equipped
for those with disabilities.
(3)
A.
There shall be a deed restriction for such affordable units, regardless of
the form of ownership or tenancy, that ensures occupancy of the units
by those of low or moderate income as defined by HUD in perpetuity.
B.
A tasting room may also include related retail sales and host marketing
events, special events, and/or factory tours.
A.
A tasting room or accessory retail shall front the street at sidewalk level
or have a well-marked and visible entrance at sidewalk level, and be
open to the public.
B.
A tasting room or accessory retail may not be greater than 33% of the
establishment's gross square footage, or 2,000 square feet, whichever
is less.
C.
An outdoor patio may be included in the total area of a tasting room, so
long as it does not occur in the parking area and appropriate screening
is provided, if necessary.
D.
USE, ACCESSORY — A use of a building, land, or portion thereof,
normally incidental to the permitted use of the premises.
A.
USE, NONCONFORMING — A use which lawfully exists at the time
this chapter becomes effective but which does not conform with the
regulations for the district in which it is located.
B.
§ 300-5 BEVERLY CODE § 300-5
1:496
USED CAR SALES — A retail establishment displaying and selling four or
more previously owned vehicles per year.
YARD — A required open space lying between a building or outer building
of a group and the nearest lot line.
USE, PRINCIPAL — Any primary purpose for which a structure or lot
is designed, arranged, occupied, or intended, which may be used or
maintained under this chapter. The use of any structure or land on the
same lot and incidental or supplementary thereto and permitted under
this chapter shall be considered as accessory use.
C.
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending for the full width of the lot
between the front line of the building wall and the front lot line; on
corner lots either street may be designated as the front yard regardless
of the address or entrance location of the building. The front-yard
setback shall apply to one street only.
A.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot
between the rear line of the building wall and the rear lot line. An
accessory building or accessory use as herein permitted may be located
in the rear yard. [Amended 7-1-1992]
B.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending for the full length of a building
between the building wall and the side lot line. On triangular-shaped
lots, each side yard setback shall be parallel and extended to a rear
point of intersection within the lot.
C.
§ 300-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-5
1:497

ARTICLE III
Zoning Districts
§ 300-6. Districts designated. [Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
§ 300-7. Overlay districts. [Amended 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 507]
Overlay districts to this chapter may be established within the City of
Beverly. These overlay districts and their attendant requirements are
presented in Article VIII. Smart Growth or Transit Oriented Overlay
Districts and their attendant requirements are presented in Article XIX.
The City of Beverly, Massachusetts is hereby divided into 18 zoning
districts to be designated as follows:
Designation Description
R-90 One-family residential
R-45 One-family residential (suburban density)
R-22 One-family residential (suburban density)
R-15 One-family residential (urban density)
R-10 One-family residential (urban density)
R-6 One- and two-family residential
RMD Multifamily residential
RHD Multifamily residential (high-density)
RSD Special residential development (high-density)
CN Neighborhood commercial
CC Central business
CG General commercial (automobile-oriented)
IR Restricted industrial, research and office
IG General industrial
HD Hospital District
BHD Beverly Harbor District
WDR Waterfront development residential
MOSR Municipal open space and recreation
A.
Specific use and dimensional regulations applicable to each of these
districts are shown in Article VI and Article VII. General provisions
applicable to all districts are included throughout this chapter.
B.
§ 300-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-7
1:499

ARTICLE IV
Zoning Map
§ 300-8. Zoning District Map.
§ 300-9. Interpretation of district boundaries.
The location and boundary of the zoning districts are shown on the
Zoning District Map of the City of Beverly Massachusetts as amended,
such map to be part of this chapter duly certified and filed in the office
of the City Clerk.
A.
B. Amendments to district boundaries shall be entered on said map.
Where any uncertainty exists with respect to the boundary of any
district as shown on the Zoning District Map, the following rules shall
apply:
Where a boundary is indicated as a highway, street, alley, railroad,
watercourse or City boundary, it shall be construed to be the center
line thereof or such City boundary.
(1)
Where a boundary is indicated as approximately parallel to a
highway, street, alley, railroad, watercourse or City boundary, it
shall be construed as parallel thereto and at such distance from the
center line thereof as shown on the Zoning District Map.
(2)
If no dimension is given on the Zoning District Map, the location of
any boundary shall be determined by use of the scale shown on the
Zoning District Map.
(3)
Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot under a single
ownership at the time of the effective date of this chapter, district
regulations governing either portion of the severed lot may be
extended up to 50 feet into the adjoining district. [Amended
6-26-1987]
(4)
The Board of Appeals shall resolve all boundary questions not
covered by Subsection A(1) through (4) above.
(5)
A.
Water Supply Protection Overlay District. [Amended by Ord. No.
169-2012; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 76-2013]
If the location of the Water Supply Protection Overlay District
boundary in relation to a particular parcel is in doubt, the Beverly
Zoning Board of Appeals will resolve the boundary dispute in
consultation with the applicant(s).
(1)
In such cases, a formal written request for consideration will be
filed with the Zoning Board of Appeals and must be accompanied
by sufficient documentation to demonstrate that either the parcel
(or portion thereof) is clearly outside of the district or that there is
sufficient question as to the exact location of the boundaries.
(2)
B.
§ 300-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-9
1:501
In cases where the Zoning Board of Appeals considers the
information submitted by the applicant to be insufficient in order
to make the requested determination, the Board will require the
applicant to select a professional engineer(s), hydrologist(s), or soil
scientist(s) from a list provided by the Board, at the applicant's
expense, to determine more accurately the boundaries of the
district with respect to an individual parcel(s) of land.
(3)
§ 300-9 BEVERLY CODE § 300-9
1:502
ARTICLE V
General Provisions
§ 300-10. Applicability. [Amended 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 170]
§ 300-11. Undersized lots of record.
Any lot lawfully laid out by plan or deed duly recorded, as defined in MGL
c. 41, § 81L, or any lot shown on a plan endorsed with the words "approval
under the Subdivision Control Law not required" or words of similar import,
pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 81P, which has a lesser area, frontage, width, and
depth required under this amendment for the district in which such lot is
located shall be subject to the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 6. The minimum
side yard for such lots shall not be less than eight feet.
§ 300-12. Building permits issued prior to adoption of chapter.
All building permits issued prior to the adoption of this chapter are subject
to the provisions of MGL c. 40A, §§ 6 and 7.
§ 300-13. Obstructions to air navigation.
§ 300-14. Height exceptions. [Amended 4-30-1997 by Ord. No. 28;
12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 170]
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof
and no lot or land or part thereof shall hereinafter be used in any
manner which does not conform to the use regulations of this chapter
for the district in which such building, structure, lot or land is located.
A.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof
shall hereinafter be erected, altered, enlarged, or rebuilt in any manner
which does not conform to the dimensional regulations of this chapter
in the district in which such building or structure is located.
B.
In airport approach zones for instrument-landing runways, building and
other structure heights shall be limited to provide a clear glide path of
34:1 from the end of the runway.
A.
No use shall be permitted which creates electrical interference with
navigation aids or communications between airport and aircraft,
impairs landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft by reasons of glare,
smoke, dust, and the like; and makes it difficult to distinguish between
airport lights and others.
B.
Any authorization for variance from the terms of the section granted
by the Board of Appeals may require the applicant to permit the City
to install, operate, and maintain such markers and lights as may be
necessary to indicate the presence of an airport hazard.
C.
Building height limits set forth in this chapter shall not apply to belfries,
chimneys, cupolas, domes, flagpoles, flues, monuments, spires, water
A.
§ 300-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-14
1:503
§ 300-15. Area, lot width and yards.
towers and tanks, air-conditioning units, nor to similar structures and
mechanical appurtenances placed on roofs, except where such
structures are located within an airport approach zone; and provided
that no such structures shall be used for human occupancy.
A parapet wall, cornice, or similar architectural element shall not
exceed more than four feet above the height limits prescribed in this
chapter.
B.
Additional stories on sloping lots. On a sloping lot, a story or stories
in addition to the number permitted in the district in which such lot is
located shall be permitted on the downhill side of a building erected
on such lot, provided that the building height shall not otherwise be
increased above that specified for the district.
C.
Joint use of lot prohibited. No part of a yard or other open space
about any building required for the purpose of complying with this
chapter shall be included as part of a yard or other open space similarly
required for another building.
A.
Reduction of area. No lot shall be changed in size, shape, or ownership
so that the height, area, yard, or off-street parking requirements herein
prescribed are no longer satisfied. This subsection shall not apply
where a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose.
B.
Yards. [Amended 7-1-1992; 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 170]
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky and
unobstructed except for accessory buildings in the yard area, and
except for ordinary projections of the belt courses, cornices, sills,
skylights, and ornamental features projecting from the building not
more than 12 inches. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes and the
ordinary projections of chimneys and flues are permitted.
(1)
Projecting eaves, chimneys, bay windows, balconies, open fire
escapes, and like projections which do not project more than 3 1/2
feet, and unenclosed steps, unroofed porches, enclosed bulkheads,
and the like which do not project more than 10 feet beyond the
line of the foundation wall, may extend into the required yards
otherwise provided for the district in which the structure is built.
(2)
C.
Every lot shall have a minimum frontage (as defined above) on a way,
public or private, which shall be equivalent to the minimum lot width,
except as noted in § 300-18 below.
D.
Any lot on which more than one house existed at the time of the
adoption of this chapter may be divided with a minimum of
nonconformance, and sold to separate owners and used with a
minimum of nonconformance.
E.
§ 300-14 BEVERLY CODE § 300-16
1:504
§ 300-16. Corner clearance.
On a corner lot, buildings may be erected subject to the provisions of the
density and dimensional requirements of the applicable district, but nothing
else shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner
as to obstruct vision at intersections between a height of three feet and
eight feet above the street grades in the triangular area bounded by the
street lines of such corner lot and a line joining points along said street lines
of 25 feet from their intersection.
§ 300-17. Severability.
The separate provisions of this chapter and the Zoning District Map are
adopted with the intent that each shall have force and effect separately
and independently, except insofar as by expressed reference or necessary
implication any one, or any part thereof, is made dependent upon another.
The invalidity of any provision or part thereof shall not affect the validity of
any other provision.
§ 300-18. Pork-chop-shaped lots.
The Beverly Planning Board may authorize pork-chop-shaped lots by
special permit in residential and industrial districts on streets in
existence at the date of adoption of this chapter (December 1984) and
on new streets in industrial zoning districts if the following conditions
are met:
The site is an appropriate location for the proposed use and the
character of adjoining uses will not be adversely affected.
(1)
No factual evidence is found that property values in the district will
be adversely affected by such use.
(2)
No undue traffic and no nuisance or unreasonable hazard will
result.
(3)
Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper
operation and maintenance of the proposed uses.
(4)
There are no valid objections from abutting property owners based
on demonstrable fact.
(5)
The minimum lot area of the pork-chop-shaped lot shall be at least
the minimum lot area required in the zoning district in which the
pork-chop-shaped lot is located, except the portion of the lot which
is the narrow strip or portion of the lot to the way shall not be
included in the lot area calculation.
(6)
The width of the pork-chop-shaped lot measured at the shortest
distance between side lot lines is no less than 75 feet at any point
between the street and the existing or proposed building on the
lot. Pork-chop lots approved by the Planning Board previous to
(7)
A.
§ 300-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-18
1:505
§ 300-19. Wind energy conversion systems.
Wind energy conversion systems devices which convert wind energy to
mechanical or electrical energy are allowed by special permit from the
Board of Appeals, if the applicant demonstrates that the installation will
not cause 1) excessive noise (excessive noise being above 50 dBA at the
nearest lot line), or 2) interference with local television and radio reception
or otherwise derogate substantially from the public good, as well as meeting
requirements of § 300-91, except wind energy conversion systems are
allowed by right if they meet all of the following conditions:
December 1984 with less than the required frontage but at least 20
feet of frontage shall be considered valid building lots for a period
of 15 years from the date of adoption of this zoning amendment
(9-5-1991). On September 5, 2006, any pork-chop lot approved by
the Planning Board prior to December 1984 which is vacant or for
which a valid building permit has not yet been issued shall lose
its status as a "grandfathered" lot and be considered unbuildable.
[Amended 9-5-1991]
All front, rear, and side yard setbacks shall be the same as the
minimum setbacks specified for the zone in which the lot is located.
[Amended 6-26-1987]
(8)
The depth of that portion of the lot which fails to satisfy the lot
frontage requirements set forth in the definition of "frontage" in
§ 300-5 between the street and the existing or proposed building
on the lot cannot exceed a distance of 250 feet from the street.
(9)
There shall be not more than one other pork-chop-shaped lot with
frontage contiguous to it.
(10)
The Planning Board shall follow the procedural requirements for
special permits as per Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40A and
as per Articles XIII and XIV of this chapter, which includes notice and
public hearings.
B.
A single windmill or wind energy conversion system may be used on a
lot for generating power primarily for on-site use.
A.
The minimum setback distance for all wind energy conversion systems
from any abutter's property line shall be (and shall continue to be for
the life of the installation) at least equal to the maximum height of the
machine from grade, plus 20 feet. Setbacks will be measured to the
center of the tower base.
B.
The maximum tower height shall be 70 feet from grade to the center of
the rotor.
C.
Climbing access to the tower shall be limited by the installation of a
fence with a locked gate around the tower base no lower than six feet
and constructed in such a manner as to restrict passage through said
D.
§ 300-18 BEVERLY CODE § 300-19
1:506
§ 300-20. (Reserved)161
§ 300-21. Removal of sod, loam and gravel.
fence or by limiting tower climbing apparatus to no lower than 10 feet
from the ground.
E. The diameter of a rotor may not exceed 30 feet.
The energy conversion system will be considered abandoned if not
properly maintained for a period of two years or if designated a safety
hazard by the Building Inspector. The owner of any wind energy
conversion system which is considered to be abandoned or considered
to be a safety hazard shall be required to immediately dismantle the
installation. There will be a fine of up to $100 for each day after
notification to dismantle.
F.
The wind energy conversion system may not interfere with TV and radio
reception. The applicant may be asked to bring in consultants at his/
her own expense to certify that the system will not interfere with TV
and radio reception. After the installation, if neighbors can demonstrate
that there is excessive interference, the Board of Appeals may order
that the wind energy conversion system be dismantled or modified to
eliminate the interference.
G.
The wind energy conversion system shall be installed in accordance
with the instructions of the manufacturer and shall be installed on a
tower approved by the wind energy conversion system manufacturer,
and shall be serviced in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions. There must be a structural support and foundation plan
stamped and approved by a registered engineer in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts.
H.
I. All certifications and plans required shall be at the applicant's expense.
The wind energy conversion system shall not cause excessive noise,
above 50 dBA, at the nearest lot line.
J.
The removal of sod or loam or the removal of gravel or other mineral
matter for commercial purposes shall be prohibited except by approval
of the Board of Appeals. In acting upon applications under this section,
the following conditions shall be observed:
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing after notifying
all interested parties, as provided by Chapter 40A of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
(1)
The applicant shall furnish a plan showing present and proposed
conditions and state a time of completion.
(2)
A.
161. Editor’s Note: Former § 300-20, Solar access, was repealed 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B.
See now Art. XVIII, Solar Energy Systems.
§ 300-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-21
1:507
§ 300-22. Design Review Board.
The Board of Appeals shall consider the neighborhood and its
future development in passing on applications.
(3)
The applicant shall furnish a performance bond of an amount
determined by the Board of Appeals and surety satisfactory to the
City Treasurer.
(4)
The applicant shall authorize the City to use the proceeds of the
bond to restore the property to a condition not detrimental to
the neighborhood or its future development if the work is not
completed within two years of the proposed time.
(5)
(6) No permits shall be granted for periods longer than five years.
This section shall not apply to excavation or grading for streets,
driveways, or walks, or in relation to structures for which a permit
has been granted according to City ordinances, or to the construction
and operation of wells for water supply or excavation of trenches for
drainage or sanitary purposes, except in the case of new subdivisions,
in which case permission must be obtained from the Planning Board.
Furthermore, this section shall not apply to any earthwork within a
new subdivision, in which case permission must be obtained from the
Planning Board and the Planning Board must review the present and
planned grades and drainage, and the earthwork must follow the
approved subdivision plan.
B.
Purpose; appointment; terms; recommendations.
The Design Review Board shall review projects for which building
permits and/or proposals are sought before the City Council, Board
of Appeals or Planning Board when such permits or proposals
concern projects involving new construction or additions
amounting to a twenty-five-percent or greater expansion of existing
structures in the Central Commercial (CC), Neighborhood
Commercial (CN), General Commercial (CG), Restricted Industrial
(IR), IR Overlay, General Industrial (IG), Hospital District (HD),
or Beverly Harbor District (BHD) zones. Additionally, the Design
Review Board will review all projects that involve new
noncommercial uses on or in first floor street-facing facades in the
CC Zoning District, and those projects involving special permits
and zoning variances in the CC, CN, CG, IR, IG, and BHD Districts.
At the request of the Building Inspector, City Planner, Planning
Board, City Council, or Mayor, the Design Review Board shall
review any new construction or rehabilitation project in any
commercial, industrial, or BHD Zoning District. The Board shall
also review all signs requiring a sign permit from the Building
Inspector and all projects that are subject to site plan review. (See
§ 300-98C.) [Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
(1)
A.
§ 300-21 BEVERLY CODE § 300-22
1:508
§ 300-23. Construction near Wenham Lake. [Amended 5-20-1993]
The recommendations of the Design Review Board will be in order
to help guide physical design and, where applicable, ensure that
projects generally adhere to the tenets and recommendations of
the City's Downtown Design Guidelines (2003), the Design
Guidelines for Taller Buildings (2007), and the General Guidelines
of the Beverly Sign Ordinance, all as the same may hereafter be
amended. [Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 57]
(2)
Appointment. The Mayor shall appoint, subject to confirmation
by the City Council, a Design Review Board to consist of seven
members: one member shall be a representative from the planning
staff, one member from the Planning Board, one member from
the Board of Appeals, one member from the Historic Districts
Commission and the remaining three members shall include, if
possible, one architect, one architect or landscape architect or
graphic designer, and one business person and/or property owner
from one of the designated design review districts.162
(3)
Term. For the three appointed members, the Mayor shall initially
appoint one member for three years, one for two years, and one
for one year. Thereafter, one member shall be appointed each year
for a three-year term. Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by
the Mayor and confirmation by the City Council for the unexpired
term.163
(4)
Recommendation procedure. The Design Review Board shall
respond to a request(s) for recommendation(s) within 30 days of
receipt of such request. Failure to forward its recommendation(s)
within 30 days will be deemed conclusion of review by the Design
Review Board. [Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 57]
(5)
The fees for the required reviews shall be as follows: [Amended
3-14-2000 by Ord. No. 43]
(1) Application fee for signs and canopies: $2 per square foot.
(2) Application fee for new building construction: $100.
B.
Other provisions of the zoning ordinance notwithstanding, no
construction of any kind within 100 feet of Wenham Lake for
residentially used property, and no construction of any kind within 150
feet of Wenham Lake for property used for any purpose other than
residential, shall be permitted.
A.
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-23
1:509
§ 300-24. Horticultural and floricultural activities. [Amended
1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent horticultural or
floricultural activities for personal use or consumption, and nothing in this
chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the sale of horticultural or floricultural
products grown entirely on the premises from which they are sold during
the months of May, June, July, August, and September, regardless of lot size.
§ 300-25. Towers and antennas. [Amended 4-30-1997 by Ord. No.
28]
Governmental uses and buildings under the jurisdiction of the City
of Beverly shall not be exempt except by two-thirds vote of the City
Council. (See also § 330-50, Watershed Supply Protection Overlay
District.)164
B.
All communication towers and antennas allowed via special permit and
other like facilities may be erected to a maximum height of 100 feet and
shall be set back a minimum distance of the total height plus 20 feet to
the nearest abutting property, measured from the center of the tower
or structure.
A.
Climbing access to the tower shall be limited by the installation of a
fence with a locked gate around the tower base no lower than six feet
and constructed in such a manner as to restrict passage through said
fence or by limiting tower climbing apparatus to no lower than 10 feet
above ground.
B.
Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, television and
communication antennas may be erected on any governmentally owned
structure in any zoning district, and may be erected on any structure
existing at the time of adoption of this chapter regardless of ownership
in any nonresidential zoning district, without a special permit;
provided, however, that the antennas do not project more than 20 feet
above the top of the structures on which they are located.
C.
Special permits shall not be required for television and communication
antennas erected by noncommercial users for noncommercial
purposes; provided, however, that such antennas must meet the height
and setback requirements applicable to the zoning district in which
they are located.
D.
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-23 BEVERLY CODE § 300-25
1:510
ARTICLE VI
Common Permitted Uses
[Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 206]
§ 300-26. Exempt uses.
Government uses and buildings under the jurisdiction of the City of Beverly
are allowed in all districts. Additionally, those uses exempted from the
provisions of this chapter in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 3, are allowed
in all zoning districts, subject to the provisions and requirements of that
section of state law. Utility company terminal enclosures, service cabinets,
and underground vaults are allowed in all districts, provided they are
screened. (See § 300-5 for definition of "screening.")
§ 300-27. Accessory buildings in residential districts. [Amended
8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 169; 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 206]
The term "accessory building" is defined in § 300-5 of this chapter. It
does not include attached garages.
A.
Location.
Accessory buildings, including detached garages, pool houses,
barns, greenhouses, and tool sheds, shall be permitted anywhere
in the side or rear yard of any lot in a residential zoning district if
they:
(a) Conform to the required rear yard and side yard requirements;
(b) Occupy 25% or less of the area of such yard(s); and
Are no taller than 15 feet in height or a height equal to 1/2 the
distance to the nearest lot line, to a maximum of 22 feet.
(c)
(1)
No accessory building may be constructed within the front yard of
a lot.
(2)
Accessory buildings located within the minimum setback
requirements applicable to the main building are subject to the
dimensional requirements outlined below and may occupy no more
than 25% of the side yard or rear yard area.
(3)
B.
The maximum number of accessory buildings permitted on a lot is
two. The Zoning Board of Appeals may authorize additional accessory
buildings, by special permit.
C.
In addition to the setback requirements outlined below, an accessory
building shall be sited at least five feet from the main building on the
lot.
D.
Dimensional requirements for accessory buildings.
(1) Minimum front yard setback: same as for main building.
E.
§ 300-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-27
1:511
§ 300-28. Accessory buildings and uses in other districts.
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to the
main building or use in all nonresidential zoning districts are permitted.
Such accessory buildings shall be permitted anywhere in the side yard
or rear yard of any lot in a nonresidential zoning district if they conform
to the required rear yard and side yard setback requirements and height
restrictions applicable to the main building. No accessory building may be
constructed within the front yard of a lot.
§ 300-29. Swimming pools and tennis courts.
Minimum side yard and/or rear yard setback: five feet if less than
10 feet in height; otherwise, setbacks applicable to the main
building apply.
(2)
Maximum height: 10 feet if located within the required side yard
or rear yard setback; otherwise, the maximum height is 15 feet,
or a height equal to 1/2 the distance to the nearest lot line, to a
maximum of 22 feet.
(3)
Maximum size: 100 square feet if located within the required side
yard or rear yard setback; otherwise, maximum size is 25% of the
yard's area.
(4)
The Zoning Board of Appeals shall have the authority under MGL
c. 40A, § 6, to permit relief from the maximum height and size
requirements of this section.
F.
Swimming pools and tennis courts shall be permitted in a side yard or
rear yard but with a minimum setback from any rear lot line or side lot
line of 10 feet. No tennis court or swimming pool may be constructed
within the front yard of a lot.
A.
Swimming pools shall be enclosed by a safety fence of not less than four
feet in height. Aboveground pools must be equipped with a self-closing
gate, latch and lock around the ladder access. No pool shall be filled
with water before a permanent fence has been erected and, in the case
of an aboveground pool, a self-closing gate, latch and lock has been
installed around the ladder access. [Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord.
No. 206]
B.
§ 300-27 BEVERLY CODE § 300-29
1:512
ARTICLE VII
District Regulations
§ 300-30. R-90 One-Family District.
General description. The R-90 One-Family District is established to
principally provide for single-family detached residences on large lots
(approximately two acres minimum). Related recreational, agricultural,
and educational facilities are allowed under special conditions.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(2)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(3)
(4) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(5)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(6)
B.
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Planned residential development, subject to the provisions of
§ 300-53 below.
(a)
(b) Subsidized elderly housing.
(c) Golf club, beach club, or tennis club.
(d) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(e) Private, noncommercial stable.
(f) Commercial riding stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(g)
(h) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
(1)
C.
§ 300-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-30
1:513
§ 300-31. R-45 One-Family District.
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(i)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(j)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(k)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(l)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 90,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 225 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) For "cluster" development, see § 300-54.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the R-90 District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
G.
General description. The R-45 One-Family District is established to
principally provide for single-family detached residences at suburban
density on moderately large lots (approximately one acre minimum).
Related recreational, agricultural, and educational facilities are allowed
under special conditions.
A.
§ 300-30 BEVERLY CODE § 300-31
1:514
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(2)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(3)
(4) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(5)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(6)
B.
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Planned residential development, on a minimum lot size of 10
acres, subject to the provisions of § 300-53 below.
(a)
(b) Subsidized elderly housing.
(c) Golf club, beach club, or tennis club.
(d) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(e) Private, noncommercial stable.
(f) Commercial riding stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(g)
(h) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(i)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(j)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(k)
(1)
C.
§ 300-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-31
1:515
§ 300-32. R-22 One-Family District.
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(l)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 45,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 175 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) For "cluster" development, see § 300-54.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the R-45 District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
G.
General description. The R-22 One-Family District is established to
principally provide for single-family detached residences at suburban
density on medium-sized lots (approximately 1/2 acre minimum).
Related recreational, agricultural, and educational facilities are allowed
under special conditions.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(2)
B.
§ 300-31 BEVERLY CODE § 300-32
1:516
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(3)
(4) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(5)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(6)
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Planned residential development, subject to the provisions of
§ 300-53 below.
(a)
(b) Subsidized elderly housing.
(c) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(d) Private, noncommercial stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(e)
(f) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(g)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(h)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(i)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(j)
(1)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
C.
D. Building and area requirements.
§ 300-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-32
1:517
§ 300-33. R-15 One-Family District.
(1) Minimum lot area: 22,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 150 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) For "cluster" development, see § 300-54.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the R-22 District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
G.
General description. The R-15 One-Family District is established to
principally provide for single-family detached residences at urban
density on medium-sized lots (approximately 1/3 acre minimum).
Related recreational, agricultural, and educational facilities are allowed
under special conditions.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(2)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(3)
(4) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(5)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(6)
B.
§ 300-32 BEVERLY CODE § 300-33
1:518
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Planned residential development, subject to the provisions of
§ 300-53 below.
(a)
(b) Subsidized elderly housing.
(c) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(d) Private, noncommercial stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(e)
(f) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(g)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(h)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(i)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(j)
(1)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
C.
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 125 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) For "cluster" development, see § 300-54.
D.
§ 300-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-33
1:519
§ 300-34. R-10 One-Family District.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the R-15 District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
G.
General description. The R-10 One-Family District is established to
principally provide for single-family detached residences at urban
density on small-sized lots (approximately 1/4 acre minimum). Related
recreational, agricultural, and educational facilities are allowed under
special conditions.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(2)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(3)
(4) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(5)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(6)
B.
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Subsidized elderly housing.
(b) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(c) Private, noncommercial stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
(d)
(1)
C.
§ 300-33 BEVERLY CODE § 300-34
1:520
§ 300-35. R-6 One-Family and Two-Family District.
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(e) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by Special
Permit under Article VI.
(f)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(g)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(h)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(i)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 100 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
(7) For "cluster" development, see § 300-54.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the R-10 District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
G.
§ 300-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-35
1:521
General description. The R-6 One-Family and Two-Family District is
established to provide for single-family and two-family residences at
urban density on small-sized lots (minimum of 6,000 square feet).
Related recreational, agricultural, and educational facilities are allowed
under special conditions.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
(2) Semidetached dwelling and two-family dwelling.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(3)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(4)
(5) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(6)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(7)
B.
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Subsidized elderly housing.
(b) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(c) Private, noncommercial stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(d)
(e) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(f)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(g)
(1)
C.
§ 300-35 BEVERLY CODE § 300-35
1:522
§ 300-36. RMD Multifamily District.
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(h)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(i)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet plus 1,000 square feet for one
additional dwelling unit.
(1)
Minimum lot area for semidetached dwelling unit: 3,500 square
feet.
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 65 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(4) Minimum lot width for semidetached dwelling unit: 40 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
Minimum side yard setback for semidetached dwelling unit: 15 feet
(one side only).
(7)
(8) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the R-6 District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
G.
General description. The RMD Multifamily District is established to
provide for multifamily residences at medium density. Related
recreational, agricultural, and educational facilities are allowed under
special conditions.
A.
§ 300-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-36
1:523
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
(2) Semidetached dwelling and two-family dwelling.
Multifamily dwelling or apartment house, subject to the
requirements of Subsection H below.
(3)
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(4)
(5) Subsidized elderly housing.
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(6)
(7) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(8)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(9)
B.
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Planned residential development, subject to the provisions of
§ 300-53.
(a)
(b) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(c)
(d) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(e)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(f)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(g)
(1)
C.
§ 300-36 BEVERLY CODE § 300-36
1:524
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(h)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(a) Artist live/work, subject to the provisions of Article XVI.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(b)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
Minimum lot area: 8,000 square feet plus 4,000 square feet for
each additional dwelling unit over two.
(1)
Minimum lot area for semidetached dwelling unit: 3,500 square
feet.
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 65 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(4) Minimum lot width for semidetached dwelling unit: 40 feet.
(5) Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet.
Minimum side yard setback for semidetached dwelling unit: 15 feet
(one side only).
(7)
(8) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the RMD District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
G.
Special requirements for multiple dwellings. The development of
multiple dwellings which includes townhouses shall be in accordance
with the density and dimensional requirements of Subsection D above
and the following:
No multiple dwelling shall measure more than 125 feet on its long
side; except that where front and rear setback offsets of at least
(1)
H.
§ 300-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-36
1:525
§ 300-37. RHD Multifamily District.
three feet are provided at fifty-foot intervals, more or less, the
length of said dwelling shall not exceed a length of 200 feet.
In multiple dwelling groups, the minimum spacing between
buildings shall be as follows:
Front-to-front, front-to-rear, and rear-to-rear, 60 feet; end-toend
(with facing windows), not less than their average height.
(a)
End-to-end (without facing windows) or corner-to-corner
(offset), not less than 1/2 of their height.
(b)
(c) Front-to-rear siting shall be avoided if at all practicable.
(2)
Interior private ways shall have a minimum width of 24 feet for
two-way traffic and 18 feet for one-way traffic and shall be paved
in accordance with City specifications. Minimum building setbacks
from such private access drives shall be 35 feet and 30 feet,
respectively, from the center lines thereof. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3)
All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by public or equivalent
sanitary sewer and water systems. No building permit shall be
granted unless the Building Inspector shall first receive a report
from the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works that provision has been made for the disposal of
sewage into a system of sufficient capacity. [Amended 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 013]
(4)
All electrical and telephone service shall be provided underground
to all buildings within a multiple dwelling group project. Antennas
for the purposes of television reception shall be provided within a
building wherever practicable, or else by one master antenna for
the project.
(5)
No multiple dwelling group nor any individual multiple dwelling
shall be permitted unless provision shall be made for adequate
snow removal and trash and garbage disposal.
(6)
Sufficient enclosed area and equipment shall be provided within
each multiple-family dwelling for laundering and drying purposes.
No outside area shall be provided for such purposes, unless such
area is enclosed by a solid screen of evergreen shrubs or fencing at
least six feet high.
(7)
A plan showing recreational facilities must be approved by the
Planning Board. The area shall be a minimum of 10% of the gross
area of the site and shall be contiguous.
(8)
General description. The RHD Multifamily District is established to
provide principally for multifamily residences at high density. Related
recreational, agricultural, and educational facilities, as well as elderly
A.
§ 300-36 BEVERLY CODE § 300-37
1:526
housing, rooming and boarding houses, and health clubs, are allowed
under special conditions.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
(2) Semidetached dwelling and two-family dwelling.
Multifamily dwelling or apartment house, subject to the
requirements of Subsection H below.
(3)
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(4)
(5) Subsidized elderly housing.
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(6)
(7) Home occupation as defined herein.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(8)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(9)
B.
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Rooming, lodging, or boarding house.
(b) Gymnasium, health club, commercial swimming pool.
Private or quasi-public club, charitable institution, or
community service organization, except where the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
(c)
(d) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(e)
(f) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(g)
(1)
C.
§ 300-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-37
1:527
Parking lot for commercial use in adjoining commercial
district.
(h)
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(i)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres. [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57]
(j)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(k)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(a) Artist live/work, subject to the provisions of Article XVI.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(b)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet plus 3,000 square feet for
each additional dwelling unit over two.
(1)
Minimum lot area for semidetached dwelling unit: 3,500 square
feet. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
Minimum lot width for semidetached dwelling unit: 40 feet.
[Amended 6-26-1987]
(4)
(5) Minimum front yard setback: 15 feet. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(6) Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; 15 feet if over three stories.
Minimum side yard setback for semidetached dwelling unit: 15 feet
(one side only).
(7)
(8) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
(9) Maximum building height: 55 feet. [Amended 10-9-1987]
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the RHD District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. No major recreational equipment, as defined
herein, shall be parked or stored in the district, except in a carport,
G.
§ 300-37 BEVERLY CODE § 300-37
1:528
or enclosed buildings, or in the side yard or rear yard area. No such
equipment shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes
on the lot on which it is stored.
Special requirements for multiple dwellings. The development of
multiple dwellings which includes townhouses shall be in accordance
with the density and dimensional requirements of Subsection D above
and the following:
No multiple dwelling shall measure more than 125 feet on its long
side; except that where front and rear setback offsets of at least
three feet are provided at fifty-foot intervals, more or less, the
length of said dwelling shall not exceed a length of 200 feet.
(1)
In multiple dwelling groups, the minimum spacing between
buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Front-to-front, front-to-rear, and rear-to-rear: 60 feet.
End-to-end (with facing windows): not less than their average
height.
(b)
End-to-end (without facing windows) or corner-to-corner
(offset): not less than 1/2 of their height.
(c)
(d) Front-to-rear siting shall be avoided if at all practicable.
(2)
Interior private ways shall have a minimum width of 24 feet for
two-way traffic and 18 feet for one-way traffic and shall be paved
in accordance with City specifications. Minimum building setbacks
from such private access drives shall be 35 feet and 30 feet,
respectively, from the center lines thereof.
(3)
All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by public or equivalent
sanitary sewer and water systems. No building permit shall be
granted unless the Building Inspector shall first receive a report
from the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works that provision has been made for the disposal of
sewage into a system of sufficient capacity. [Amended 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 013]
(4)
All electrical and telephone service shall be provided underground
to all buildings within a multiple dwelling group project. Antennas
for the purposes of television reception shall be provided within a
building wherever practicable, or else by one master antenna for
the project.
(5)
No multiple dwelling group nor any individual multiple dwelling
shall be permitted unless provision shall be made for adequate
snow removal and trash and garbage disposal.
(6)
Sufficient enclosed area and equipment shall be provided within
each multiple-family dwelling for laundering and drying purposes.
(7)
H.
§ 300-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-37
1:529
§ 300-38. RSD Special Residential District.
No outside area shall be provided for such purposes, unless such
area is enclosed by a solid screen of evergreen shrubs or fencing at
least six feet high.
A plan showing recreational facilities must be approved by the
Planning Board. The area shall be a minimum of 10% of the gross
area of the site and shall be contiguous.
(8)
General description. The RSD Special Residential District is established
to provide principally for special residential development at high
density, as well as one-family, two-family, and multifamily residences
at high density. Related recreational, agricultural, and educational
facilities, as well as elderly housing, health, golf, and tennis clubs, are
allowed under special conditions.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes: [Amended 1-2-1996 by Ord. No. 57; 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 013]
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
(2) Semidetached dwelling and two-family dwelling.
(3) (Reserved)165
(4) Subsidized elderly housing.
Gymnasium, health club, commercial swimming pool, subject to the
provisions of Subsection G(2) below.
(5)
Golf club, beach club, tennis club, subject to the provisions of
Subsection G(2) below.
(6)
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(7)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(8)
(9) Home occupation as defined herein.
Retail establishment serving local area needs, including, but not
limited to, drug, grocery and baked goods store with up to 5,000
square feet of floor area per establishment, subject to the
provisions of Subsection G(2) below.
(10)
Personal and consumer service establishments, including, but not
limited to, barber or beauty shop and laundromat, subject to the
provisions of Subsection G(2) below.
(11)
B.
165. Editor's Note: Subsection B(3), Multifamily dwelling or apartment house, was repealed
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 211A. See now Subsection C(11) below.
§ 300-37 BEVERLY CODE § 300-38
1:530
Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the premises,
subject to the provisions of Subsection G(2) below.
(12)
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural (as defined in MGL
Chapter 61A) uses and expansion or reconstruction of existing
structures relating thereto, permitted with a minimum lot size of
five acres.
(13)
Those uses, including accessory buildings, allowed by right under
Article VI.
(14)
Uses by special permit. [Amended 3-19-1991; 1-2-1996 by Ord. No.
57; 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 115; 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Planned residential development, subject to the provisions of
§ 300-53 below.
(a)
Private or quasi-public club, charitable institution, or
community service organization, except where the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
(b)
(c) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(d) Private, noncommercial stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(e)
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(f)
(g) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(h)
Horticultural and floricultural (as defined by MGL Chapter
61A) uses on lots with at least one acre but fewer than five
acres.
(i)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers.
(j)
Multifamily dwelling or apartment house, subject to the
requirements of Subsection H below. [Added 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 211A]
(k)
(1)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
(2)
C.
§ 300-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-38
1:531
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
Building and area requirements.
The lot on which the building or group of buildings is constructed
shall have a minimum area of 15,000 square feet for each dwelling
unit in the development. Maximum coverage by buildings (not
including the landscaped exterior of underground garage space)
shall not exceed 15% of the gross area of the lot or tract. Said
lot or tract may have roads or ways constructed thereon, and the
approval of said roads or ways by the Beverly Planning Board under
the Subdivision Control Law (MGL Chapter 41) shall not be deemed
to divide said lot or tract into two or more lots or tracts. [Amended
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 211A]
(1)
No multiple dwelling shall measure more than 125 feet on its long
side; except that where front and rear setback offsets of at least
three feet are provided at fifty-foot intervals, more or less, the
length of said dwelling shall not exceed a length of 200 feet.
(2)
Accessory commercial uses permitted by this chapter shall not
occupy more than 2% of the total gross floor space of multifamily
dwellings. No exterior signs advertising such uses and no
illuminated interior signs displayed in windows shall be permitted.
(3)
Except for fences, walls, gardens, and landscape features, no
dwelling or structure shall be erected closer than 200 feet to the
boundary line of land located in another district.
(4)
No building shall exceed 55 feet in height measured from the level
of the principal entrance. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(5)
Not more than 15% of the dwelling units within the district shall
contain three or more bedrooms.
(6)
In multiple dwelling groups, the minimum spacing between
buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Front-to-front, front-to-rear, and rear-to-rear: 60 feet.
End-to-end (with facing windows): not less than their average
height.
(b)
End-to-end (without facing windows) or corner-to-corner
(offset): not less than 1/2 of their height.
(c)
(d) Front-to-rear siting shall be avoided if at all practicable.
(7)
Interior private ways shall have a minimum width of 24 feet for
two-way traffic and 18 feet for one-way traffic and shall be paved
in accordance with the applicable rules and regulations of the
Planning Board adopted under the Subdivision Control Law.
(8)
D.
§ 300-38 BEVERLY CODE § 300-38
1:532
Buildings other than carports or garages shall be set back not
less than 35 feet from the center line of two-way interior private
ways and not less than 30 feet from the center line of one-way
interior private ways. Paved off-street parking spaces adjacent to
such ways shall not be considered as part of said ways for purposes
of computing the dwelling building setbacks therefrom.
All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by public or equivalent
sanitary sewer and water systems. No building permit shall be
granted unless the Building Inspector shall first receive a report
from the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works that provision has been made for the disposal of
sewage into a system of sufficient capacity. [Amended 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 013]
(9)
All electrical and telephone service shall be provided underground
to all buildings within a multiple dwelling group project. No
building shall have more than one exterior television or radio
antenna.
(10)
Sufficient enclosed area and equipment shall be provided within
each multiple-family dwelling for laundering and drying purposes.
No outside area shall be provided for such purposes, unless such
area is enclosed by a solid screen of evergreen shrubs or fencing at
least six feet high.
(11)
No multiple dwelling group nor any individual multiple dwelling
shall be permitted unless provision shall be made for adequate
snow removal and trash and garbage disposal.
(12)
A plan showing recreational facilities must be approved by the
Planning Board. The area shall be a minimum of 10% of the gross
area of the site and shall be contiguous.
(13)
A site plan of the proposed development, including the location,
length, and layout of proposed buildings, structures, roads, parking
areas, recreational facilities, utilities, and other improvements,
must be approved by the Planning Board.
(14)
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below. [Amended 2-16-2016
by Ord. No. 013]
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the RSD District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements.
No major recreational equipment, as defined herein, shall be
parked or stored in the district, except in a carport, or enclosed
buildings, or in the side yard or rear-yard area. No such equipment
(1)
G.
§ 300-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-38
1:533
§ 300-39. CN Neighborhood Commercial District.
shall be used for living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes on the
lot on which it is stored.
Commercial and recreational uses clearly accessory or incidental
to the principal use of the RSD District shall be permitted on the
approval of a site plan by the Planning Board. Other commercial
and recreational uses shall be allowed upon the approval of a site
plan thereof by the Planning Board and upon the granting of a
special permit therefor by the Board of Appeals.
(2)
General description. The CN Neighborhood Commercial District is
established principally to allow for limited commercial development
adjacent to residential neighborhoods, intended to serve primarily
those neighborhoods.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
(2) Semidetached and two-family dwellings.
One or more dwellings in a permitted commercial building.
[Amended 6-26-1987]
(3)
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(4)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality, or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(5)
(6) Home occupation as defined herein.
Retail establishment serving local area needs, including, but not
limited to, drug, grocery, baked goods store, and photo processing
stores, with up to 5,000 square feet of floor area per establishment.
(7)
Personal and consumer service establishments, including, but not
limited to, barber or beauty shop and laundromat.
(8)
(9) Business and professional offices; banks.
(10)Funeral home.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural uses and expansion or
reconstruction of existing structures relating thereto, permitted
with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.
(11)
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(12)
(13)Any use allowed by right under Article VI.
B.
§ 300-38 BEVERLY CODE § 300-39
1:534
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Subsidized elderly housing.
Other private or quasi-public club, charitable institution, or
community service organization, except where the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
(b)
(c) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(d) Private, noncommercial stable.
Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the
premises.
(e)
(f) Taxi, rail, bus passenger terminal.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(g)
(h) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Any use, including accessory uses, allowed by special permit
under Article VI.
(i)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(j)
Brewery, distillery, winery. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No.
014]
(k)
(1)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(a) Artist live/work, subject to the provisions of Article XVI.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(b)
(2)
C.
Building and area requirements. Dimensional requirements are the
same as the least restrictive adjacent residential district.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the CN District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
§ 300-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-39
1:535
§ 300-40. CC Central Business District. [Amended 6-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 35]
Special requirements.
Screening of conflicting uses.
At the time of occupancy of a new nonresidential use, or the
expansion of the outside outline of an existing nonresidential
use of any lot in an industrial or commercial district, there
shall be a bufferyard along each boundary which adjoins an
R District or use. This bufferyard shall consist of landscaped
plantings, including evergreens, the plantings to be of such
height and density as needed to adequately screen from view
any light glare, parking lots, loading bays, accessory buildings
or uses. Fences, walls, and earthen berms may be included as
part of the bufferyard, but shall not be used in place of the
landscaped screening.
(a)
The adequacy of screening and landscaping shall be approved
by the Building Inspector, after consultation with the Planning
Board, and shall be incorporated in the Building Inspector's
records. In the event a special permit or site plan review is
required, the planting plan shall be considered in this review.
Required screening and landscaping shall be in good condition
and appearance. Failure to maintain same shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures contained herein. [Amended
6-26-1987]
(b)
(1)
No retail or commercial establishment may operate between the
hours of 12:00 midnight and 5:00 a.m. [Amended 9-5-1991]
(2)
G.
General description. The CC Central Business District is established to
provide principally for a central commercial business district.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) Detached one-family dwelling.
(2) Semidetached and two-family dwelling.
Mixed-use building containing both commercial and residential
(multifamily dwelling) uses, provided: [Amended 6-26-1987;
7-31-2017 by Ord. No. 374A]
In the Core Pedestrian Area (as defined in § 300-5), 100% of
the ground floor facing the primary street shall be occupied by
an activated ground floor use (as defined in § 300-5) and the
use(s) shall meet the activated ground floor design standards
(a)
(3)
B.
§ 300-39 BEVERLY CODE § 300-40
1:536
in § 300-40I. If a specific use is listed separately under
§ 300-40C, the special permit still applies.
Outside the Core Pedestrian Area (as defined in § 300-5), the
ground floor facing the primary street shall be designed to
accommodate an activated ground floor use (as defined in
§ 300-5) and to meet the activated ground floor design
standards in § 300-40I in anticipation of future market demand
for nonresidential uses. However, while activated ground floor
uses are encouraged, residential uses, including residential
units, and any other use permitted by right, may be located
on the ground floor. If a specific use is listed separately under
§ 300-40C, the special permit still applies.
(b)
Subsidized elderly housing, subject to the provisions of Subsection
D below.
(4)
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(5)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality, or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(6)
(7) Home occupation as defined herein.
(8) Retail establishments.
Personal and consumer service establishments, including, but not
limited to, barber or beauty shop and laundromat.
(9)
(10)Business and professional offices; banks.
(11)Funeral home.
(12)Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the premises.
Agriculture, horticultural, and floricultural uses and expansion or
reconstruction of existing structures relating thereto, with a
minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(13)
Administrative offices, data processing centers, and laboratory for
scientific and industrial research, including testing and product
development. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(14)
Printing and publishing establishment, including photostatic
copying.
(15)
(16)Taxi, rail, bus passenger terminal.
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(17)
(18)Those uses allowed by right under Article VI.
§ 300-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-40
1:537
Artist live/work, subject to the provisions of Article XVI. [Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(19)
(20)Brewery, distillery, winery. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board:
Multifamily dwelling, apartment house, or mixed-use building
that does not meet the standards specified in § 300-40B(3);
subject to Subsection H, Special requirements for multiple
dwellings, if applicable. [Amended 6-26-1987; 7-31-2017 by
Ord. No. 374A]
(a)
(b) Rooming, lodging, or boarding house.
(c) Gymnasium, health club, commercial swimming pool.
Other private or quasi-public club, charitable institution, or
community service organization, except where the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
(d)
(e) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(f) Private, noncommercial stable.
(g) Hotel or motel.
Place of commercial recreation such as a theater, bowling
alley, roller skating rink or ice skating rink where the use is
conducted entirely indoors. For purposes of this subsection,
the term "commercial indoor recreation" does not include
those uses regulated by MGL c. 140, § 183A. [Amended
5-20-1993]
(h)
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(i)
(j) Parking lots or garages as a principal use of the lot.
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(k)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(l)
(m) Maker space. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(1)
C.
§ 300-40 BEVERLY CODE § 300-40
1:538
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(n)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Marijuana retailers, subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(b)
Medical marijuana treatment center or registered marijuana
dispensary (RMD), subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(c)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
Commercial uses, residential uses or combined commercial/
residential uses on CC-zoned lots with side and/or rear yards
abutting a residential zoning district:
Minimum lot area: none for 100% commercial use; 1,000
square feet of total lot area per dwelling unit for residential
use.
(a)
Minimum lot frontage: none for 100% commercial use; 50 feet
for residential use.
(b)
(c) Minimum front yard setback: none
Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; 15 feet if building is over
three stories for that side yard which abuts the side yard or
rear yard of a residentially zoned lot.
(d)
Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet if the rear yard abuts a
side yard or rear yard of a residentially zoned lot.
(e)
Maximum building height: 55 feet when "RHD" is the abutting
residential district; 35 feet when "RMD" or "R-6" is the
abutting residential district.
(f)
For commercial uses, residential uses or combined
commercial/residential uses which abut residential zoning
district by a public way with an average width of at least 25
feet or a railroad right-of-way of at least 25 feet there shall be
no setback requirement.
(g)
(1)
Residential uses which do not abut a residential zoning district:
Minimum lot area: 1,000 square feet of total lot area per
dwelling unit.
(a)
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
(2)
D.
§ 300-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-40
1:539
(c) Minimum front yard setback: 15 feet.
Minimum side yard setback: 10 feet; 15 feet if over three
stories.
(d)
(e) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
Maximum height: 55 feet/75 feet. [Note: The Planning Board
may authorize, by special permit, an increase in building
height over 55 feet, to a maximum of 75 feet, for uses under
Subsection D(2), (3), and (5) only, and only for lots zoned "CC
overlay" on the official City Zoning District Map, and only when
the provisions of Subsection G below are met.]
(f)
Commercial uses which do not abut a residential district:
(a) Minimum lot area: none.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: none.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: none.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: none.
(e) Minimum rear yard setback: none.
Maximum height: 55 feet/75 feet. [Note: The Planning Board
may authorize, by special permit, an increase in building
height over 55 feet, to a maximum of 75 feet, for uses under
Subsection D(2), (3), and (5) only, and only for lots zoned "CC
overlay" on the official City Zoning District Map, and only when
the provisions of Subsection G below are met.]
(f)
(3)
Commercial or residential uses within structures existing at the
time of the adoption of this chapter:
Minimum lot area: none for commercial use; 1,000 square feet
of total lot area per dwelling unit for residential uses.
(a)
(b) Minimum lot frontage: none.
(c) Minimum front yard setback: none.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: none.
(e) Minimum rear yard setback: none.
(f) Maximum height: 55 feet. [Amended 6-6-1990; 7-1-1992]
(4)
Combined commercial/residential uses on lots with side and/or rear
yards which do not abut a residential zoning district:
(a) Minimum lot area: none.
(b) Minimum lot frontage: 50 feet.
(5)
§ 300-40 BEVERLY CODE § 300-40
1:540
(c) Minimum front yard setback: none.
(d) Minimum side yard setback: none.
(e) Minimum rear yard setback: none.
Maximum building height: 55 feet/75 feet. [Note: The Planning
Board may authorize, by special permit, an increase in building
height over 55 feet, to a maximum of 75 feet, for uses under
Subsection D(2), (3), and (5) only, and only for lots zoned "CC
overlay" on the official City Zoning District Map, and only when
the provisions of Subsection G below are met.]
(f)
Parking requirements. [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 61]
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the requirements
set forth in Article X below, and with the parking requirements
applicable to the Depot Parking Overlay District described in
Subsection E(2) below.
(1)
Having determined that a reduction in the parking requirement
for two-bedroom dwelling units within walking distance of the
Beverly MBTA Depot is reflective of actual demand and would be
beneficial in encouraging "smart growth" residential development,
the City of Beverly hereby establishes the Depot Parking Overlay
District, which shall include those lots within the CC District south
of Federal Street and having frontage on Rantoul Street. The Depot
Parking Overlay District is shown on the official City of Beverly
Zoning District Map. The off-street parking requirement for oneand
two-bedroom dwelling units located in the Depot Parking
Overlay District shall be one off-street parking space per dwelling
unit.
(2)
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the CC District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements.
Screening of conflicting uses.
At the time of occupancy of a new nonresidential use, or the
expansion of the outside outline of an existing nonresidential
use, of any lot in an industrial or commercial district, there
shall be a bufferyard along each boundary which adjoins an R
District or use.
(a)
This bufferyard shall consist of landscaped plantings, including
evergreens, the plantings to be of such height and density as is
needed to adequately screen from view any light glare, parking
lots, loading bays, accessory buildings or uses. Fences, walls,
and earthen berms may be included as part of the bufferyard,
but shall not be used in place of the landscaped screening.
(b)
(1)
G.
§ 300-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-40
1:541
The adequacy of screening and landscaping shall be approved
by the Building Inspector, after consultation with the Planning
Board, and shall be incorporated in the Building Inspector's
records. In the event a special permit or site plan review is
required, the planting plan shall be considered in this review.
Required screening and landscaping shall be in good condition
and appearance. Failure to maintain same shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures contained herein. [Amended
6-26-1987]
(c)
The following provisions shall apply to those buildings in the CC
District that are authorized by special permit from the Planning
Board to exceed 55 feet in height:
The perimeter of at-grade parking areas shall be screened
from abutting properties and streets by a landscape buffer at
least eight feet in width.
(a)
During the special permit process, the Design Review Board
shall have issued a finding that the design of the proposed
development is consistent with the general intent of the City's
Design Guidelines for Tall Buildings dated January 2007 and
with the objectives embodied therein.
(b)
(2)
Special requirements for multiple dwellings. The development of
multiple dwellings which includes townhouses shall be in accordance
with the density and dimensional requirements of Subsection D above
and the following: [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35; 7-12-2011
by Ord. No. 61]
No multiple dwelling shall measure more than 125 feet on its long
side; except that where front and rear setback offsets of at least
three feet are provided at fifty-foot intervals, more or less, the
length of said dwelling shall not exceed a length of 200 feet.
(1)
In multiple dwelling groups, the minimum spacing between
buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Front-to-front, front-to-rear, and rear-to-rear: 60 feet.
End-to-end (with facing windows): not less than their average
height.
(b)
End-to-end (without facing windows) or corner-to-corner
(offset): not less than 1/2 of their height.
(c)
(d) Front-to-rear siting shall be avoided if at all practicable.
(2)
No multiple dwelling group nor any individual multiple dwelling
shall be permitted unless provision shall be made for adequate
snow removal and trash and garbage disposal.
(3)
H.
§ 300-40 BEVERLY CODE § 300-40
1:542
§ 300-41. CG General Commercial District.
Sufficient enclosed area and equipment shall be provided within
each multiple-family dwelling for laundering and drying purposes.
No outside area shall be provided for such purposes, unless such
area is enclosed by a solid screen of evergreen shrubs or fencing at
least six feet high.
(4)
Activated ground floor development standards. The development of
activated ground floor uses in the CC District shall be in accordance
with the following standards, as well as the Beverly Downtown Design
Guidelines and Design Guidelines for Tall Buildings, as applicable:
[Added 7-31-2017 by Ord. No. 374A]
Buildings shall extend across a minimum of 80% of the lot at
the frontage on the primary street, allowing for vehicular and
pedestrian circulation. Public open space at the sidewalk may be
included in the 80% if a building is located behind it.
(1)
No more than 25% of the ground floor space in the building facing
the primary street can support any combination of residential lobby
and residential circulation, private open space, and/or hotel/motel
uses, in the Core Pedestrian Area.
(2)
Uses on the ground floor shall have no less than 25 feet of building
depth (or the full depth of the building, whichever is less).
(3)
The floor-to-floor height of ground floors shall be no less than
12 feet in all mixed-use buildings in the CC District, regardless
of residential use on the ground floor. Floor-to-floor heights may
be adapted to accommodate grade changes along the street as
necessary.
(4)
In the Core Pedestrian Area, the glazing/transparency (windows)
of the facade shall extend for 70% of the facade width, between
two feet and 10 feet from the sidewalk grade. Dark tinting and
completely covered windows should be avoided.
(5)
On ground floors facing primary streets, doorways shall open
directly to the sidewalk. Where permitted outside the Core
Pedestrian Area, residential units on the ground floor may open to
the sidewalk where feasible.
(6)
On buildings with a zero foot front setback, doorways shall be
recessed, at a minimum distance equal to the swing of the door, to
add visual character to the street and prevent doors from opening
onto the sidewalk. Doorways on buildings with greater front
setback may also consider a recessed doorway.
(7)
I.
General description. The CG General Commercial District is established
to provide principally for suburban and automotive-related commercial
development outside of residential areas.
A.
§ 300-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-41
1:543
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
(1) One or more dwellings in a permitted commercial building.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(2)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality, or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(3)
(4) Hotel or motel.
(5) Home occupation as defined herein.
(6) Retail establishments.
(7) Gymnasium, health club, commercial swimming pool.
Personal and consumer service establishments, including, but not
limited to, barber or beauty shop and laundromat.
(8)
(9) Business and professional offices; banks.
(10)Funeral home.
(11)Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the premises.
(12)Fast-food restaurant.
Place of commercial recreation such as a theater, bowling alley,
roller skating rink or ice skating rink where the use is conducted
entirely indoors. For purposes of this subsection, the term
"commercial indoor recreation" does not include those uses
regulated by MGL c. 140, § 183A. [Amended 5-20-1993]
(13)
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural uses and expansion or
reconstruction of existing structures relating thereto, permitted
with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.
(14)
Administrative offices, data processing centers, and laboratory for
scientific and industrial research, including testing and product
development.
(15)
(16)Printing and publishing establishment.
(17)Taxi, rail, bus passenger terminal.
Car wash; establishment for the sale of automobiles, trucks, travel
trailers, and major recreational equipment, but excluding heavy
repair of same. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(18)
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(19)
B.
§ 300-41 BEVERLY CODE § 300-41
1:544
(20)Those uses allowed by right under Article VI.
Public recreational boating facility. [Amended 11-23-1994 by
Ord. No. 254]
(21)
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
provisions of § 300-135, provided the use is accessory to another
use permitted within the district. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(22)
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Subsidized elderly housing, subject to the provisions of
Subsection D below.
(a)
Other private or quasi-public club, charitable institution, or
community service organization, except where the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business.
(b)
(c) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(d) Private, noncommercial stable.
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(e)
(f) Gasoline station.
(g) Parking lots or garages as a principal use of the lot.
(h) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(i)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(j)
Brewery, distillery, winery. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No.
014]
(k)
(l) Maker space. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
Marijuana retailers, subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(m)
Medical marijuana treatment center or registered marijuana
dispensary (RMD), subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(n)
(1)
C.
§ 300-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-41
1:545
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
Maximum lot coverage: 35% by buildings and accessory structures,
no more than 65% total impervious area as defined below.
Impervious lot coverage may be increased up to 75% of lot by
site plan approval granted by the Planning Board in accordance
with § 300-98. The 35% of the lot that is not buildable (or, in the
case of site plan approval, 25%) shall either remain in its natural
state or be improved by loaming, seeding, grading, planting, and/
or landscaping, in accordance with final site plan approval. For the
purpose of this section "impervious area" shall be defined to mean
the area of the lot covered by buildings, structures, parking, paved
walkways, vehicular access and egress area, loading and unloading
areas, loading docks, dumpsters and all areas that are paved or not
in their natural vegetative state or landscaped.
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 80 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(4) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet.
(7) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the CG District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements.
Screening of conflicting uses. At the time of occupancy of a new
nonresidential use, or the expansion of the outside outline of an
existing nonresidential use, of any lot in an industrial or
commercial district, there shall be a bufferyard along each
boundary which adjoins an R District or use. This bufferyard shall
consist of landscaped plantings, including evergreens, the
plantings to be of such height and density as is needed to
adequately screen from view any light glare, parking lots, loading
bays, accessory buildings or uses. Fences, walls, and earthen
berms may be included as part of the bufferyard, but shall not be
used in place of the landscaped screening.
(1)
G.
§ 300-41 BEVERLY CODE § 300-41
1:546
§ 300-42. IR and IR Overlay Restricted Industrial, Research and
Office District. [Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
The adequacy of screening and landscaping shall be approved
by the Building Inspector, after consultation with the Planning
Board, and shall be incorporated in the Building Inspector's
records. In the event a special permit or site plan review is
required, the planting plan shall be considered in this review.
(a)
Required screening and landscaping shall be in good condition
and appearance. Failure to maintain same shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures contained herein.
(b)
General description. The IR Restricted Industrial, Research and Office
District is established to provide principally for office complexes, light
industrial parks, and necessary support facilities, including ancillary
storage, service, and retail uses. The IR Overlay District is established
to provide principally for mixed-use commercial development within the
IR District. Lots zoned "IR Overlay" on the official City Zoning District
Map shall be subject to all of the provisions of the IR District, unless
specifically provided otherwise. [Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No.
230]
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes: [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 57;
2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(1)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality, or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(2)
(3) Business and professional offices; banks.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural uses and expansion or
reconstruction of existing structures relating thereto, permitted
with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.
(4)
Manufacturing, assembly, processing, packaging, research and
testing operations, including the following uses, provided that such
operations shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed building
or structure: products developed from previously processed
materials such as bone, ceramic, cloth, glass, leather, metals,
plastics, paper, rubber (except tires), wood (except planing mills),
electrical and mechanical instruments and appliances, optical
goods, cosmetics, toiletries, and pharmaceutical products.
(5)
Manufacturing, assembly, processing, packaging, research and
testing operations associated with renewable or alternative energy
research and development facilities, provided that any outdoor
(6)
B.
§ 300-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-42
1:547
operations are limited to those that require outside siting, are
associated with the testing of materials and/or equipment, and can
be maintained and operated in a manner that does not negatively
affect abutting properties.
Administrative offices, data processing centers, and laboratory for
scientific and industrial research, including testing and product
development.
(7)
Printing and publishing establishment, including photostatic
copying services.
(8)
(9) Taxi, rail, bus passenger terminal.
Contractors' or craftsmen's shop, including carpentry, welding,
ornamental iron works, electrical and machine shops, provided that
such use is not located within 200 feet of any R District, and
further provided that such use is screened from surrounding uses,
as defined in § 300-5.
(10)
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(11)
(12)Those uses allowed by right under Article VI.
(13)Brewery, distillery, winery. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(14)Maker space. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
provisions of § 300-135, provided the use is accessory to another
use permitted within the district. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(15)
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Subsidized elderly housing.
(b) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(c) Private, noncommercial stable.
(d) Hotel or motel.
Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the
premises.
(e)
Place of commercial recreation such as a theater, bowling
alley, roller skating rink or ice skating rink where the use is
conducted entirely indoors. For purposes of this subsection,
the term "commercial indoor recreation" does not include
(f)
(1)
C.
§ 300-42 BEVERLY CODE § 300-42
1:548
those uses regulated by MGL c. 140, § 183A. [Amended
5-20-1993]
Animal hospital or commercial kennel, provided that such use
shall not be within 200 feet of any residential district and the
kennel area shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or
fence.
(g)
Auto body or paint shop; vehicle repair garage, excluding the
repair of heavy motorized equipment and the open storage
of inoperable equipment, provided that such use shall be
permitted upon the approval of a special permit therefor by
the Board of Appeals. Review shall follow the procedural
requirements in § 300-98. Special attention should be given to
possible adverse noise, odor, or visual effects of the use upon
the surrounding neighborhood. Proper screening and buffering
should be provided to eliminate undesirable adverse effects.
(h)
Warehouses; including mini-storage warehouses, where all
storage is indoors, bottling plant, frozen food locker, ice
manufacturing plant, wholesale establishment, and similar
distribution center.
(i)
Open storage of new building materials, machinery and metal
products, but not including junk, scrap, metal, wastepaper,
and similar used materials; provided that the area is enclosed
within a wall, solid fence, or compact evergreen hedge at least
six feet in height. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(j)
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(k)
(l) Parking lots or garages as a principal use of the lot.
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(m)
(n) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(o)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(p)
Skilled nursing care facility licensed by the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts as defined in 105 CMR 150, as the same may
from time to time be amended. [Added 7-7-2015 by Ord. No.
359]
(q)
§ 300-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-42
1:549
Marijuana retailers, subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(r)
Medical marijuana treatment center or registered marijuana
dispensary (RMD), subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(s)
Craft marijuana cooperative, subject to provisions of
§ 300-122. [Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(t)
Independent testing laboratory, subject to provisions of
§ 300-122. [Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(u)
Marijuana cultivator, subject to provisions of § 300-122.
[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(v)
Marijuana product manufacturer, subject to provisions of
§ 300-122. [Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(w)
Marijuana research facility, subject to provisions of § 300-122.
[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(x)
Marijuana transporter, subject to provisions of § 300-122.
[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(y)
Microbusiness, subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(z)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board, and only for lots zoned "IR Overlay" on the
official City Zoning District Map:
(a) Retail establishments.
Restaurant selling food both for consumption on and off the
premises; provided, however, that fast-food restaurants, as
defined in § 300-5 of this chapter, shall not be allowed.
[Amended 5-5-2014 by Ord. No. 38]
(b)
(c) Dwellings in a mixed-use development.
(d) Gymnasium, health club, indoor commercial swimming pool.
Personal and consumer service establishments, including, but
not limited to, barber or beauty shop and laundromat.
[Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
(e)
(2)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(3)
D. Building and area requirements.
§ 300-42 BEVERLY CODE § 300-42
1:550
(1) Minimum lot area: two acres.
Maximum lot coverage: 40%; no more than 60%, including parking.
The Planning Board may authorize, by special permit, an increase
in impervious lot coverage to 75% for lots zoned IR Overlay on the
official City Zoning District Map, and only for lots that satisfy the
minimum lot area requirement in the IR District as provided above.
[Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 225 feet.
Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet; 150 feet for buildings and for
parking which abut residential districts.
(4)
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(7) Maximum building height: 60 feet.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below. The Planning Board
may modify the parking requirements for lots zoned IR Overlay on the
official City Zoning District Map in accordance with § 300-65 below.
[Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the IR District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below. One freestanding sign of no
more than 35 square feet and no more than 15 feet above grade
identifying multiple users shall be permitted for a mixed-use
development on a lot zoned IR Overlay on the official City Zoning
District Map. [Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
F.
Special requirements.
Screening of conflicting uses.
At the time of occupancy of a new nonresidential use, or the
expansion of the outside outline of an existing nonresidential
use, of any lot in an industrial or commercial district, there
shall be a bufferyard along each boundary which adjoins an
R District or use. This bufferyard shall consist of landscaped
plantings, including evergreens, the plantings to be of such
height and density as is needed to adequately screen from view
any light glare, parking lots, loading bays, accessory buildings
or uses. Fences, walls, and earthen berms may be included as
part of the bufferyard, but shall not be used in place of the
landscaped screening.
(a)
The adequacy of screening and landscaping shall be approved
by the Building Inspector, after consultation with the Planning
Board, and shall be incorporated in the Building Inspector's
(b)
(1)
G.
§ 300-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-42
1:551
§ 300-43. IG General Industrial District.
records. In the event a special permit or site plan review is
required, the planting plan shall be considered in this review.
Required screening and landscaping shall be in good condition
and appearance. Failure to maintain same shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures contained herein. [Amended
6-26-1987]
(c)
For lots zoned IR Overlay on the official City Zoning District Map,
site plan review by the Planning Board will be required for any
development requiring a special permit. [Amended 2-19-2009 by
Ord. No. 230]
(2)
General description. The IG General Industrial District is established to
provide principally for general industrial, research, and office use.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes: [Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(1)
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality, or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(2)
(3) Business and professional offices; banks.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural uses and expansion or
reconstruction of existing structures relating thereto, permitted
with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.
(4)
Products developed from previously processed materials such as
bone, ceramic, cloth, glass, leather, metals, plastics, paper, rubber
(except tires), wood (except planing mills).
(5)
Electrical and mechanical instruments and appliances, optical
goods.
(6)
(7) Cosmetics, toiletries, and pharmaceutical products.
Administrative offices, data processing centers, and laboratory for
scientific and industrial research, including testing and product
development.
(8)
(9) Printing and publishing establishment.
Contractors' or craftsmen's shop, including carpentry, welding,
ornamental iron works, electrical and machine shops, provided that
such use is not located within 200 feet of any R District.
(10)
B.
§ 300-42 BEVERLY CODE § 300-43
1:552
Warehouse, bottling plant, frozen food locker, ice manufacturing
plant, wholesale establishment, and similar distribution center.
(11)
Open storage of new building materials, machinery and metal
products, but not including junk, scrap, metal, wastepaper, and
similar used materials, provided that the area is enclosed within a
wall, solid fence, or compact evergreen hedge at least six feet in
height.
(12)
General industrial uses, including manufacture, assembly,
processing, packaging, or other industrial operation [such as, but
not limited to, the following: products developed from previously
processed materials such as bone, ceramic, cloth, glass, leather,
metals, plastics, paper, rubber (except tires), wood (except planing
mills), electrical and mechanical instruments and appliances,
optical goods, cosmetics, toiletries, and pharmaceutical products,
steam laundry, dry cleaning, and rug cleaning establishments, food
products, machine shop, bottling works, box manufacture, textile
manufacture, manufacture of boots and shoes], which would not be
offensive because of injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke,
gas, fumes, odors, dust, or other objectionable feature, or become
hazardous to the community on account of fire or explosion or any
other cause, but the following are expressly prohibited:
(a) Acid manufacture.
(b) Cement, lime, or gypsum manufacture.
(c) Explosives or fireworks manufacture.
(d) Glue manufacture.
Incineration or reduction of garbage, offal, or dead animals,
except such processing as may be conducted by the City and
except solid waste resource recovery and disposal facilities.
(e)
(f) Smelting of zinc, copper, tin, or iron ores.
(g) Stockyard or abattoir.
(13)
(14)Taxi, rail, bus passenger terminal.
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(15)
(16)Those uses allowed by right under Article VI.
(17)Brewery, distillery, winery. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(18)Maker space. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
provisions of § 300-135, provided the use is accessory to another
(19)
§ 300-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-43
1:553
use permitted within the district. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Subsidized elderly housing.
(b) Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats.
(c) Private, noncommercial stable.
Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the
premises.
(d)
(e) Fast-food restaurant. [Amended 6-26-1987]
Animal hospital or commercial kennel, provided that such use
shall not be within 200 feet of any residential district and the
kennel area shall be completely enclosed by a solid wall or
fence.
(f)
Auto body or paint-shop; vehicle repair garage, excluding the
repair of heavy motorized equipment and the open storage
of inoperable equipment, provided that such use shall be
permitted upon the approval of a site plan thereof by the
Planning Board and upon the granting of a special permit
therefor by the Board of Appeals. Review shall follow the
procedural requirements in § 300-98. Special attention should
be given to possible adverse noise, odor, or visual effects of the
use upon the surrounding neighborhood. Proper screening and
buffering should be provided to eliminate undesirable adverse
effects.
(g)
Open storage of coke, coal, sand, or other similar materials or
storage in silos or hoppers, provided that the area is enclosed
within a wall, solid fence, or compact evergreen hedge at least
six feet in height.
(h)
Motor or rail freight; yard or building for the storing and
servicing of trucks, trailers, or buses.
(i)
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(j)
(k) Parking lots or garages as a principal use of the lot.
Pork-chop lots on streets in existence prior to December 1984,
subject to the provisions of § 300-18 above.
(l)
(1)
C.
§ 300-43 BEVERLY CODE § 300-43
1:554
(m) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(n)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(o)
Marijuana retailers, subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(p)
Medical marijuana treatment center or registered marijuana
dispensary (RMD), subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(q)
Craft marijuana cooperative, subject to provisions of
§ 300-122. [Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(r)
Independent testing laboratory, subject to provisions of
§ 300-122. [Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(s)
Marijuana cultivator, subject to provisions of § 300-122.
[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(t)
Marijuana product manufacturer, subject to provisions of
§ 300-122. [Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(u)
Marijuana research facility, subject to provisions of § 300-122.
[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(v)
Marijuana transporter, subject to provisions of § 300-122.
[Added 1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(w)
Microbusiness, subject to provisions of § 300-122. [Added
1-7-2019 by Ord. No. 213A]
(x)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(a) Artist live/work, subject to the provisions of Article XVI.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(b)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: none.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: none. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3) Minimum front yard setback: none.
(4) Minimum side yard setback: none.
D.
§ 300-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-43
1:555
§ 300-44. HD Hospital District.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: none.
Maximum building height: 35 feet; provided, however, buildings
set back a minimum of 400 feet from all abutting public ways
shall be allowed a maximum building height of 70 feet. [Amended
7-16-2001 by Ord. No. 67]
(6)
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the IG District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements.
Screening of conflicting uses. At the time of occupancy of a new
nonresidential use, or the expansion of the outside outline of an
existing nonresidential use, of any lot in an industrial or
commercial district, there shall be a bufferyard along each
boundary which adjoins an R District or use. This bufferyard shall
consist of landscaped plantings, including evergreens, the
plantings to be of such height and density as is needed to
adequately screen from view any light glare, parking lots, loading
bays, accessory buildings or uses. Fences, walls, and earthen
berms may be included as part of the bufferyard, but shall not be
used in place of the landscaped screening.
The adequacy of screening and landscaping shall be approved
by the Building Inspector, after consultation with the Planning
Board, and shall be incorporated in the Building Inspector's
records. In the event a special permit or site plan review is
required, the planting plan shall be considered in this review.
(a)
Required screening and landscaping shall be in good condition
and appearance. Failure to maintain same shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement procedures contained herein.
(b)
(1)
G.
General description. The HD Hospital District is established to provide
principally for medical, health care, and hospital-related uses.
A.
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
Residential uses necessary to or normally associated with a medical
institution.
(1)
(2) Hospitals, nursing care homes.
Historic site including historic dwellings, or museum not operated
for profit.
(3)
B.
§ 300-43 BEVERLY CODE § 300-44
1:556
Sanitary landfill facilities, provided that the same are operated by
the municipality, or pursuant to a municipal lease or license.
(4)
(5) Home occupation as defined herein.
Retail establishment serving local area needs, including, but not
limited to, drug, grocery and baked goods store, with up to 5,000
square feet of floor area per establishment.
(6)
Personal and consumer service establishments, including, but not
limited to, barber or beauty shop and laundromat.
(7)
(8) Business and professional offices; banks.
(9) Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the premises.
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural uses and expansion or
reconstruction of existing structures relating thereto, permitted
with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet.
(10)
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(11)
(12)Doctors' offices, medical clinics. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(13)Any use allowed by right under Article VI. [Amended 6-26-1987]
(14)Ambulance depot facility. [Amended 6-26-1987]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
provisions of § 300-135, provided the use is accessory to another
use permitted within the district. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(15)
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
Subsidized elderly housing, subject to the provisions of
Subsection D below.
(a)
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage.
(b)
(c) Bed-and-breakfast establishments. [Amended 3-19-1991]
Any use, including accessory uses, allowed by special permit
under Article VI.
(d)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities,
structures, and/or towers. [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No.
115]
(e)
(1)
C.
§ 300-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-44
1:557
§ 300-45. BHD Beverly Harbor District. [Amended 6-26-1987;
3-19-1991; 7-1-1992; 5-20-1993; 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 115;
6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board: [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35.
(a)
(2)
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 10 acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 225 feet. [Amended 7-1-1992]
(3) Minimum front yard setback: 30 feet.
(4) Minimum side yard setback: 20 feet.
(5) Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Maximum building height: 65 feet.
D.
Parking requirements. Off-street parking shall be in accordance with
the requirements set forth in Article X below.
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the HD District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements. All those commercial uses normally associated
with the functioning of a hospital, such as a gift shop, coffee shop,
medical offices, and laundry, shall be permitted, provided that such
accessory retail uses are located entirely within the hospital building
and no exterior or lighted interior window sign shall advertise the
presence thereof. All those uses normally associated with the
functioning of a college or university, including a bookstore and
cafeteria, shall be permitted, provided that such uses are clearly
serving the needs of the institution to which they are accessory.
G.
General description and purpose. The Beverly Harbor District seeks
to protect and enhance Beverly's existing marine and waterfront uses
and amenities and to expand public access to the water by creating
continuous and inviting public spaces enlivened with new mixed-use
development and waterside recreational facilities that are well
integrated with surrounding neighborhoods. The Beverly Harbor
District is established in order to facilitate the following objectives:
Support and grow commercial maritime uses, including
commercial fishing vessels, as they are an integral part of the longterm
vision of the Harbor District.
(1)
Facilitate use of the Harbor District's shoreline by commercial
maritime, fishing, and recreational vessels.
(2)
A.
§ 300-44 BEVERLY CODE § 300-45
1:558
Accommodate mixed-use development that is pedestrian-friendly
and will include recreational amenities to engender an inviting and
active place.
(3)
Make the district accessible and designed to accommodate all
modes of transportation.
(4)
Provide publicly accessible open spaces along the length of the
Harbor District and which will seek to connect with existing open
spaces located elsewhere on Beverly's waterfront.
(5)
Complement the historical context of the waterfront with
construction to a scale in keeping with the character of the
surrounding neighborhood.
(6)
Enhance the visual appeal of the street, pedestrian paths, and
other public areas within the Harbor District by minimizing the
visual impact of overhead utilities, service equipment and other
infrastructure and by the use of underground utilities where
feasible.
(7)
Uses by right. Property and buildings shall be used only for the
following purposes:
Commercial fishing, excluding the processing of fish, except as
provided by Subsection B(8).
(1)
Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats,
subject to the provisions of Subsection G.
(2)
Public or private recreational boating facilities, including but not
limited to ancillary office facilities, kitchen facilities and meeting
space.
(3)
Marine-related museums and/or aquariums, and public service
facilities including but not limited to Harbormaster.
(4)
Boatyard for the construction, repair or maintenance of boats,
including but not limited to ancillary office space.
(5)
Berthing and boat storage facility where a vessel is confined by wet
slip, dry stack, float, mooring, jack stand, cradle or other type of
docking facility.
(6)
Restaurants up to 5,000 square feet in gross floor area; provided,
however, that fast-food restaurants as defined in § 300-5 of this
chapter shall not be allowed.
(7)
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(8)
Home occupation as defined herein, subject to the provisions of
Subsection G.
(9)
B.
§ 300-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-45
1:559
Uses by special permit.
(1) Retail establishments, subject to the provisions of Subsection G.
Residential as part of a mixed-use commercial development where
all residential units are located above the first (or ground) floor.
(2)
Business and professional offices as part of a mixed-use
commercial development where all office-related uses are located
above the first (or ground) floor.
(3)
Hotel as part of a mixed-use commercial development where all
lodging rooms are located above the first (or ground) floor and
subject to the provisions of Subsection G.
(4)
Restaurants with more than 5,000 square feet in gross floor area;
provided, however, that fast-food restaurants as defined in § 300-5
of this chapter shall not be allowed.
(5)
Artist live/work, subject to the provisions of Article XVI. [Added
4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(6)
(7) Brewery, distillery, winery. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, provided the
special permit is granted by the Planning Board. [Added
6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
(8)
C.
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: none required.
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.25, unless modified by special
permit as provided in Subsection I below. FAR calculations do not
include structured parking.
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: none.
Minimum front yard setback: 20 feet, unless modified by special
permit as provided in Subsection I below.
(4)
(5) Minimum side yard setback: five feet.
Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet, measured from the current
mean high water mark, or the perimeter of any pier, wharf, or
other structure supported by existing piles, whichever is further
seaward.
(6)
Maximum building height: 35 feet, measured as the vertical
distance from the average existing street grade along the lot to the
top of the highest roof beams of a flat roof or the top of the highest
ridge of a sloped roof, except that there may be uninhabited space
under a sloped roof up to a total height of 40 feet.
(7)
D.
§ 300-45 BEVERLY CODE § 300-45
1:560
Accessory structures shall not be located in the front yard or rear
yard of a lot.
(8)
Parking requirements.
Off-street parking may be provided under or on the first floor of
commercial or mixed-use buildings, provided an active groundfloor
use screens parking facilities from the public way and
waterfront walkway.
(1)
Off-street surface parking located in the front yard or rear yard of
a property must provide a minimum five-foot landscape buffer from
Water Street and the waterfront walkway.
(2)
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Article X below.
(3)
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the BHD shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Minimum development standards.
All proposals, including new construction of any building(s) or
shoreline structure(s) (pier, slips, wharves, etc.) or any substantial
addition(s) to same, must secure the appropriate federal, state,
and local permits and licenses. These permits and licenses may
include, but are not limited to: U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
permit(s); MassDEP Division of Wetlands and Waterways Chapter
91 waterways license; and City of Beverly Conservation
Commission order of conditions.
Conditions imposed by any state or federal permit or license
may be more restrictive or require certain public benefits not
stated or identified in this chapter.
(a)
For any new development or improvements to existing
structures within the BHD requiring site plan review under
Article XIV or a special permit under this chapter, the project
proponent shall establish the location, if applicable, of the
commonwealth tidelands and private tidelands on any plan or
site plan(s) required under this chapter.
(b)
(1)
All proposals shall conform with MassDEP waterways regulations,
310 CMR 9.00, as they may be amended, and shall provide or
preserve any rights of access as required therein.
(2)
Any project that includes the use of filled tidelands for public
access shall provide for long-term management of such areas that
achieves effective public use and enjoyment while minimizing
conflicts with interests such as the protection of private property
and natural resources. Such proposals shall provide rights of public
access as follows:
(3)
G.
§ 300-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-45
1:561
The provision, including construction and maintenance, of a
public pedestrian walkway adjacent to the project shoreline,
a minimum of 10 feet in width and including, but not limited
to, pedestrian improvements such as landscaping, benches,
lighting, and trash receptacles. The location and landscape
elements shall be subject to approval by the Planning Board,
and designed to connect to existing or future harborfront
walkways on adjoining properties. Should a proposed or
existing water-dependent use, such as a boat launch or boat
washing system, inhibit the project proponent's ability to
provide a continuous walkway as prescribed above, the project
proponent shall provide a reasonable alternative on the parcel
providing access to the project shoreline and connecting the
subject parcel to abutting parcels and walkways, subject to
approval by the Planning Board.
(a)
Access from the public street to the project shoreline walkway
shall be required if there is no existing public access to said
walkway and may be required by the Planning Board even if
there is existing public access to the walkway elsewhere within
the Beverly Harbor District; and in all cases shall be provided
without time restriction except as authorized by the Planning
Board or MassDEP. Public access and use of public rights and
ways shall be encouraged by the use of appropriate signage
at all entryways and other reasonable locations on the project
site.
(b)
No gates, fences, or other structures may be placed on any
areas open to public access in a manner that will impede the
free flow of pedestrians.
(c)
Buildings shall be designed to the scale and character of the
surrounding neighborhood, and shall incorporate design elements
that create an attractive pedestrian realm.
Proposals shall include the following elements:
Buildings with architectural elevations facing both the
public way and/or the waterfront shall be oriented and
designed as though both are primary elevations.
[1]
Streets, driveways, parking lots, and principal facades
shall include amenities that are conducive to an active
pedestrian realm, including sidewalks, landscaping, lights,
and outdoor seating.
[2]
Development should be designed to facilitate and
encourage use by alternative modes of transportation such
as walking, biking, and public transit.
[3]
Building materials shall be of permanent and sturdy
quality, including brick, stone or wooden clapboard, or
[4]
(a)
(4)
§ 300-45 BEVERLY CODE § 300-45
1:562
materials similar in appearance, texture, quality and scale
to these materials.
Buildings facing the public way and/or the waterfront shall
incorporate vertical design elements, operable doors, and/
or entrances with public access and transparent windows
at regular intervals in the principal facade(s).
[5]
Buildings within the Beverly Harbor District shall not have
blank walls (without doors or windows) for a distance of
greater than 10 feet in length.
[6]
Buildings shall be so designed and located to allow fiftyfoot-
wide views from the street to the harbor at intervals
no greater than 150 feet. The longer side of each building
should be sited approximately perpendicular to the street
and the water's edge, or as the Planning Board may
require, in order to preserve water views from the street.
[7]
The Planning Board may waive the above-listed building
placement and design requirements by special permit if it is
found that such an alteration will better meet the objectives of
this chapter.
(b)
Surface-level off-street parking shall be sited and screened so as
to minimize the visual intrusion from public ways, waterfront
walkways, and other public spaces that are provided for under this
chapter.
(5)
Rooftop and other mechanical equipment, including HVAC systems,
shall be screened using materials similar in type, texture, and scale
to the building, such as brick, slate, wood or other materials similar
in appearance. No vinyl is permitted nor shall wood stockade or
similar fencing be used on roofs. Solar panels are exempt from this
requirement.
(6)
Mechanical equipment and other noise-producing appurtenances
shall comply with MassDEP noise control regulations (310 CMR
7.10) where a source sound shall not increase broadband sound
level by more than 10 dB(A) above ambient levels or produce a pure
tone condition. Measurements of sound levels shall be taken at the
boundary of the subject property.
(7)
Special permit criteria.
When approving a special permit under the BHD, the Planning
Board shall make findings, in addition to any specific requirements
or criteria set forth in § 300-91 of this chapter, that the project
proposal meets the following special permit criteria:
(1)
H.
§ 300-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-45
1:563
The proposed development and associated uses are allowed
and compatible with the purpose of the Beverly Harbor
District.
(a)
The proposed development is consistent with the character,
materials and scale of the surrounding neighborhood.
(b)
The proposed development is oriented to public ways and the
project shoreline edge such that the project minimizes visual
intrusion of parking, storage, and other outdoor service areas.
(c)
The proposed development shall provide direct access to
public ways and the waterfront; buildings shall be oriented to
complement public spaces.
(d)
Access is designed to provide an inviting pedestrian realm and,
where necessary, includes signage to promote public access.
(e)
Buildings are oriented such that visual connection to the
waterfront from streets and public ways is accommodated.
(f)
The proposed development will not prevent or materially
interfere with the creation or preservation of adjacent waterrelated
uses and public access and enjoyment on surrounding
properties.
(g)
Project proponents of new residential uses allowed by special
permit under this section shall certify that notice will be
provided to residents, by deed or lease, that the Beverly
Harbor District is intended for mixed uses, including public
access and enjoyment of the waterfront, commercial fishing,
and other marine and water-related commercial uses. Notice
shall at a minimum state that the residential building is in
close proximity to water-related commercial uses which will
continue to operate in accordance with normal business
practices, which may include extended hours of operation and
use of public infrastructure. This provision shall be
incorporated as a condition of special permit approvals under
this chapter that include a residential component.
(h)
In exercising its power under this section, the Planning Board may
impose conditions to further the purposes and intent of the Beverly
Harbor District.
(2)
Special requirements.
For any use allowed in the BHD, the Planning Board, through a
special permit process, may grant a bonus in floor area ratio (FAR),
increasing the existing maximum FAR of 0.25 up to 1.5, in return
for the following public benefits (additional FAR of 0.25 may be
granted by the Planning Board for one public benefit; 0.50 for a
second public benefit; and 0.50 for a third public benefit):
(1)
I.
§ 300-45 BEVERLY CODE § 300-45
1:564
§ 300-46. WDR Waterfront Development Residential District.
[Amended 12-27-2006 by Ord. No. 109]
For property which abuts Water Street, the provision, including
construction (but not maintenance), of a public right-of-way
along Water Street, so that there can be a minimum of a thirtyfoot
roadway and five-foot sidewalks on both sides in locations
where the existing Water Street right-of-way is less than 40
feet. The front yard setback requirement for projects providing
additional public right-of-way is reduced from 20 feet to five
feet.
(a)
The provision, including construction and maintenance, of a
public pedestrian walkway along the project shoreline, a
minimum of 15 feet in width, the exact location to be approved
by the Planning Board, designed to connect to existing or
future harborfront walkways on adjoining properties. Public
access from the public street to the project shoreline walkway
shall be required by the Planning Board if there is no existing
public access. In addition, public access from the public street
to the project shoreline walkway may be required by the
Planning Board in its discretion.
(b)
Ten percent of the gross site area to be developed and
maintained as public open space (as defined in § 300-5). This
provision is in addition to any open space requirements which
may otherwise be required by this chapter.
(c)
Land set aside for the above public benefits shall remain included
in the formula to determine FAR.
(2)
General description. This district is established to provide principally
for mixed-use development, residential development and public access
along the waterfront.
A.
Uses by right. Property and building shall be used only for the following
purposes:
Multifamily dwelling or apartment house, subject to the
requirements of Subsection H below.
(1)
Home occupation as defined herein, subject to the provisions of
Subsection G below.
(2)
Agricultural, horticultural, and floricultural uses and expansion or
reconstruction of existing structures relating thereto, permitted
with a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet, and subject to the
provisions of Subsection G below.
(3)
Commercial fishing, excluding the processing of fish, except as
provided by Subsection B(7) below. (Processing, meaning canning,
(4)
B.
§ 300-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-46
1:565
cooking, or freezing but not preparation of bait.), subject to the
provisions of Subsection G below.
Commercial marina for the sale, mooring, and rental of boats,
subject to the provisions of Subsection G below.
(5)
Restaurant selling food for consumption entirely on the premises,
subject to the provisions of Subsection G below.
(6)
Accessory buildings and uses required for and clearly incidental to
the principal building or use are permitted.
(7)
(8) Any use allowed by right under Article VI.
Uses by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Planning Board:
Gymnasium, health club, commercial swimming pool, subject
to the provisions of Subsection G below.
(a)
Other private or quasi-public club, charitable institution, or
community service organization, except where the chief
activity is a service customarily carried on as a business,
subject to the provisions of Subsection G below.
(b)
(c) Hotel or motel, subject to the provisions of Subsection G below.
Retail establishments, subject to the provisions of Subsection
G below.
(d)
Personal and consumer service establishments, including, but
not limited to, barber or beauty shop and laundromat, subject
to the provisions of Subsection G below.
(e)
Business and professional offices; banks; subject to the
provisions of Subsection G below.
(f)
Place of commercial recreation such as a theater, bowling
alley, roller skating rink or ice skating rink where the use is
conducted entirely indoors. For purposes of this subsection,
the term "commercial indoor recreation" does not include
those uses regulated by MGL c. 140, § 183A.
(g)
Essential public services such as transformer stations,
substations, pumping stations, automatic telephone
exchanges, not including outdoor vehicle or equipment
storage, subject to the provisions of Subsection G below.
(h)
Parking lots or garages as a principal use of a lot, subject to
the provisions of Subsection G below.
(i)
(1)
C.
§ 300-46 BEVERLY CODE § 300-46
1:566
Those uses, including accessory uses, allowed by special
permit under Article VI.
(j)
Artist live/work, subject to the provisions of Article XVI.
[Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(k)
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, subject to
the provisions of § 300-35. [Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No.
067B]
(l)
The following uses are only allowed by special permit granted by
the Board of Appeals:
(a) Bed-and-breakfast establishments.
(b) Maker space. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
(2)
Building and area requirements.
Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet, plus 2,261 square feet for
each additional dwelling unit over three.
(1)
Maximum floor area ratio (FAR): 0.25, unless modified by special
permit as provided in Subsection G below. FAR calculations do not
include structured parking.
(2)
(3) Minimum lot frontage: 65 feet.
(4) Minimum front yard setback: five feet.
(5) Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet.
(6) Minimum rear yard setback: 20 feet.
Maximum building height: 35 feet measured as the vertical
distance from the average existing paved street grade along the lot,
to the top of the highest roof beams of a flat roof, or the top of the
highest ridge of a sloped roof, except that there may be uninhabited
space under a sloped roof up to a total height of 40 feet.
(7)
D.
Parking requirements.
Off-street parking shall be in accordance with the requirements set
forth in Article X below.
(1)
One off-street parking space for each marina recreational or
commercial boat slip shall also be provided.
(2)
E.
Sign requirements. All signs in the WDR District shall conform to the
regulations set forth in Article XI below.
F.
Special requirements.
All WDR proposals, including new construction of any building(s)
or water-based structure(s) (pier, slips, wharves, etc.) or any
(1)
G.
§ 300-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-46
1:567
substantial addition(s) to same, must secure the appropriate
federal, state, and local permits and licenses. These permits and
licenses may include, but are not limited to: U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers permit(s); Massachusetts DEP Division of Wetlands
and Waterways Chapter 91 tidelands license; and City of Beverly
Conservation Commission order of conditions.
Regulations mandated by any state or federal permit or license
obtained for any non-water-dependent, or water-dependent
use (including the applicability of the public trust doctrine)
may be more restrictive or require certain public benefits not
stated or identified in this chapter.
(a)
For any new development or substantial improvement to
existing structures within the WDR, the project proponent
shall establish the location, if applicable, of the commonwealth
tidelands (that land seaward of the historic mean low water
mark) on any plan or site plan(s) drawn for a special permit,
building permit, or other permit required under this chapter.
(b)
For any use allowed in the WDR District, the Planning Board,
through a special permit process, may grant a bonus in floor area
ratio (FAR), increasing the FAR from 0.25 up to 0.75, in return for
all of the following public benefits:
The provision, including construction and maintenance, of a
public pedestrian walkway along the water, a minimum of
12 feet in width, the exact location to be determined by the
Planning Board, designed to connect to existing or future
harborfront walkways on adjoining properties. Access from the
public street to the harborfront walkway may be required at
the discretion of the Planning Board. The walkway shall be
open from sunrise to sunset.
(a)
For property which abuts Congress Street, the provision,
including construction (but not maintenance), of a public rightof-
way along Congress Street, so that there can be five-foot
sidewalks on both sides.
(b)
All buildings shall be so designed and placed to allow fifty-footwide
views to the waterfront at least every 220 feet from the
street to the harbor. The longer side of each building shall be
appropriately sited in order to preserve water views from the
street.
(c)
The provision of an area of the land or building(s) having an
area of a minimum of 20% of the floor area for a restaurant
or water-dependent use (i.e., an office, commercial, retail or
service establishment, or public space which is primarily
marine or fishing related) as defined below:
(d)
(2)
§ 300-46 BEVERLY CODE § 300-46
1:568
Marine-related industries and services, including fish
storage, fish products/processing and sales.
[1]
[2] Harbor/Marine supplies and services and ship supply.
Boat storage and service facilities, such as boat
construction yards, dry-dock services, boat repair shops,
launching ramps, and marinas.
[3]
Sea/Land loading and transfer areas for people and goods,
including ferry terminals, loading areas, and docks.
[4]
Marine-related museums and aquariums, and public
service facilities, including Harbormaster's quarters.
[5]
Public walkway, parkland dedicated to public use, public
fishing area, and public parking.
[6]
Should the Chapter 91 licensing and permitting regulations
(administered by the Department of Environmental Protection), as
may be amended, require some or all of the above public benefits,
additional public benefits may be required by the Planning Board.
(3)
Special requirements for multiple dwellings. The development of
multiple dwellings which includes townhouses shall be in accordance
with the density and dimensional requirements of Subsection D above,
except as may be modified by Subsection G above, and the following:
No multiple dwelling shall measure more than 125 feet on its long
side; except that where front and rear setback offsets of at least
three feet are provided at fifty-foot intervals, more or less, the
length of said dwelling shall not exceed a length of 220 feet.
(1)
In multiple dwelling groups, the minimum spacing between
buildings shall be as follows:
(a) Front-to-front, front-to-rear, and rear-to-rear: 60 feet.
End-to-end (with facing windows): not less than their average
height.
(b)
End-to-end (without facing windows) or corner-to-corner
(offset): not less than 1/2 of their height.
(c)
(d) Front-to-rear siting shall be avoided if at all practicable.
(2)
Interior private ways shall have a minimum width of 24 feet for
two-way traffic and 18 feet for one-way traffic and shall be paved
in accordance with City specifications. Minimum building setbacks
from such private access drives shall be 35 feet and 30 feet,
respectively, from the center lines thereof, except those portions of
drives which may serve parking under the building.
(3)
H.
§ 300-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-46
1:569
§ 300-47. MOSR Municipal Open Space and Recreation District.
[Amended 6-28-1999 by Ord. No. 109]
All multiple-family dwellings shall be served by public or equivalent
sanitary sewer and water systems. No building permit shall be
granted unless the Building Inspector shall first receive a report
from the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services,
Public Works that provision has been made for the disposal of
sewage into a system of sufficient capacity.166
(4)
All electrical and telephone service shall be provided underground
to all buildings within a multiple dwelling group project. Antennas
for the purposes of television reception shall be provided within a
building wherever practicable, or else by one master antenna for
the project.
(5)
No multiple dwelling group nor any individual multiple dwelling
shall be permitted unless provision shall be made for adequate
snow removal and trash and garbage disposal.
(6)
Sufficient enclosed area and equipment shall be provided within
each multiple-family dwelling for laundering and drying purposes.
No outside area shall be provided for such purposes, unless such
area is enclosed by a solid screen of evergreen shrubs or fencing at
least six feet high.
(7)
A plan showing recreational facilities must be approved by the
Planning Board. The area shall be a minimum of 10% of the gross
area of the site, shall be contiguous, and shall include the twentypercent
public space area provided for in Subsection G(2)(d) above.
(8)
Purpose. The Municipal Open Space and Recreation District is
established in accordance with the boundaries as shown on the Zoning
District Map. The primary purposes of the Municipal Open Space and
Recreation District are to encourage the preservation of large,
contiguous wetland areas and open space for parkland, active and
passive recreation, reservations, community gardens, rivers and
streams, and similar uses. It is intended that the Municipal Open Space
and Recreation District will permanently protect these open space
resources so as to enhance the quality of life for residents and visitors
to the area. The Municipal Open Space and Recreation District may
also encompass wetland resource areas, open space, and recreational
areas where there are important public health, safety, and welfare
interest in watershed and flood potential protection, preservation of
wildlife habitat, and conservation of recreational land for resident use
and enjoyment.
A.
B. Permitted uses:
166. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-46 BEVERLY CODE § 300-47
1:570
(1) Conservation of soil, water, plants and wildlife.
Outdoor recreation, not involving the use of motor vehicles or
motor boats, including boating, fishing, and nature study where
otherwise legally permitted.
(2)
Active recreation, including playing fields and other athletic
purposes.
(3)
(4) Foot, bicycle, and horse paths and bridges.
(5) Community gardens.
Fences, parking, landing piers, small structures for noncommercial
uses, and public rest room facilities.
(6)
Uses permitted by special permit. Upon the issuance of a special permit
for an exception by the Zoning Board of Appeals, and subject to such
other special conditions and safeguards as the Zoning Board of Appeals
deems necessary to fulfill the purposes set forth in Subsection A, the
following uses, structures and actions are permitted:
Dams, excavations or grading, consistent with the purposes of this
section, to create ponds, pools or other changes in watercourses
for swimming, fishing or other recreational uses, agricultural uses,
scenic features, or drainage improvements.
(1)
C.
Prohibited uses. Within the Municipal Open Space and Recreation
District, the following uses are expressly prohibited:
(1) Land filling or dumping.
(2) Storage or disposal of hazardous materials.
Storage or disposal of solid wastes as defined in MGL Chapter 21C,
as may be amended.
(3)
Storage of materials or equipment, except when necessary to
permitted activities above.
(4)
D.
§ 300-47 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-47
1:571

ARTICLE VIII
Overlay Districts
§ 300-48. FOD Floodplain Overlay District. [Amended 7-5-2012 by
Ord. No. 102; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 104]
Purpose. The purposes of the Floodplain Overlay District are to protect
the health and safety of residents of lands subject to seasonal or
periodic flooding and to minimize future flood damage by providing
for the maintenance of existing waterways, water bodies, and wetlands
through a floodplain management program.
A.
Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the following meanings:
AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD — Land in a floodplain that is
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year
and which is designated on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, AH, AE, A99, VE, or
V.
BASE FLOOD — The flood having a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year.
COASTAL HIGH-HAZARD AREA — An area of special flood hazard
extending from offshore to the inland limit of a primary frontal dune
along an open coast and any other area subject to high-velocity wave
action from storms or seismic sources and designated on a FIRM as
Zone V or VE.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling
operations.
FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA) — The
federal agency which administers the National Flood Insurance
Program and provides a nationwide flood hazard area mapping study
program for communities as well as regulatory standards for
development in the flood hazard areas.
FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A general and temporary condition
of partial or complete inundation of two or more acres of normally dry
land areas or of two or more properties that have a 0.2% annual chance
of flooding and which are located outside of special flood hazard areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — An official map of a
community on which FEMA has delineated both the areas of special
flood hazard and the risk-premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY — An examination, evaluation, and
determination of flood hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding
water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and
determination of flood-related erosion hazards.
B.
§ 300-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-48
1:573
FLOOD or FLOODING — A general and temporary condition of partial
or complete inundation of normally dry land areas or of two or more
lots. This inundation can result from the overflow of inland or tidal
waters or the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source or from mudflow.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement or cellar). An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement or cellar, is not considered a
building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to
render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of NFIP Regulation 60.3.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — For floodplain management purposes,
structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after
the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by
the City of Beverly. For the purpose of determining insurance rates,
the term "new construction" means structures for which the start of
construction commenced on or after the effective date of an initial
FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — See "base flood."
REGULATORY FLOODWAY — See "floodway."
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA — An area having special flood and/or
flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on a FIRM as Zone A, AO, AE,
A99, AH, V or VE.
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home. For
insurance coverage purposes, the term "structure" means a walled
and roofed building, other than a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above ground and affixed to a permanent site, as well as a
manufactured home on a foundation. For the latter purpose, the term
includes a building while in the course of construction, alteration, or
repair, but does not include building materials or supplies intended for
use in such construction, alteration, or repair, unless such materials or
supplies are within an enclosed building on the premises.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of
the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction, or
improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50%
of the market value of the structure either (a) before the improvement
§ 300-48 BEVERLY CODE § 300-48
1:574
or repair is started, or (b) if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this
subsection, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur
when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the structure.
ZONE A — The one-hundred-year floodplain area where the base flood
elevation (BFE) has not been determined. To determine the BFE, use
the best available federal, state, local or other data.
ZONE AE (FOR NEW AND REVISED MAPS) — That portion of the
one-hundred-year floodplain where the base flood elevation has been
determined. (Note that Zone AE replaces Zones A1-A30 on maps
created in and prior to 1987.)
ZONE AH AND ZONE AO — That portion of the one-hundred-year
floodplain with flood depths of one foot to three feet.
ZONE VE — Areas in Beverly identified by a FEMA-conducted Flood
Insurance Study as special flood hazard areas along a coast subject
to inundation by a one-hundred-year flood with additional hazards due
to velocity (wave action) for which base flood elevations have been
determined.
ZONE X — Areas in Beverly identified by a FEMA-conducted Flood
Insurance Study as those of moderate or minimal flood hazard. (Note
that Zone X replaces Zones B and C on maps created in and prior to
1987.)
Use regulations.
The Floodplain Overlay District is herein established as an overlay
district and includes all special flood hazard areas within the City
of Beverly currently designated as Zone A, AE, AH, AO, A99, V
or VE on the Essex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for
the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The
map panels of the Essex County FIRM that are wholly or partially
within the City of Beverly are panel numbers 25009C0408F,
25009C0409F, 25009C0428F, 25009C0429F, dated July 3, 2012;
and 25009C0416F, 25009C0417G, 25009C0433G, 25009C0436G,
25009C0437G, and 25009C0441G, dated July 16, 2014. The exact
boundaries of the Floodplain Overlay District may be defined by
the one-hundred-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM
and by the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report(s) for Essex County
prepared by FEMA dated July 16, 2014. Prior to July 16, 2014, refer
to the July 3, 2012, FIRM panels. The aforementioned FIRM panels
and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file
with the City Engineer.
(1)
The Floodplain Overlay District is established as an overlay district
to all other districts. All development in the overlay district,
(2)
C.
§ 300-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-48
1:575
including structural and nonstructural activities, whether
permitted by right or by special permit, must comply with all other
applicable local, state and federal laws. These laws include (but
are not limited to) this Chapter 300, Zoning, MGL c. 131, § 40,
Chapter 287, Wetlands Protection, of the City Code, sections of
the Massachusetts State Building Code (780 CMR) which address
floodplain and coastal high-hazard areas, and DEP regulations,
restrictions and requirements for wetlands protection, inland and
coastal wetlands and requirements for sanitary sewage subsurface
disposal.
Additionally, permitted uses are subject to the following
requirements:
All encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements to existing structures, and other developments
are prohibited in the floodway as designated on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map for Beverly.
(a)
In Zone VE (areas of one-hundred-year coastal flood with wave
action), all new construction or substantial improvements must
be located landward of the reach of mean high tide.
(b)
A floodplain development permit shall be obtained before any
construction or development begins within any area of special
flood hazard as determined by Beverly's Flood Insurance Rate
Maps.
(c)
(3)
Application requirements. Application for a development permit shall
be made on forms furnished by the Municipal Inspections Department.
The form must be accompanied by the following:
A narrative that describes the extent to which any watercourse will
be altered or relocated as a result of the proposed development.
Note that no encroachments may be proposed within a designated
floodway (see Subsection C). In a riverine situation where
alteration or relocation of a watercourse is proposed, the applicant
shall notify by certified mail, return receipt requested, all adjacent
communities, the NFIP State Coordinator for the MA Department
of Conservation and Recreation and the NFIP Program Specialist
for the Federal Emergency Management Agency Region 1. Proof
of notification shall be submitted with the floodplain development
permit application.
(1)
Plans, drawn to scale, showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and elevations of the area in question with detail of existing or
proposed structures, fills, and drainage facilities shall be included
with the floodplain development permit application. Specifically,
the following information is required on the plan:
Certification by a registered professional engineer that any
construction, improvements, or development meets the
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 300-48 BEVERLY CODE § 300-48
1:576
requirements of the rules and regulations stipulated in 44 CFR
60.3 (known as the Federal Emergency Management Agency's
National Flood Insurance Program, and known more
specifically as Floodplain Management Criteria for Flood-
Prone Areas). Copies of these regulations are available at the
Municipal Inspections Department and City Engineer's office.
In Zone A where flood base elevation data is not provided on
the FIRM, the applicant shall obtain any existing base flood
elevation data and it shall be reviewed by a registered
professional engineer for its reasonable utilization toward
meeting the requirements of the Floodplain Overlay District
ordinance.
(b)
Information as to the elevation in relation to mean sea level of
the lowest floor of all structures (including basements).
(c)
All permits for construction in the Floodplain Overlay District shall
be subject to administrative review by the City's Health
Department, Municipal Inspections Department, Engineering
Division of the Public Services Department and Conservation
Commission.
(3)
In Zones A and AE, along watercourses that have not had a
regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state,
local, or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit
encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase
in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
(4)
Base flood elevation data is required for subdivision proposals or
other developments greater than 10 lots or two acres, whichever is
the lesser, within unnumbered A Zones.
(5)
Within Zones AH and AO on the FIRM, adequate drainage paths
must be provided around structures on slopes, to guide floodwaters
around and away from proposed structures.
(6)
Man-made alteration of sand dunes within Zone VE which would
increase potential flood damage is prohibited.
(7)
All subdivision proposals must be designed to assure that:
(a) Such proposals minimize flood damage;
All public utilities and facilities are located and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(b)
Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(c)
(8)
§ 300-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-49
1:577
§ 300-49. LHD Local Historic District.
No building in the Fish Flake Hill Local Historic District (Front Street) shall
be altered or constructed until a certificate of appropriateness is received
from the Beverly Historic Districts Commission.
§ 300-50. WSPOD Water Supply Protection Overlay District.
[Amended by Ord. No. 169; 6-19-2013 by Ord. No. 76]
Purpose. The purposes of the Water Supply Protection Overlay District
(WSPOD) are to:
Protect and promote the health, safety, and general welfare of
the community by ensuring an adequate quality and quantity of
drinking water for the residents, institutions and businesses of the
City of Beverly;
(1)
Protect and preserve watersheds, surface waters, groundwater,
and aquifers for existing drinking water supplies and potential
sources of drinking water supplies;
(2)
Inhibit temporary and permanent contamination of watersheds,
surface waters, and groundwater in the WSPOD;
(3)
Protect the community by restricting and controlling activities
which are likely to have a significant adverse impact(s), immediate
or cumulative, upon the quality of the surface water and
groundwater in the WSPOD; and
(4)
Work in support of the Salem and Beverly Water Supply Board,
which has primary responsibility for the distribution and protection
of the water supply for Beverly, Salem and parts of Wenham, and
has ultimate authority for those activities.
(5)
A.
Applicability. The Water Supply Protection Overlay District is
superimposed over the underlying districts set forth in this chapter
and shall apply to all new construction, reconstruction, or expansion of
existing buildings and new or expanded uses. Within the Water Supply
Protection Overlay District, the requirements of the underlying district
continue to apply, except where the requirements of the Water Supply
Protection Overlay District are more stringent.
B.
Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms and
words are given the meanings stated below (For other terms or words
see § 300-5, Definitions.):
PETROLEUM PRODUCT — Petroleum or a petroleum by-product,
including, but not limited to, fuel oil; gasoline; diesel; kerosene;
aviation jet fuel; aviation gasoline; lubricating oils; oily sludge; oil
refuse; oil mixed with other wastes; crude oils; or other liquid
hydrocarbons regardless of specific gravity. The term "petroleum
product" shall not include liquefied petroleum gas, including, but not
limited to, liquefied natural gas, propane or butane.
C.
§ 300-49 BEVERLY CODE § 300-50
1:578
PROPANE — A colorless, hydrocarbon gas liquefied when under
pressure.
RECHARGE AREA — An area that collects precipitation or surface
water to resupply a water body or aquifer as defined in 310 CMR 40.00
and 310 CMR 22.00, inclusive.
SALEM AND BEVERLY WATER SUPPLY BOARD (SBWSB) — A regional
agency comprising the Cities of Salem and Beverly, which oversees
and regulates the quality of the drinking water as well as the quantity
of potable water necessary to ensure an adequate supply to the two
affected communities as well as to parts of the Town of Wenham. The
SBWSB consists of:
SLUDGE — The solid, semi-solid, and liquid residue that results from a
process of wastewater treatment or drinking water treatment. Sludge
does not include grit, screening, or grease and oil which are removed
at the headworks of a facility.
TREATMENT WORKS — Any and all devices, processes and properties,
real or personal, used in the collection, pumping, transmission, storage,
treatment, disposal, recycling, reclamation, or reuse of waterborne
pollutants, but not including any works receiving a hazardous waste
from off the site of the works for the purpose of treatment, storage, or
disposal.
VERY SMALL QUANTITY GENERATOR — Any public or private entity,
other than residential, which produces less than 27 gallons (100
kilograms) per month of hazardous waste or waste oil, but not including
any acutely hazardous waste as defined in 310 CMR 30.136.
WATERSHED — The area contained within the geomorphic or
topographic boundaries of higher elevations which cause surface water
and/or groundwater to drain or flow to lower elevations into water used
as a public water source.
(1) The Beverly City Engineer;
(2) A Beverly citizen appointed by the Mayor of Beverly;
(3) The Salem Director of Public Works;
(4) A Salem citizen appointed by the Mayor of Salem; and
A person who does not reside in, own property or have business
interests in either the City of Beverly or Salem, who is appointed
by the Governor of the Commonwealth and serves as the Chairman
of the Board.
(5)
Delineation of Water Supply Protection Overlay District. The Water
Supply Protection Overlay District shall be as shown on the official City
of Beverly Zoning District Map.
D.
§ 300-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-50
1:579
Prohibited uses or activities. The following uses and activities are
expressly prohibited within the Water Supply Protection Overlay
District:
Storage of chemical or petroleum products of any kind except for:
Products stored in a freestanding container of less than 15
gallons' capacity;
(a)
Heating fuel products stored in the building where that fuel is
to be utilized;
(b)
Propane gas, stored above ground, to be used for residential
home heating purposes; and
(c)
Propane gas, stored above ground, to be used for retail resale;
provided, however, that the containers being filled for resale
shall be no larger than 40 pounds' capacity.
(d)
The storage incidental to:
Normal household use, outdoor maintenance, or the
heating of a structure; or
[1]
[2] The use of emergency generators; or
A response action conducted or performed in accordance
with MGL c. 21E and 310 CMR 40.000 and which is
exempt from a groundwater discharge permit pursuant to
314 CMR 5.05(14); or
[3]
(e)
Storage within a building, either in a container(s) or
aboveground tank(s), or outdoors in a covered container(s)
or aboveground tank(s) in an area that has a containment
system designed and operated to hold either 10% of the total
possible storage capacity of all containers, or 110% of the
largest container's storage capacity, whichever is greater.
However, these storage requirements do not apply to the
replacement of existing tanks or systems for the keeping,
dispensing or storing of gasoline, provided the replacement
is performed in accordance with applicable state and local
requirements;
(f)
(1)
Treatment or disposal works subject to 314 CMR 3.00 or 5.00,
except the following:
The replacement or repair of an existing treatment or disposal
works that will not result in a design capacity greater than the
design capacity of the existing treatment or disposal works.
(a)
Treatment or disposal works for sanitary sewage if necessary
to treat existing sanitary sewage discharges in noncompliance
with Title 5, 310 CMR 15.00, provided that any such facility
(b)
(2)
E.
§ 300-50 BEVERLY CODE § 300-50
1:580
shall be permitted in accordance with applicable state
regulations and requirements.
Treatment works designed for the treatment of contaminated
groundwater or surface waters permitted and operated in
compliance with 314 CMR 5.05(3) or 5.05(13).
(c)
Discharge by a public water system of waters incidental to
water treatment processes.
(d)
Facilities that, through their acts or processes, generate, treat,
store or dispose of hazardous waste as defined in § 300-5, except
for the following:
(a) Very small quantity generators.
Treatment works approved in accordance with 314 CMR 5.00
for treatment of contaminated groundwater or surface waters.
(b)
(3)
(4) Sand and gravel excavation operations.
Uncovered or uncontained storage of fertilizers, herbicides and
pesticides.
(5)
Uncovered or uncontained storage of road or parking lot deicing
and sanding materials.
(6)
Storage or disposal of snow or ice removed from highways and
streets outside the district that contains deicing chemicals.
(7)
(8) Uncovered or uncontained storage of manure.
(9) Junk and salvage operations.
Motor vehicle or aircraft repair operations not in accordance with
state regulations (MGL Chapter 21C).
(10)
Solid waste disposal other than brush or stumps, landfills,
combustion facilities, or handling facilities as defined at 310 CMR
16.00 or MGL Chapter 21C.
(11)
Commercial outdoor washing of motor vehicles or airplanes, and
commercial car washes not in accordance with state (310 CMR
27.00A, 314 CMR 5.00) and federal (the Federal Clean Water Act)
regulations.
(12)
(13)Disposal of leachable wastes.
(14)Landfills.
Floor drains in all facilities handling hazardous waste as defined
in the Massachusetts Hazardous Waste Regulations, 310 CMR
30.010.
(15)
(16)Animal feed lots.
§ 300-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-50
1:581
(17)Dry-cleaning establishments.
(18)Mining of natural resources.
Uses permitted by right. The following uses are permitted by right
within the Water Supply Protection Overlay District, subject to the
provisions of the underlying zoning:
(1) Conservation of soil, water, plants, and wildlife.
Outdoor recreation, not involving the use of motor vehicles or
motor boats, including boating, fishing, nature study and hunting
where otherwise legally permitted.
(2)
(3) Foot, bicycle, and horse paths and bridges.
Rehabilitation, repair, and maintenance of any existing (prior to
adoption of this amendment) structure, provided there is no
increase in impervious pavement (other than that material which is
used in the construction of the structure itself) and provided that
all appropriate permits (if any) have been obtained.
(4)
(5) Expansion of any existing residential structure.
New single-family residential development, as permitted in the
underlying district, provided that such (individual) development is
not in excess of two house lots.
(6)
Farming, gardening, nursery, conservation, forestry, harvesting and
grazing uses, provided that fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides,
manure and other leachable materials are not stored outdoors.
(7)
Notwithstanding the provisions of Subsection E above, public
water supply facilities and associated uses, including, but not
limited to, chemical and fuel storage.
(8)
Disturbance of the existing landscape for construction or landscape
maintenance, provided that the disturbance conforms to Chapter
249, Stormwater Management, of the City Code.
(9)
F.
Uses permitted by special permit.
The following uses are only allowed by special permit within the
Water Supply Protection Overlay District:
Commercial and industrial uses permitted in the underlying
district.
(a)
New single-family development in excess of two house lots
or multifamily residential development as permitted in the
underlying district.
(b)
Enlargement or alteration of existing uses that do not conform
to the Water Supply Protection Overlay District.
(c)
(1)
G.
§ 300-50 BEVERLY CODE § 300-50
1:582
Activities that involve the handling of toxic or hazardous
materials in quantities greater than those associated with
normal household use, as permitted in the underlying zoning
district.
(d)
Special permit applications shall be made, reviewed, and acted
upon in accordance with the following procedures:
An application, plan and filing fee shall be submitted in
accordance with the Rules of the Planning Board for the
Issuance of Special Permits and will be processed in
accordance with the procedural requirements of MGL c. 40A,
§ 9.
(a)
The Planning Board shall forward the special permit
application to the Board of Health, Conservation Commission,
Department of Public Services, Engineering Department and
the Salem and Beverly Water Supply Board (SBWSB) for
review and comment. These boards, commissions and
departments shall forward a recommendation to the Planning
Board within 30 days of submittal, but may request an
additional thirty-day extension of time for providing comment.
(b)
Applications shall, at a minimum, include the following
information where pertinent:
Description of the proposed project, including location and
extent of impervious surfaces; on-site processes or storage
of materials; the anticipated use of the land and buildings;
description of the site, including topographic, hydrologic
and vegetative surfaces.
[1]
Characteristics of natural runoff and projected runoff with
the proposed project, including its rate and chemical
characteristics deemed necessary to make an accurate
assessment of water quality.
[2]
Measures proposed to be employed to reduce the rate
of runoff and pollutant loading of runoff from the project
area, both during and after construction.
[3]
Proposed runoff control and reservoir protection measures
for the site. These measures shall be designed with the
goal of ensuring that the rate of surface water runoff from
the site does not exceed pre-development conditions and
that the quality of such runoff will not be less than predevelopment
conditions.
[4]
A complete list of chemicals, pesticides, herbicides,
fertilizers, fuels, and other potentially hazardous materials
to be used or stored on the premises in quantities greater
than those associated with normal household use.
[5]
(c)
(2)
§ 300-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-50
1:583
For those activities using or storing such hazardous
materials, a hazardous materials management plan shall
also be prepared and filed with the Fire Department and
Board of Health. The plan shall include:
Provisions to protect against the discharge of
hazardous materials or wastes to the environment due
to spillage, accidental damage, corrosion leakage, or
vandalism, including spill containment and clean-up
procedures;
[a]
Provisions for indoor, secured storage of hazardous
materials and wastes with impervious floor surfaces;
[b]
Evidence of compliance with the Massachusetts
Hazardous Waste Regulations, 310 CMR 30.00; and
[c]
Proposed down-gradient location(s) for a groundwater
monitoring well(s), should the Planning Board deem
the activity a potential groundwater threat.
[d]
[6]
The Planning Board may adopt regulations to govern design
features of projects.
The Planning Board may grant the required special permit
only upon finding that the proposed use meets the
conditions set forth in § 300-91B, any other applicable
regulations or guidelines adopted by the Planning Board,
and the following additional conditions:
The proposed use in no way, during construction or
thereafter, adversely affects the existing or potential
quality of water that is available in the Water Supply
Protection Overlay District; and
[a]
The proposed construction has been designed to avoid
unnecessary disturbance of the soils, topography,
drainage, vegetation, and other water-related natural
characteristics of the site to be developed.
[b]
[1]
The Planning Board may deny a proposed project or
activity if it finds that such project or activity violates
the purposes of this overlay district, has an adverse
environmental impact on the watershed, aquifer and/or
recharge area or adversely affects the existing or potential
public water supply. Appeals of the Planning Board's
decision may be taken to the Board of Appeals for further
public hearing.
[2]
(d)
Enforcement. Written notice of any violations of this chapter shall
be given to the responsible person by the Director of Municipal
Inspections as soon as possible after detection of a violation or a
H.
§ 300-50 BEVERLY CODE § 300-50
1:584
§ 300-51. IR Overlay District. [Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230]
The IR Overlay District is established to provide principally for mixed-use
commercial development within the IR District. See § 300-42.
§ 300-52. Depot Parking Overlay District. [Amended 7-12-2011 by
Ord. No. 61]
The Depot Parking Overlay District addresses parking requirements for
certain residential units within walking distance of the Beverly MBTA
Depot. See § 300-40.168
continuing violation. Notice to the assessed owner of the property
shall be deemed notice to the responsible person. Such notice shall
specify the requirement or restriction violated and the nature of the
violation, and may also identify the actions necessary to remove or
remedy the violations and preventive measures required for avoiding
future violations and a schedule of compliance. A copy of such notice
shall be submitted to the Planning Board, Board of Health,
Conservation Commission, Department of Public Services, and the
Salem and Beverly Water Supply Board. The cost of containment, cleanup,
or other action of compliance shall be borne by the owner and
operator of the premises jointly and severally. If a plan to remedy the
violation is not provided to the Director of Municipal Inspections within
30 days of the deliverance of the notice of violation, the Director of
Municipal Inspections is authorized to assess a fine of no more than
$100 per day until the remediation plan is provided to the Planning
Board.167
167. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
168. Editor's Note: Original § 38-31F, Beverly Harbor Interim Planning Overlay District
(BHIPOD), added 9-2-2014 by Ord. No. 131, which immediately followed this section, was
repealed 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314. See now the Beverly Harbor District in § 300-46 of this
chapter.
§ 300-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-52
1:585

ARTICLE IX
Special Density and Dimensional Regulations
§ 300-53. Planned Residential Development (PRD).
Purposes. The purpose of planned residential development is to provide
for innovative design and flexibility in residential development, to
provide for a mixture of housing types at certain locations, to provide
for the economical installation and maintenance of streets and utilities,
and to conserve open space and natural amenities.
A.
Use regulations. In any R-90, R-45, R-22, R-15, RMD, and RSD Districts,
the Board of Appeals may permit by special permit a planned
residential development comprising a combination of the following
uses: [Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 115; 6-24-2004 by Ord.
No. 161]
(1) One-family dwellings;
(2) Two-family dwellings;
(3) Semidetached dwellings;
(4) Multifamily dwellings (rental or otherwise);
(5) Public or private schools;
(6) Public recreation and open space;
(7) Fire stations, and other public facilities;
Membership clubs for the exclusive use of residents of the PRD;
and
(8)
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities, structures,
and/or towers.
(9)
B.
Procedure. Application for a special permit for a PRD shall be filed and
processed in accordance with Article XIII, unless otherwise provided
herein. Site plan review by the Planning Board is also required for
PRDs; see § 300-98 for procedures and filing requirements. The Board
of Appeals shall not take final action on an application for PRD until
it has received a report thereon from the Planning Board within 35
days or until said Planning Board has allowed 35 days to elapse without
submission of a report. An approved site plan shall thereafter be subject
to the requirements of the City of Beverly (Planning Board rules and
regulations).
C.
Development requirements. A PRD shall be subject to the requirements
for the district in which the project is located, except in the case of
existing structures, and except where modified and supplemented as
follows:
(1) Minimum lot area.
D.
§ 300-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-53
1:587
Minimum lot area of a PRD shall be:
[1] R-15 District: five acres.
[2] R-22 District: seven acres.
[3] R-45 District: 10 acres.
[4] R-90 District: 12 acres.
(a)
(b) There shall be no PRDs in the R-6 or R-10 District.
At least 30% of the gross area of the PRD shall be dedicated as
permanent open space for the protection of natural drainage areas,
the conservation of woodlands and other natural amenities, parks
and recreation and other such public natural uses described or
shown on the Comprehensive Plan and Official Map of the City of
Beverly.
Upon recommendation of the Planning Board, such open space
shall be either deeded to the City of Beverly for public use or
conservation, subject to approval thereof by the City Council;
covenanted by the owner or developer with an association of
residents of the PRD as permanent open space. If such space is
retained in private ownership, as a condition in the granting of
a special permit to permit the PRD, the owner or developer of
the PRD shall establish a procedure for maintaining the open
space in an orderly state.169
(a)
This dedicated open space shall not include parking areas or
drives and shall not be within the minimum yard requirements
for building in the particular zoning district.
(b)
(2)
Lot requirements for one-family dwellings in a PRD may be reduced
to not less than those dimensional requirements set forth in the
next least restrictive R District in which the PRD is proposed.
(3)
The maximum density in dwelling units per gross area of a
proposed PRD shall be the same as allowed in that district for
a single-family dwelling as set forth in the requirements for the
zoning district in which the project is located. This density
calculation shall exclude wetlands as defined by MGL Chapter 131
as amended, and shall exclude any standing bodies of water. The
applicant will file a request for determination with the Beverly
Conservation Commission at the same time as filing with the
special permit granting authority to determine the wetland area of
the lot.
(4)
A PRD site at the time of application shall be served by both
public water and sewer systems, such systems to be of sufficient
(5)
169. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-53 BEVERLY CODE § 300-53
1:588
§ 300-54. Open space residential design (OSRD) site plans.171
[Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 105]
This section encourages land-sensitive construction, siting and design of
significant new residential projects through a cooperative exploration of
alternatives which allows relaxation of current zoning and subdivision
dimensional standards and which permits increased density in return for
achievement of open space preservation targets.
capacity to accommodate increased density of development of the
PRD as determined and approved by the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works. The provisions of
this subsection may be waived by the Director of Engineering,
Commissioner of Public Services, Public Works.170
The provisions of this section are optional. The Planning Board or
the Board of Appeals is not required to approve a PRD plan where
it finds that, by increasing the density of the tract, the general area
would be affected adversely by such action.
(6)
Purpose and intent.
The primary purposes for this section are the following:
To allow for greater flexibility and creativity in the design of
residential developments.
(a)
To encourage the protection and permanent preservation of
open space, forestry land, wildlife habitat, other natural
resources, including public water supplies, aquifers, water
bodies and wetlands, and historical resources in a manner that
is consistent with Beverly's Master Plan and Open Space and
Recreation Action Plan (together, the "master plans").
(b)
To encourage a less sprawling and more efficient form of
development that consumes less open land and conforms to
existing topography and natural features better than a
conventional or grid subdivision.
(c)
(d) To minimize the total amount of disturbance on the site.
(e) To further the goals and policies of the master plans.
To facilitate the construction and maintenance of housing,
streets, utilities, and public service in a more economical and
efficient manner.
(f)
(1)
A.
170. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
171. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 350, Open Space Residential Design Guidelines.
§ 300-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:589
To protect the regional water supply from contamination and
to ensure it will be adequate to serve population requirements
in the future.
(g)
The secondary purposes for this section are the following:
(a) To protect the value of real property.
(b) To provide for a diversified housing stock.
To provide affordable housing to persons of low and moderate
income.
(c)
(2)
Applicability.
Covered projects shall be subject to this section. A covered project
shall include any development or construction of new housing
(including a condominium) on a tract of land that: [Amended
7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
Will create four or more buildable lots by reason of a
subdivision in the R-10, R-15 and R-22 Zones; or
(a)
Will create four or more new dwelling units (excluding new
units in an existing building) in the R-10, R-15 and R-22 Zones;
or
(b)
Consists of an area of two acres or more in the R-10, R-15 and
R-22 Zones; or
(c)
Consists of an area of 180,000 square feet (i.e., just over four
acres) or more in the R-45 Zone and will create three or
more buildable lots by reason of a subdivision or four or more
dwelling units (excluding new units in an existing building); or
(d)
Consists of an area of 300,000 square feet (just under seven
acres) or more in the R-90 Zone and will create three or
more buildable lots by reason of a subdivision or four or more
dwelling units (excluding new units in an existing building).
(e)
(1)
Zoning classification. This section shall apply only to those tracts
(or to the portions thereof) located in one or more of the City's
R-10, R-15, R-22, R-45, and R-90 Residential Zoning Districts, but
shall not apply to any tract or portion of a tract in an R-6, RSD,
RHD or RMD Zoning District. Any other residential project in a
zoning district other than R-6, RSD, RHD, or RMD may elect to
be subject to this section, but such election shall not eliminate
the requirement to obtain a use variance or special permit where
otherwise required in such nonresidential zoning district.
(2)
Tract.
A "tract" for the purposes of this section shall consist of one
or more contiguous lots under single legal or beneficial
(a)
(3)
B.
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:590
ownership or proposed to be developed as a single project,
including in phases. Lots separated only by a private way shall
be considered contiguous for the purposes of this section.
The calculation of the area of a tract shall be the same as the
calculation of the area of a lot as set forth in the definition of
"lot" in § 300-5. [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
(b)
This section shall not prevent endorsement of any qualified
approval not required (ANR) plan but shall apply to all covered
projects after ANR endorsement has been received or
obtained.
(c)
The Planning Board may waive the requirements of this section
for any approval not required (ANR) plan, provided that it finds
that:
[1] No new building lots are being created; or
No more than two new building lots are created and:
[Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
The owner and his/her successors in title, through
deed restriction, relinquish all rights of future division
that will create additional building lots together or in
conjunction with land outside the tract; and
[a]
The applicant provides a plan identifying and
delineating primary and secondary conservation
areas, potentially buildable areas, and, where
possible, proposed house location(s); and
[b]
The applicant satisfies the Planning Board that siting
of the new house(s) and associated site improvements,
including stormwater management, conforms to the
purposes and intent of this section.
[c]
[2]
(d)
OSRD site plan approval. No building permit shall be issued for,
nor any construction or foundation work be commenced on, any
portion of a covered project without first obtaining OSRD site plan
approval pursuant to this section for the entire project.
(4)
Initial review.
Initial review. Prior to submitting its application for an OSRD site
plan approval, the applicant shall participate in initial review at one
or more meetings of the Planning Board.
The Planning Board shall send prior written notice of such
review to the Beverly City Council, the Beverly Conservation
Commission, the Beverly Board of Health, the Beverly Open
Space and Recreation Committee, and such other municipal or
regional entities as it shall judge appropriate. Such council,
(a)
(1)
C.
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:591
commission, board, committee, or other entity may send a
representative to speak in an official or unofficial capacity
during such review. In addition, the Planning Board shall, at
the applicant's expense, send written notice, at least seven
days prior to the initial meeting at which such review shall take
place, to each abutter and abutter of an abutter of the tract.
The Planning Board shall also, at the applicant's expense, send
legal notice of the initial meeting for publication in a
newspaper of general circulation at least seven days prior to
said meeting. The purpose of initial review is to commence
discussions with the Planning Board at the earliest possible
stage in the development.
At or during the initial review; the applicant shall submit two
or more conceptual plans showing materially different
alternative development configurations, shall describe the
development and how it furthers the goals of this section, shall
incorporate the four-step general design process described in
Subsection E below, seek feedback from the Planning Board
and/or its technical experts, and indicate a possible timetable
for submittal of a formal application. Conceptual plans shall
not be detailed, but shall show the general features of the site
and the possible location of structures and ways. Imaginative
and creative land use planning should be applied with the aim
of furthering the purposes of this section.
(b)
At the expense of the applicant, the Planning Board may
engage technical experts to perform preliminary review of the
plans submitted by the applicant in order to facilitate selection
of a preferred plan [as described in Subsection C(2) below] and
submittal of a formal application for OSRD site plan approval.
Prior to the initial review meeting, the Planning Board shall
request comments from the Conservation Commission on all
ecologically sensitive areas within its jurisdiction, including,
but not limited to, wetlands, water bodies, and their buffer
zones.
(c)
The initial review may extend over more than one meeting or
session and shall not constitute or require a public hearing.
However, members of the public shall be welcome to speak
during a required public comment period to be held prior to
the selection of a preferred plan. The public is also encouraged
to submit comments in writing to the Planning Board with
respect to any proposed concept plan or preferred plan.
(d)
The applicant is encouraged to meet with abutters and
neighbors prior to submitting a preferred plan to discuss the
applicant's intentions and possible alternative configurations.
The applicant shall inform the Planning Board of the substance
of its meetings with abutters and neighbors.
(e)
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:592
Preferred plan. At least one concept plan submitted during the
initial review shall be amended, refined and conditioned so as
to constitute a "preferred plan" as described below. Submission
during the initial review stage of at least three concept plans
showing alternative development configurations is strongly
encouraged.
The applicant shall not submit a preferred plan until the
Planning Board and the applicant have discussed the initial
concept plans and alternative development and conservation
configurations so that the input of the Planning Board and
Conservation Commission can be taken into account in the
creation of a preferred plan depicting the configuration which
best addresses the objectives of this section.
(a)
The preferred plan shall address the general features and
topography of the land, identify major types and the size of
vegetation, and give configurations of the lots. The preferred
plan shall also show roadways, open space, wetlands, water
bodies, and their buffer zones and shall include such other
information as may be required in the OSRD Site Plan Rules
and Regulations.172
(b)
The applicant must demonstrate that the preferred plan
incorporates the four-step general design process set forth in
Subsection E below, and the design standards according to
Subsection F(3) below, when determining a proposed design
for the development.
(c)
(2)
Yield plan. Before approval of the preferred plan by the Planning
Board in the initial review, the applicant shall submit a yield plan
(as defined in Subsection D below). Approval of a yield plan shall
be subject to a public hearing, which shall occur as early in the
initial review process as reasonably possible but no later than 45
days after submission of the initial review application. The Planning
Board shall, at the applicant's expense, send written notice, at least
seven days prior to the public hearing, to each abutter and abutter
of an abutter of the tract. The Planning Board shall also, at the
applicant's expense, send legal notice of the public hearing for
publication in a newspaper of general circulation at least seven
days prior to said meeting. [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
(3)
Rules and regulations. The Planning Board shall adopt rules and
regulations relative to the size, form, number and contents of the
conceptual plans, preferred plan, yield plan and OSRD site plan.
[Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
(4)
Approval of preferred plan. A preferred plan which does not exceed
the basic maximum number of dwelling units possible under the
(5)
172. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Open Space Residential Design Guidelines.
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:593
yield plan shall be approved by the Planning Board subject to such
conditions as it deems appropriate to achieve the goals of this
section. When the Planning Board approves the preferred plan, the
applicant may then file an application for OSRD site plan approval.
Approval of a preferred plan shall not foreclose further review
or amendment of the yield plan or preferred plan during public
hearings on an OSRD site plan application under Subsection F
below.
Basic maximum number (of lots/units). In order for a preferred plan to
be approved, the number of lots or dwelling units on the tract shall not
exceed the basic maximum number, as defined below.
The basic maximum number shall be the maximum number of
lots (or, where no subdivision or lot division is involved, number
of dwelling units) that could be placed upon the tract under a
conventional subdivision or development plan pursuant to thenapplicable
zoning and subdivision requirements (other than this
section), without variances or waivers of any kind, including from
other bodies having regulatory authority over the development or
any portion thereof (such as the Conservation Commission and
Board of Health) unless such variances or waivers have already
been obtained from such other authority, and accurately depicted
on a yield plan. Waivers from Chapter 375, Subdivision of Land,
are permitted in determining the basic maximum number. Such
waivers must be sought and obtained during the OSRD process,
but prior to acceptance of a yield plan. The yield plan shall display
the general features and topography of the land shown on the
preferred plan, the dimensions, areas, and locations of the lots,
open space, roadways, wetlands, water bodies, and their buffer
zones and such other information as is required from time to time
by the OSRD rules and regulations. [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 24]
(1)
The applicant shall have the burden of proof in establishing the
basic maximum number of lots (or dwelling units) resulting from
the design and engineering specifications shown on the yield plan.
The Planning Board shall consider at least the following factors in
determining if such burden of proof has been met:
The applicant has demonstrated through title insurance or
other acceptable evidence that it is the owner of, or in control
of, the entire tract depicted within the OSRD site plan;
(a)
The existence of wetlands pursuant to an approved
abbreviated notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD) as
described in Subsection E(1) below and other environmental
and regulatory constraints upon development have been
adequately shown and dealt with; and
(b)
(2)
D.
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:594
The applicant demonstrates that under then-current market
conditions the number of dwelling units, and their related
improvements and infrastructure, as shown on the yield plan
could be reasonably and economically constructed.
(c)
General design process. During the OSRD site plan initial review and
approval process, but no later than the time of submittal of the
preferred plan described above, applicants shall demonstrate to the
Planning Board that the following steps, in the order indicated, (i)
were performed by a licensed landscape architect and registered
professional engineer and (ii) were followed in determining the layout
of proposed streets, buildings, house lots, and open space as shown on
the required plans. [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
Step One: Identifying Conservation Areas. Identify preservation
land by two steps:
First, primary conservation areas (such as wetland resource
areas, riverfront areas, and floodplains regulated by local,
state or federal law) and additional conservation areas
(including elements of the natural landscape such as steep
slopes, mature woodlands, prime farmland, meadows, wildlife
habitats and cultural features such as historic sites, historic
structures, and scenic views) shall be identified and
delineated. Wetlands resource areas shall be determined by
the Conservation Commission pursuant to the ANRAD process
under Chapter 287, Wetlands Protection, of the City Code,
and the regulations in Chapter 565, Wetlands Protection
Regulations.
(a)
Second, the potentially developable area will be identified and
delineated. To the maximum extent feasible, the potentially
developable area shall consist of land outside identified
primary and additional conservation areas. The potentially
developable area shall not be construed as the final buildable
area as defined by Subsection H(1)(b).
(b)
(1)
Step Two: Locating Housing Sites. Locate the approximate sites of
all residential buildings within the potentially developable area.
(2)
Step Three: Aligning Streets and Ways. Align streets in order to
access the house lots and residential buildings. In addition, new
access ways should be laid out to create internal and external
connections to existing and/or potential future streets, sidewalks,
trails and bicycle paths.
(3)
Step Four: Lot Lines. Draw in new lot lines (where applicable)
and include the delineation of private yards, exclusive easement
areas, and shared amenities, with a design that seeks to encourage
an integrated community within the proposed development and
further the goals of the Master Plan and the Open Space and
(4)
E.
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:595
Recreation Action Plan. Shared amenities should be located so as
to encourage use by persons inside and outside of the covered
project.
Site plan approval process.
OSRD site plan. A proposed OSRD site plan shall be a fully
engineered plan, conforming to the provisions of this section all
the provisions of the OSRD site plan rules and regulations,173 and
site plan review in accordance with § 300-98B, to the extent that
§ 300-98B does not conflict with this section. The proposed OSRD
site plan shall incorporate the features and comply with the
conditions of the approved preferred plan and, in addition, shall
also include stormwater management, including best management
practices, wastewater management, utilities, and all other
information as required by subdivision ordinances, rules and
regulations.174 [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
(1)
General procedures.
When an application for approval of an OSRD site plan is filed
with the Planning Board, the applicant shall also file, within
five working days of the filing of the completed application,
a copy of the full application, including proposed site plan
and other documentation, with each of the Board of Health,
Conservation Commission, Building Inspector, Design Review
Board, Parking and Traffic Commission, Department of Public
Works, Police Chief, Fire Chief, and City Engineer for their
consideration, review, and report. The applicant shall furnish
the copies necessary to fulfill this requirement. Reports from
other boards and officials shall be submitted to the Planning
Board within 45 days of receipt by the reviewing party of all
of the required materials. In the event that the public hearing
by the Planning Board is commenced prior to the expiration of
the forty-five-day period, the Planning Board shall continue the
public hearing to permit the formal submission of reports and
recommendations within that forty-five-day period.
(a)
The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 90 days
of receipt of a complete application. The decision of the
Planning Board shall be upon a majority of its members. After
consideration of the public's concerns, the Planning Board
shall make and file its decision with the City Clerk within 65
days from the close of the public hearing, and shall notify the
applicant of its decision. A copy of the decision, certified by
the City Clerk as appropriate, shall be recorded with the Essex
South District Registry of Deeds or the Essex South Registry
District of the Land Court, as appropriate, by the applicant
(b)
(2)
F.
173. Editor's Note: See Ch. 350, Open Space Residential Design Guidelines.
174. Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Subdivision of Land.
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:596
prior to the commencement of work. The decision shall be
binding on the land depicted on the approved site plan.
OSRD site plan approval shall lapse after one year from the
grant thereof if a substantial use thereof has not sooner
commenced, except for good cause. Such approval may, for
good cause, be extended from time to time in writing by the
Planning Board, without public hearing, upon the written
request of the applicant.
(c)
Design standards. In approving an OSRD site plan, the Planning
Board may impose conditions to ensure that the site plan furthers
the objectives of the master plans and complies with the following
design standards:
Generic design standards.
The site plan shall promote more effectively permanent
preservation of open space, agricultural land, forestry
land, natural resources and historical and archeological
resources than would a conventional subdivision [for
purposes of this section, a "conventional subdivision" shall
mean a subdivision designed in full accordance with
applicable subdivision rules and regulations (other than
pursuant to this section) without waivers of any kind].
[1]
The site plan shall consume less undeveloped land and
shall conform to existing topography and natural features
more than a conventional subdivision.
[2]
The site plan shall have less total amount of disturbance
on the site than a conventional subdivision.
[3]
The site plan shall facilitate the construction and
maintenance of streets, utilities, and public service in a
more economical, safe and efficient manner than a
conventional subdivision, and all utilities shall be
underground within the proposed development.
[4]
The landscape within the site plan shall be preserved in
its natural state, insofar as practicable, by minimizing tree
and soil removal. The orientation of building sites shall
be such as to maintain maximum natural topography and
cover. Topography, tree cover, and natural drainageways
shall be treated as primary determinants of road and lot
configuration.
[5]
Streets and other ways within the site plan shall be
designed, dimensioned and located, consistent with the
needs of public safety, in such a manner as to maintain and
preserve natural topography, significant landmarks, and
trees; to minimize cut and fill; and, insofar as practicable,
[6]
(a)
(3)
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:597
to preserve and enhance views and vistas on or off the
subject parcel.
All open space (landscaped and usable) shall be designed
to add to the visual amenities of the area by maximizing its
visibility for persons passing the site or overlooking it from
nearby properties.
[7]
The removal or disruption of historic, traditional or
significant uses, structures, or architectural elements shall
be minimized, whether these exist on the site or on
adjacent properties.
[8]
Parking areas shall be screened to the extent required by
Article X of this chapter.
[9]
Site-specific design standards.
Parking. Each dwelling unit shall be served by two offstreet
parking spaces. Parking spaces in front of garages
may count in this computation.
[1]
Buffer areas. A buffer area of at least 25 feet shall be
provided at the following locations: perimeter of the
property; and a buffer area of at least 100 feet around
primary conservation areas [as defined in Subsection E(1)
above]. Such buffer areas shall be free of aboveground
structures and improvements, except that driveways
necessary for access to and egress from the tract and
other accessways may cross such buffer areas. No
vegetation in this buffer area will be disturbed, destroyed
or removed, except for installation and normal
maintenance of structures and landscapes approved as
part of the project. The Planning Board may waive, reduce
or increase the buffer requirement in those locations
where it determines that a smaller or larger buffer (or
no buffer) is necessary, or will suffice, to accomplish the
objectives set forth herein; provided always that no buffer
requirement herein shall be applied so as to render any
tract unusable, and any variation from the required buffer
area shall be rationally related to accomplishing the
objectives of this section. [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord.
No. 24]
[2]
Drainage. The Planning Board shall encourage the use of
nonstructural stormwater management techniques (such
as rain gardens and open grass and bioretention swales)
and other drainage techniques that do not create
impervious surface and that enable infiltration.
Stormwater should be treated at the source to limit nonpoint
source pollution. Water conservation measures,
[3]
(b)
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:598
including but not limited to the use of rainwater retention
systems, such as rain barrels and cisterns for water
irrigation purposes, are also strongly encouraged.
Common/Shared driveways. A common or shared driveway
may serve a maximum number of six lots.
[4]
Stormwater management facilities. All structural surface
stormwater management facilities shall be accompanied
by a conceptual landscape and screening plan.
[5]
On-site pedestrian and bicycle circulation. Walkways and
bicycle paths shall be provided to link residences with
parking areas, adjacent public transportation, recreation
facilities (including parkland and open space) and adjacent
land uses, such as trails and open space identified in the
open space and recreation action plan, where appropriate.
The feasibility of a perimeter path shall be considered.
[6]
Undisturbed areas. At least 50% of the total tract shall be
undisturbed, whether by initial or subsequent construction
or structures and, except as otherwise provided in
Subsection H(1)(d), shall be shown on the OSRD site plan
as "Not To Be Disturbed." An undisturbed area is any land
left in its natural vegetated state.
[7]
Disturbed areas. Within areas to be disturbed, the
applicant shall show all trees of ten-inch caliper or greater
and present justification for their disturbance or removal.
[8]
Site visit. The Planning Board shall conduct a site visit during the
site plan approval process. At the site visit, the Planning Board and
its agents shall be accompanied by the applicant and its agents.
Members of the general public may be included at the discretion of
the applicant and with the acquiescence of the Planning Board.
(4)
Other information. The submittals and permits of this Subsection
F shall be in addition to any other requirements of the Subdivision
Control Law, Chapter 375, Subdivision of Land, or any other
provisions of this chapter.
(5)
Permitted reduction of dimensional requirements. The Planning Board,
which shall have the power, in its discretion, to waive or reduce
frontage or other dimensional or subdivision requirements for such
purpose, shall encourage applicants to modify lot size, shape, and other
dimensional requirements for lots and ways within an OSRD site plan,
in order to further the goals of this section, subject to the following
limitations: [Amended 7-2-2008 by Ord. No. 24]
Lots having reduced area or frontage shall not have their legal
frontage on a street other than a street created by the OSRD,
provided that this limitation shall not apply in the case of lots
(1)
G.
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:599
created by an ANR plan, nor shall it apply to lots created by a
subdivision plan if its application would conflict with the purposes
or with other provisions of this OSRD.
Reduction of otherwise applicable setback requirements shall not
be permitted with respect to those setbacks measured from any
exterior boundary of the tract.
(2)
Nothing in this Subsection G shall permit, or be deemed to permit,
the construction or use of more dwelling units per lot than are
otherwise permitted in the applicable zoning district.
(3)
The dimensional requirements imposed upon any lot created by the
OSRD shall not be less than a lot area of 6,000 square feet, a front
yard setback of 20 feet, a side yard setback of 10 feet on one side
(one side yard may have a zero-foot side yard setback, provided
that only a lot line created by the proposed OSRD may have such a
zero-foot side yard setback), and a rear yard setback of 25 feet; nor
shall a building height greater than 35 feet be permitted. However,
a dimensional limitation imposed by this Subsection G(4) shall not
apply to a lot if a majority of members of the Planning Board
entitled to vote determines that such an application unnecessarily
frustrates the purposes of this section.
(4)
The subdivision requirements imposed upon any roadway created
within the OSRD development shall not be less than a right-ofway
width of 40 feet, a roadway width of 24 feet, and a maximum
roadway grade of 8%. However, a dimensional limitation imposed
by this Subsection G(5) shall not apply to an OSRD development
if a majority of members of the Planning Board entitled to vote
determines that such an application unnecessarily frustrates the
purposes of this section.
(5)
The sidewalk requirements for any way created within the OSRD
development shall be the following: A sidewalk shall extend the
full length of one side of the way and shall be a minimum width
of five feet. The Planning Board may allow pedestrian access that
is not parallel to the street in lieu of one or more sidewalks as
described above. The sidewalk requirement may be eliminated
by the Planning Board if it makes a finding that the connecting,
existing roadways do not have existing sidewalks, or if alternative
pedestrian access is provided within the OSRD development. When
it determines that it is appropriate to do so, the Planning Board
may waive the sidewalk requirement if it makes a finding that other
provisions are made within the tract to safely and adequately lead
pedestrians to connecting sidewalks outside of the tract.
(6)
Open space requirements.
Open space. A minimum of 50% of the buildable area [as defined
below in Subsection H(1)(b)] shown on the OSRD site plan shall be
open space meeting the following criteria:
(1)
H.
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:600
All proposed open space shall be conveyed to at least one
conservation entity [as defined below in Subsection H(2)] for
conservation purposes. The open space shall be perpetually
preserved in an open or natural state as described below,
exclusively for the purposes set forth herein, and shall be
maintained in a manner which will ensure its suitability for
such intended purposes.
(a)
The buildable area shall consist of that portion of the tract
that does not consist of either (i) wetlands, (ii) that portion
of the wetland buffer zone within 25 feet of a wetland, or
(iii) areas having a slope of more than 20%; however, the
Planning Board may reduce such open space requirement in
any instance where the strict application thereof would render
a tract effectively unbuildable. Input from the Conservation
Commission concerning the wetland resources shall be
requested.
(b)
The open space sufficient to meet the minimum requirements
shall be contiguous. Open space shall be considered
contiguous if a roadway or an accessory amenity separates it.
(c)
The primary purpose of the open space shall be for wildlife
habitat and conservation. The open space can also be used
for the following secondary purposes: historic preservation,
education, outdoor education, passive recreation, or a
combination of these uses, and shall be served by suitable
access. The Planning Board may permit up to 5% of the open
space to be paved for the dedicated use of such open space
(e.g., pedestrian walks and bike paths). Limited portions of
the open space may be reserved for active outdoor recreation
when consistent with the goals of the Beverly open space
and recreation plan, provided that such reservation is not
materially inconsistent with the wildlife habitat and
conservation purposes of this section.
(d)
The open space shall be subject to a management plan to
be approved by the Planning Board as part of the OSRD site
plan approval. The purpose of the management plan is to
provide guidance for the maintenance and stewardship of the
open space and any facilities accessory thereto. Input from
the Conservation Commission and Open Space and Recreation
Committee concerning the management plan is encouraged.
(e)
Wastewater and stormwater management systems serving the
OSRD may be located within the open space; however, surface
systems, such as retention and detention ponds, shall not
qualify toward the minimum open space required.
(f)
Open space shall be disturbed to the minimum extent possible
during construction upon the tract. The applicant shall show
(g)
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:601
all areas proposed to be disturbed within the tract and shall
present justification for the use or disturbance of those areas.
A higher level of scrutiny will be applied to areas within the
proposed open space that are proposed to be disturbed.
No provision in this section shall be deemed to preclude an
applicant from providing an endowment to a conservation
entity for the purpose of securing the maintenance,
stewardship, and enforcement of the open space, and
applicants are encouraged to provide such an endowment. In
the case of a conservation entity under Subsection H(2)(c)[1]
below, however, any such endowment shall be in addition to,
and not in replacement of, the cash bond referred to in
Subsection H(2)(c)[2].
(h)
Each deed conveying open space to a conservation entity
under Subsection H(2)(a) or (b) below shall include a provision
expressly stating that the preservation of such open space
constitutes a public purpose within the meaning and subject to
the protections of Article 97 of the Massachusetts Constitution,
as it may be amended from time to time. Each deed conveying
open space to a conservation entity under Subsection H(2)(c)
below also shall be deemed for the benefit of the owners of
the lots within the OSRD site plan. Such deed provisions shall
be submitted to the Planning Board for approval, and shall
thereafter be recorded.
(i)
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit building within a
wetlands resource area (as defined in Chapter 287, Wetlands
Protection, of the City Code, and the regulations in Chapter
565, Wetlands Protection Regulations) with the permission of
the Conservation Commission to the extent such permission is
required by law, ordinance, or regulation.
(j)
Other than perimeter buffer zones required by this section,
required open space shall be provided to the maximum extent
possible within wetlands buffer zones.
(k)
Ownership of the open space. The open space and any facilities
accessory thereto shall, at the applicant's election, be conveyed to,
and shall be held as open space in perpetuity by, one or more of the
following (each a "conservation entity"):
The City, acting by and through its Conservation Commission
or its Parks and Recreation Department or the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts as part of a state forest, park, or wildlife
management area; provided, further, that in the case of the
City, any endowment provided under Subsection H(1)(h) above
shall be administered by the Planning Board in the same
manner as a cash bond under Subsection H(2)(c) below, except
(a)
(2)
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:602
that all such endowments held by the City may be pooled and
administered and applied collectively.
A nonprofit organization, the principal purpose of which is the
conservation of open space and any of the purposes for such
open space set forth above.
(b)
Association.
A corporation or trust owned jointly or in common by
the owners of lots within the OSRD site plan (either an
"association"). If an association is used, an ownership
interest in the association shall pass with conveyance of
each of the lots in perpetuity. Physical maintenance and
stewardship of the open space and any facilities accessory
thereto, and legal enforcement of the provisions of the site
plan approval applicable to the open space and accessory
facilities, including the management plan (hereinafter the
"association obligations"), shall be permanently
guaranteed by, and at the sole expense of, such
association, which shall provide for mandatory
assessments for such purposes to each lot.
[1]
In addition, the applicant shall post a cash bond to secure
the association obligations. Such cash bond shall be in the
initial amount of up to $25,000 per project, to be held
by the City in a segregated fund for such project solely
for such purposes, any use thereof to be subject to the
prior approval of the Planning Board in each instance.
Each association shall be deemed to have assented to
allow the City to perform maintenance of such open space
and accessory facilities, if the association fails to perform
the association obligations, and shall grant the City an
easement for this purpose. In such event, the City shall
first provide 14 days' written notice to the association as to
the inadequate performance of the association obligations,
and, if the association fails to correct in a timely manner
its inadequate performance, the City may perform the
association obligations on its behalf, and the cost thereof
may be paid from the cash bond and any interest accrued
thereon. The City shall assess the association for (i)
amounts so used by the City from the cash bond, and
(ii) any excess above the cash bond paid or incurred by
the City, in exercise of the provisions of this Subsection
H(2)(c), including expenses of enforcing the association
obligations. Any amounts not paid in a timely manner
by the association shall constitute a lien on each of the
lots within the OSRD site plan, which may be collected
and enforced by the City in the same manner as real
estate taxes. Each individual deed, and the deed of trust
or articles of incorporation of the association, shall include
[2]
(c)
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-54
1:603
provisions designed to effect these provisions. Documents
creating such association shall be submitted to the
Planning Board for approval, and shall thereafter be
recorded.
Any open space conveyed to an association shall not be
deemed or required to be dedicated or conveyed for use
for a public purpose, and shall be preserved as open space
for the benefit of the owners of the lots within the OSRD
site plan. Nevertheless, an applicant or an association may
elect to dedicate or convey some or all of the open space
for use by the public, provided that such a dedication
or conveyance shall be subject to site plan review and
approval by the Planning Board. A second site plan review
and approval shall be necessary if the association changes
the applicant's initial decision after it acquires the lots.
[3]
Amendment or modification of approved OSRD site plans. No
amendment or modifications of an approved OSRD site plan shall be
valid unless first approved by the Planning Board, and no approval,
special permit or variance with respect to same shall be required
from the Zoning Board of Appeals. In its sole discretion, the Planning
Board may approve without public hearing those amendments or
modifications that are determined by a two-thirds majority of the
Planning Board members to be minor in nature.
I.
Relationship between the OSRD site plan and definitive subdivision
plan.
For projects subject to this section for which approval under the
Subdivision Control Law is necessary, the filing of either a
preliminary or a definitive subdivision plan with the Planning Board
shall be deemed the start of the initial review required by
Subsection C, unless such review has already started. Any site plan
approval issued by the Planning Board shall specifically state that
the definitive subdivision plan shall substantially comply with the
approved OSRD site plan.
(1)
Upon written request of the applicant, the Planning Board, in
its sole discretion, may conduct the public hearings on the
applications concurrently, provided that:
By so requesting, the applicant shall be irrevocably deemed
to have requested extensions from the Planning Board of the
time frames for hearing and final action under the Subdivision
Control Law in order to allow site plan approval to proceed as
stated in this section, including the provisions of Subsection
J(3) below;
(a)
The Planning Board's decision on site plan approval shall be
rendered separately from and prior to taking final action on the
definitive subdivision plan; and
(b)
(2)
J.
§ 300-54 BEVERLY CODE § 300-54
1:604
The Planning Board shall take final action with respect to the
definitive subdivision plan not later than 135 days after the
close of the public hearing on the site plan approval.
(c)
If such hearings are conducted concurrently, they may at any time
be severed by the Planning Board and thereafter conducted
separately, provided that in no event shall the public hearing on the
definitive subdivision plan be closed before the public hearing on
the OSRD site plan.
(3)
A definitive subdivision plan will be considered not to substantially
comply with the approved site plan if the Planning Board
determines that the definitive subdivision plan displays, in
comparison to such approved site plan:
(a) An increase in the number of building lots or dwelling units;
(b) A significant decrease in the open space acreage;
(c) A significant change in the lot layout;
A significant change in the general development pattern which
adversely affects natural landscape features and open space
preservation;
(d)
Significant changes to the stormwater management facilities;
and/or
(e)
(f) Significant changes in the wastewater management systems.
(4)
If the Planning Board determines that the definitive subdivision
plan does not substantially comply with the approved site plan, the
Board may disapprove the definitive subdivision plan for failure
to comply with the conditions of the site plan requiring that the
definitive plan substantially comply with the site plan.
(5)
The Planning Board may conditionally approve a definitive
subdivision plan that does not substantially comply with the
approved site plan. However, such conditional approval must
identify where the plan does not substantially comply with the
approved site plan and shall require that the approved site plan
be amended to be in compliance with the significant changes
identified by the Planning Board. The Planning Board shall also
require that the applicant file an application to amend the site plan
within a specified time period.
(6)
The public hearing on the application to amend the site plan shall
be limited to the significant changes identified by the Planning
Board in its conditional approval of the definitive subdivision plan.
These changes are the only considerations that the Planning Board
may take into account in deciding whether to amend the site plan.
[Amended 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 105]
(7)
§ 300-54 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-55
1:605
§ 300-55. Accessory apartments.
Intent and objectives. The accessory apartment requirements and
procedures outlined in this section are not intended to encourage the
public to acquire variances to allow for the construction of larger
dwellings for the use of accessory apartments. Instead, they are
intended to:
Enable homeowners of single-family dwellings larger than required
for their present needs to share space and burdens of home
ownership with a relative(s).
(1)
Create feasible housing alternatives for elderly people or other
relatives looking to stay in their homes, yet receive the help they
need for or from other relatives.
(2)
Encourage a diverse population with a particular focus on senior
citizens and young adults through the creation of an accessory
apartment in the familial home.
(3)
A.
Conditions and requirements. Notwithstanding provisions in this
chapter to the contrary, the Zoning Board of Appeals may consider the
granting of a special permit for the alteration of an existing singlefamily
residence to include an accessory apartment in any residential
zone, subject to the following provisions: [Amended 7-5-2012 by Ord.
No. 72]
An accessory apartment may be permitted to accommodate a
maximum of two people to live in proximity to, but with
independence from, a relative.
(1)
The application shall designate the individual(s) who is to occupy
the accessory apartment.
(2)
The alterations/additions necessary to create the accessory
apartment shall be limited to the principal dwelling.
(3)
There shall be no more than two dwelling units on said property,
including an accessory apartment.
(4)
The owner of record shall reside in one of the two dwelling units,
which shall be said owner's principal residence.
(5)
The size of the accessory apartment is not to exceed the lesser of
900 gross square feet or 30% of the gross floor area of the principal
unit. The square footage of the accessory apartment must meet the
minimum requirements of the state's sanitary code.
(6)
The accessory apartment shall be a self-contained dwelling unit
that shares a common vertical and/or horizontal wall with the
primary dwelling unit. Within the common vertical and/or
horizontal wall shall be a doorway so that the accessory unit may
be accessed from the primary unit.
(7)
B.
§ 300-55 BEVERLY CODE § 300-55
1:606
The principal dwelling unit shall have only one front entrance; any
new entrance shall be located on the side or in the rear of the
building. Where two or more entrances already exist on the front
facade of a dwelling, modifications made to any of the entrances
shall result in one entrance appearing to be the principal entrance
and other entrances appearing to be secondary. All stairways
leading to second or third stories shall be enclosed within the
exterior walls of the dwelling.
(8)
(9) The accessory apartment will have no more than two bedrooms.
Special permit for accessory apartment.
The special permit for an accessory apartment shall terminate:
[1] Upon the death of the designated occupant; or
Upon the change of residence of the designated occupant;
or
[2]
[3] Upon the transfer of ownership of the premises.
(a)
Following termination of said special permit, the owner shall
remove the kitchen built as a result of the special permit within
90 days.
(b)
The house will then revert to a single-family residence. The
accessory apartment shall not be held in or transferred into
separate ownership from the principal dwelling under a
condominium form of ownership, or otherwise.
(c)
(10)
An affidavit by the record owner, sworn under penalties of perjury,
with proper documentation is required with the application to
certify that the accessory apartment living area is for a relative(s).
The special permit shall be issued to the owner of the property.
The Building Inspector shall have the right, at a reasonable time,
to inspect the premises to determine compliance with the
requirements of this section and the special permit. Refusal of this
inspection may result in the revocation of the special permit.
(11)
In granting a special permit, the Board may impose such
conditions, including requirements for off-street parking and
limitations on other accessory uses of the premises, as it may deem
appropriate to avoid detriment to the neighborhood or to nearby
persons or property. The Board shall evaluate each special permit
application that involves exterior changes in the appearance and
character of the neighborhood and may require that there be no
change or minimal change to any building facade oriented toward
a public way or visible from a public way.
(12)
§ 300-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-56
1:607
§ 300-56. Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities.
[Amended 6-11-1996 by Ord. No. 115]
Commercial mobile radio service transmission facilities, structures, and/or
towers are allowed by special permit.
§ 300-57. Congregate housing for elderly and/or permanently
disabled residents. [Amended 7-20-1987; 6-30-1988; 3-6-1989;
7-1-1992]
A special permit may be granted by the Planning Board in any
residential district for congregate housing for elderly and/or
permanently disabled to permit the following:
All residential developments associated with Congregate housing
for elderly and/or permanently disabled.
(1)
Commercial uses associated with the functioning of congregate
housing, subject to specific, special requirements listed in
Subsection E below.
(2)
A.
Building and area requirements.
(1) Minimum lot area: 20 acres.
(2) Minimum lot frontage: 250 feet.
(3) Minimum setbacks (front, rear, and side): 125 feet.
(4) Maximum building height: 35 feet.
B.
Parking requirements. One and a quarter (1.25) parking spaces will
be provided for each individual unit; loading requirements shall be the
same as in Article X.
C.
Sign requirements. All signs showing the location of the project itself
shall conform to Article XI. No exterior signs advertising on-site
commercial uses and no illuminated interior signs displayed in windows
shall be permitted.
D.
Special requirements.
Commercial uses, as described above, shall not occupy more than
5% of the gross floor area of the entire complex and must be
housed within the main building on the site.
(1)
(2) The Design Review Board shall review all special permit requests.
Plans submitted for special permit requests must include a detailed
site and landscaping plan showing architectural renderings,
parking and egress plans.
(3)
A plan shall be prepared by the petitioner which shall, to the
extent allowable by law, give a preference for housing within the
(4)
E.
§ 300-56 BEVERLY CODE § 300-57
1:608
§ 300-58. Residential reuse of public buildings. [Amended 5-9-1988;
4-6-2007 by Ord. No. 1; 4-22-2010 by Ord. No. 3A]
development first to Beverly residents, then to immediate family
members of Beverly residents, and then to residents of cities or
towns which have a reciprocal agreement with the City of Beverly.
A plan shall be prepared by the petitioner which shall, to the extent
allowable by law, designate at least 10% of the units, or more at
the discretion of the permit granting authority, for the purpose of
providing affordable housing. For the purpose of this Subsection
E(5), the definition of affordable housing shall be based on at
least the Massachusetts Housing Finance Agency's (MHFA) or its
successor's definition of low or moderate income for a family and/
or individuals.
(5)
(6) The maximum density allowed shall be four dwelling units per acre.
Any remaining area of the proposed site not dedicated for
buildings, streets, and other public rights-of-way shall be dedicated
as open space in perpetuity.
(7)
The provisions of this section are optional. Nothing herein shall
require the Planning Board to approve a special permit where it
finds the granting of this permit shall adversely affect the general
area.
(8)
Purpose. This purpose of this section is to provide for the productive
reuse of existing or former public buildings and the lots on which they
are located primarily for residential purposes, and to provide affordable
housing opportunities for low-/moderate-income households.
A.
Use regulations.
In any zoning district, the City Council may allow by special permit
the reuse of an existing or former public building and the lot on
which it is located, as hereinafter defined, for residential purposes
and for other supporting uses the Council may determine are
appropriate, provided that 12% of such allowed housing units are
set aside for low- or moderate-income tenants or owners as
hereinafter defined. The special permit may allow a greater
number of residential units than would otherwise be permitted
under the building and area requirements applicable to the zoning
district in which such building and lot are located.
(1)
In the case of units to be owned or occupied by low- or moderateincome
households, such units shall be subject to an affordable
housing restriction that contains limitations on use, occupancy,
sale, resale and rents, and provides for periodic monitoring to
verify compliance with and to enforce said restriction. The
affordable housing restriction shall run with the land and be in
force in perpetuity or for the maximum period allowed by law, and
(2)
B.
§ 300-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-58
1:609
be enforceable under the provisions of MGL c. 184, § 26 or §§ 31
and 32.
Each affordable unit created under this section shall be sold or
rented to a household with income at or below 80% of the area
median income that applies to subsidized housing in the City of
Beverly, as reported annually by the U.S. Department of Housing
and Urban Development (HUD), adjusted for household size.
(3)
For any special permit issued under this section, the provisions of
§ 300-54, Open space residential design (OSRD) site plans, shall be
optional.
(4)
Definitions. For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have
the meanings indicated:
LOW- OR MODERATE-INCOME HOUSEHOLD — Those whose annual
income falls within the income guidelines for low or moderate income
as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development for the Boston-Cambridge-Quincy MA – NH – MSA.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building, together with the lot on which it is
located, that is currently or formerly owned by the City of Beverly or
any of its departments, authorities, or agencies.
C.
Parking. Parking shall be provided as required by Article X of this
chapter.
D.
Procedure.
A special permit application and 12 copies of a site plan meeting
the requirements of § 300-98 shall be filed with the Beverly City
Council and processed by the City Council in accordance with the
provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 9, and, to the extent practical, the
rules and regulations of the Planning Board with respect to special
permits.
(1)
In reviewing a special permit application under this section, the
City Council shall consider the conditions outlined in § 300-91B
of this chapter, along with any other considerations it deems
advisable and reasonable within the parameters of MGL c. 40A, § 9.
(2)
The City Council shall open a public hearing on the special permit
application and provide the applicant with initial feedback
regarding the basic elements of the proposed project, including
density. Six copies of the site plan (which may be amended to
reflect Council feedback) shall then be transmitted by the City
Council to the Planning Board, which shall review the proposed
site plan and provide recommendations to the City Council for its
consideration. The City Council shall not close the public hearing
on a special permit application until it has received a
recommendation from the Planning Board on the site plan, or
until 65 days have elapsed since the plans were submitted to the
(3)
E.
§ 300-58 BEVERLY CODE § 300-58
1:610
Planning Board without the submission of a recommendation. The
Planning Board's review of a site plan submitted to it by the City
Council for a project under this section shall be deemed compliance
with § 300-98, and no subsequent site plan review by the Planning
Board under § 300-98 shall be necessary.
The City Council may elect to refer a special permit application or
site plan to any other board, commission, or City department for
review and comment during the course of the public hearing.
(4)
The provisions of this section are optional, and nothing herein shall
require the City Council to grant a special permit where it finds that
the general area would be adversely affected by the proposed project's
overall impact.
F.
§ 300-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-58
1:611

ARTICLE X
Parking and Loading Requirements
[Amended 6-26-1987; 9-21-1987; 7-10-1989; 3-19-1991; 7-1-1992;
8-27-1996 by Ord. No. 169; 11-6-2008 by Ord. No. 207; 7-9-2009 by
Ord. No. 72; 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 61; 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 52]
§ 300-59. Off-street parking requirements.
For any use newly established use; or any change from one use to
another; or for any use increased in intensity or physically enlarged
by more than 25% under this chapter, off-street parking and loading
space shall be provided in accordance with the following schedule in
this section. Off-street parking and/or loading requirements for uses
other than those cited in this article shall be determined in consultation
with the applicant by the Building Inspector on recommendation from
the Planning Board. The Building Inspector, on recommendation from
the Planning Board, may require additional spaces if the particular use
so warrants.
A.
Location of off-street parking generally.
Residential uses.
In all zoning districts, parking spaces for residential uses must
be provided:
[1] On site; or
Off site on a privately owned lot located within 500 feet of
the property/use(s) it is designed to serve; or
[2]
By special permit, off-site parking in a public parking
facility within 500 feet of the property/use it is designed to
serve.
[3]
(a)
Five hundred feet shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the subject property to the nearest point of the
off-site parking facility.
(b)
(1)
Nonresidential uses.
In all zoning districts, parking spaces for nonresidential uses
must be provided:
[1] On site;
Off site on a privately owned lot located within 500 feet of
the property/use(s) it is designed to serve;
[2]
Off site in a public parking facility located within 500 feet
of the property/use(s) it is designed to serve; or
[3]
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 300-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-59
1:613
On street, if and to the extent such parking spaces are
completely contained within the frontage of the property.
[4]
Five hundred feet shall be measured in a straight line from the
nearest point of the subject property to the nearest point of the
off-site parking facility.
(b)
Whenever a privately owned parking lot is proposed to satisfy the
parking requirements, evidence of authority to use such off-site
location must be provided to the permit granting authority (which
may be the Director of Municipal Inspections). In the event that
conditions (such as a change in use) for off-site parking change,
or if the off-site parking arrangement is discontinued, the owner(s)
shall notify the Director of Municipal Inspections in writing within
10 days of such change or discontinuance. Whether or not such
notice is given, if the Director of Municipal Inspections determines
that a zoning violation exists as a result and the owner(s) fails to
apply for the necessary remedial permit(s)/approval(s) within 60
days of notice of such determination, the Director of Municipal
Inspections shall require the owners to comply with the original
parking requirements, or those in effect at the time of the change.
[Amended 2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
(3)
Calculations for off-street parking requirements may involve two basic
calculations:
A baseline number of parking spaces shall be calculated in
accordance with the parking schedule found in this § 300-59.
Where mixed-use developments are proposed, the baseline parking
requirement shall be calculated as the sum of the requirements for
each use; or
(1)
The baseline number of off-street parking spaces required under
the parking schedule found in this § 300-59 may be reduced
through any individual technique or combination of techniques
found in § 300-62. Any such proposed reductions in the baseline
number of spaces to be provided off-street may only be approved by
the Planning Board by grant of a special permit as provided below,
including in connection with the approval of a special permit under
§ 300-91.
(2)
C.
Any other deviation from all or a portion of the requirements for offstreet
parking must be obtained by a special permit from the Planning
Board upon determination that the applicable conditions set forth in
§ 300-91 will be satisfied.
D.
Table of Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Amended 2-16-2016 by
Ord. No. 013; 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
E.
§ 300-59 BEVERLY CODE § 300-59
1:614
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Spaces Required
Residential uses in the CC
District:
Residential units of 1
bedroom or smaller
1 per residential unit
Residential units with 2
bedrooms located in the
Depot Overlay District (as
defined in § 300-41E)
1 per residential unit
All other residential units
with 2 or more bedrooms
2 per residential unit
Residential units in the CG,
CN, WD, IG, IR, RHD, RSD,
RMD, R-6, R-10, R-15, R-22,
R-45, and R-90 Zoning
Districts
2 per residential unit
Rooming house, hotel, motel 1 for each rental unit plus 1 for each 8
seats provided for eating and meeting
facilities
Bed-and-breakfast
establishment
1 for every room rented, plus 2
Hospital 1 for every 2 beds
Clubs, lodges, and similar
uses
1 per 400 square feet of gross floor
area
Auditorium, theater, general
meeting facilities or place
thereof
1 for every 4 seats, permanent or
otherwise
Business and professional
offices
1 for every 250 square feet of gross
floor area
Retail trade establishment,
personal service
1 for every 275 square feet of gross
floor area for those establishments
10,000 square feet and under in gross
floor area; 1 for every 200 square feet
of gross floor area for those
establishments over 10,000 square feet
in gross floor area
Clinic or medical buildings,
including medical offices as
an accessory use in a
residential dwelling
1 for every 150 square feet of gross
floor area
Restaurant or similar indoor
place dispensing food, drink,
or refreshment
1 for every 4 seats, permanent or
otherwise
§ 300-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-59
1:615
Use
Minimum Off-Street Parking
Spaces Required
Schools 1 for each 500 square feet of floor
space, exclusive of basements
Wholesale and storage in
enclosed buildings
1 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area for the first 20,000 square feet
1 for each 2,000 square feet of gross
floor area for the second 20,000 square
feet
1 for each 4,000 square feet of gross
floor area for areas in excess of the
initial 40,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Open storage 1 for every 1,000 square feet of the lot
devoted to the use thereon
Manufacturing, assembly,
processing, research,
printing, and publishing
2.5 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor
area
Congregate housing for the
elderly and permanently
disabled, including
subsidized elderly housing
facilities that provide shared
living arrangements
0.75 per unit
Marina 0.5 per boat moored, docked, stored, or
trailered. Between September 15 and
May 15, up to 80% of the required
parking spaces may be used for winter
storage of boats, floats, runways, and
associated equipment. On or before
May 16, 70% of the required parking
spaces must be clear and available for
motor vehicle parking. By June 15,
100% of the required parking spaces
must be clear and available for motor
vehicle parking.
Brewery, distillery, winery 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area for area dedicated to
manufacturing and process related
activities; 1 space per 275 square feet
of gross floor area for tasting room, as
defined herein
Maker space 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 300-59 BEVERLY CODE § 300-60
1:616
§ 300-60. Off-street loading requirements.
Off-street loading requirements for commercial and industrial uses, if
established or expanded by more than 25% under this chapter, shall be
required to provide adequate off-street loading space for loading and
unloading all vehicles incidental to the operation of the establishment. The
Building Inspector, on recommendation from the Planning Board, may waive
all or a portion of the requirements for loading or may require additional
space if the particular use so warrants.
§ 300-61. Lot, vehicle and location restrictions.
§ 300-62. Special off-street parking provisions.
Where a principal use of a lot is not enclosed in a building, the portion
of the lot so used shall be considered as the gross floor area for
calculating off-street parking space requirements.
A.
No accessory off-street parking space shall be permitted within the
required front yard in any R District, except that this shall not be
construed as applying to parking required for a one- or two-family
dwelling.
B.
No employee parking shall be permitted within the required front yard
in any IR District. No parking in any IR District shall be permitted less
than 15 feet from any lot line.
C.
Commercial or industrial vehicles with more than two axles not related
to a home occupation or home professional office as defined in § 300-5
shall not be allowed to be parked or stored on a permanent basis in a
residential district without a special permit.
D.
"Piggy-back" parking, in which each space does not have independent
access to a driveway or street, is not allowed, except when such spaces
are permanently assigned to the same residential unit and except for
one- and two-family homes.
E.
For bed-and-breakfast establishments, all parking shall be off-street,
not within the required front yard setback, and "piggy back" parking
shall not be allowed except for those spaces assigned to the permanent
resident(s) of the structure. All other requirements of the City's parking
requirements will apply as well (size of spaces, surfacing materials,
etc.).
F.
Shared on-site parking.
In all zoning districts (except for the IR Overlay District, which
is regulated by § 300-65), the Planning Board may grant a special
permit to allow implementation of a shared parking arrangement
for a mix of uses defined in the application and otherwise permitted
in the applicable zoning district for a particular project.
(1)
A.
§ 300-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-62
1:617
The special permit may provide for a reduction of up to 50% in the
number of parking spaces to be provided for a mixed-use project,
subject to all of the following conditions/findings:
The extent to which projected parking demands for the
proposed uses overlap or conflict is not substantial;
(a)
The mix of proposed uses can reasonably be expected to share
spaces compatibly; and
(b)
In the event that conditions (such as a change in use) change,
or if the shared parking arrangement is discontinued, the
owner(s) shall notify the Director of Municipal Inspections
and Planning Board in writing within 10 days of such change
or discontinuance. Whether or not such notice is given, if
the Director of Municipal Inspections determines that a
modification of the special permit is required and the owner(s)
fails to apply to the Planning Board for such modification
within 60 days of such notice of such determination, or if the
required modification is not granted by the Planning Board,
then the Director of Municipal Inspections shall require the
owners to comply with the original parking requirements, or
those in effect at the time of the change, if less burdensome, in
each case without reference to this Subsection A. [Amended
2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
(c)
(2)
All special permit applications for shared parking shall be
forwarded to the Parking and Traffic Commission for its comments
and recommendations, which comments/recommendations shall be
received by the Planning Board within 30 days of submission to
the Commission. Failure to forward comments within 30 days will
be deemed conclusion of review by the Commission. An applicant
may use the latest peak demand analyses published by the Institute
of Traffic Engineers (ITE) or another other source of information
acceptable to the Planning Board to justify a request for shared
parking implementation, but any such information shall not be
deemed conclusive or binding on the Planning Board, and the
Planning Board may grant greater or lesser relief than that
requested.
(3)
Off-site parking in a public parking facility. Separate from, or in
conjunction with, authorized shared parking arrangements, the
Planning Board may grant a special permit to allow use of off-site
parking in a public parking facility to satisfy a portion of the residential
parking requirements of a particular project.
The Planning Board may grant a special permit to allow up to 25%
of the off-street parking required for residential uses to be provided
in an off-site public parking facility, subject to the following
conditions/findings:
(1)
B.
§ 300-62 BEVERLY CODE § 300-62
1:618
§ 300-63. Parking and loading space specifications.
All parking or loading areas containing over three spaces, including
automobile service and drive-in establishments, shall be either contained
within buildings or other structures or be subject to the following, as well
as all specifications of the City of Beverly:
The off-site public parking facility is located within 500 feet
of the property/use it is designed to serve. Five hundred feet
shall be measured in a straight-line distance from the nearest
point of the subject property to the nearest point of the public
parking facility; and
(a)
The off-site public parking facility can reasonably be expected
to have sufficient capacity to accommodate:
The additional demand, given such factors as peak
demand times for the proposed uses; and
[1]
Any other present or future uses or demands on such
facility that may be reasonably foreseen by the Planning
Board.
[2]
(b)
In the event that conditions (such as a change in use) change, or
if the off-site parking arrangement is discontinued, the owner(s)
shall notify the Director of Municipal Inspections and Planning
Board in writing within 10 days of such change or discontinuance.
Whether or not such notice is given, if the Director of Municipal
Inspections determines that a modification of the special permit is
required and the owner(s) fails to apply to the Planning Board for
such modification within 60 days of notice of such determination,
or if the required modification is not granted by the Planning
Board, then the Director of Municipal Inspections shall require
the owner(s) to comply with the original parking requirements, or
those in effect at the time of the change, if less burdensome.175
(2)
All special permit applications for off-site parking shall be
forwarded to the Parking and Traffic Commission for its comments
and recommendations, which comments/recommendations shall be
received by the Planning Board within 30 days of submission to the
Commission. Failure to forward comments within 30 days will be
deemed conclusion of review by the Commission.
(3)
Parking or loading spaces shall be effectively screened on each side
of the parking area which adjoins or faces the side or rear lot line
of premises situated in any R District. The screening shall be
accomplished using one of the following methods: a five-foot-wide and
five-foot-high evergreen landscaping strip; a wall or fence of uniform
appearance six feet in height; or a landscaped earthen berm at least
A.
175. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-63
1:619
§ 300-64. Design requirements.
five feet in height. Such screening shall be maintained in good
condition.
Every parking or loading area and access driveways thereto shall be
surfaced with a durable and dustless material which shall meet with the
approval of the Building Inspector and shall be graded and drained so
as to disperse of all surface water and accumulation.
B.
Any fixture used to illuminate any parking or loading area shall be
so arranged as to direct the light away from street and away from
adjoining premises used for residential purposes.
C.
Any off-street parking area shall also be subject to the following:
[Amended 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
There shall not be any motor vehicle parking within five feet of any
side or rear lot line, except that this requirement shall not apply in
the BHD District.
(1)
There shall not be any vehicle repair facilities or any repair made
to any motor vehicles. For purposes of this subsection, the terms
"vehicle" and "motor vehicle" do not include boats or travel lifts or
other mechanical equipment, as these activities are an accessory
use customary in the operation of a boatyard or recreational
boating facility located in the BHD District.
(2)
There shall not be any storage of materials or equipment, except as
part of approved building or site operations.
(3)
Off-street parking spaces may be permitted within the required
front yard in other than the R and IR Districts, but such space shall
be set back from the street line by a minimum of 10 feet, except
that this requirement shall not apply in the BHD District.
(4)
D.
All off-street parking and loading areas containing three or more spaces
shall be so arranged and marked as to provide for orderly and safe
loading, unloading, parking and storage of vehicles, with individual
parking spaces clearly defined.
A.
Such areas shall meet the following requirements:
Standard parking spaces. Each parking space shall be at least nine
feet in width and 18 feet in length. Aisle width shall be a minimum
of 18 feet for one-way traffic and 24 feet for two-way traffic.
(1)
Compact parking spaces. Up to 25% of the proposed parking
spaces may be designed for use by compact cars and/or
motorcycles and other motorized bikes, provided:
Each compact parking space shall be at least eight feet in
width and 16 feet in length. Aisle widths shall be the same
(a)
(2)
B.
§ 300-63 BEVERLY CODE § 300-64
1:620
§ 300-65. Shared parking in lots zoned IR Overlay.
as for standard parking spaces except where aisles service(s)
compact cars, motorcycles, and/or motorbikes exclusively. In
those instances, aisle widths of 16 feet for one-way traffic and
22 feet for two-way traffic are permitted.
The parking lot or area in which compact spaces will be
provided must be designed and equipped with a signage
system that clearly and effectively indicates the location of
compact car spaces within the lot.
(b)
Each loading space shall not be less than 1,000 square feet,
including space for maneuvering; and arrangement or layout of offstreet
loading areas shall be approved by the Building Inspector.
(3)
No portion of any entrance or exit driveway shall be closer than 20
feet to the curb of an intersecting street.
(4)
No two drives leading from a street to a single lot shall be within
30 feet of each other at a street.
(5)
No entrance or exit driveway shall exceed 25 feet in width at a
street.
(6)
A maximum of two driveway accesses at a street per lot are
allowed; for example, a lot with frontage on two streets may have a
maximum of four driveway accesses, two on each street.
(7)
The arrangement of all parking spaces and parking lots shall be
approved by the Building Inspector, adhering to the requirements
of the State Building Code, and shall provide for safe pedestrian
access in and around such parking areas.176
(8)
Incorporation in parking area design of electric-car charging stations
and low-impact development techniques such as vegetated swales, rain
gardens and permeable pavers is highly encouraged.
C.
In a mixed-use development on a lot zoned IR Overlay on the official
City Zoning District Map, the number of required parking spaces shall
be as provided above in this Article X, unless in performing site plan
review or in acting on a special permit the Planning Board determines
that a lesser number of spaces would be adequate for all parking
needs because of special circumstances such as shared parking for
uses having peak parking demands at different times or other measures
reducing parking demand.
A.
When considering shared parking, the following method will be used
to determine the appropriate parking requirements: multiply the
minimum parking requirement for each individual use, as set forth in
B.
176. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-65
1:621
Article X, by the listed percentage, as set forth below in the Schedule of
Parking Occupancy Rates, for each of the five designated time periods
and then add the resulting sums from each vertical column. The column
total having the highest total value is the minimum shared parking
space requirement for that combination of land uses.
Schedule of Parking Occupancy Rates.
Weekday Weekend
Night
12:00
Midnight
to 7:00
a.m.
Day
7:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
Evening
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
Midnight
Day
6:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
Evening
6:00 p.m.
to 12:00
Midnight
Residential 100% 60% 90% 80% 90%
Manufacturing,
assembly,
processing
5% 100% 10% 10% 5%
Business and
professional
office
5% 100% 10% 10% 5%
Retail
establishment
5% 80% 90% 100% 70%
Hotel 70% 70% 100% 70% 100%
Restaurant 10% 50% 100% 50% 100%
Eating and
meeting
facilities
associated with
hotel
10% 50% 60% 50% 60%
Auditorium,
theater
10% 40% 100% 80% 100%
School, daycare
facilities
5% 100% 10% 20% 5%
All other 100% 100% 100% 100% 100%
C.
Prior to issuance of an occupancy permit for shared parking, the
owner(s) of a mixed-use development shall have in its possession and
readily available for review by the Director of Municipal Inspections
a reciprocal agreement executed by the owners and operators of the
different sources or uses in the development ensuring the long-term
joint use of such shared parking, and defining the terms upon which the
parking is shared. [Amended 2-19-2009 by Ord. No. 230177]
D.
177. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-65 BEVERLY CODE § 300-65
1:622
In the event that the conditions (such as a change in use) for
shared parking change, or if the shared parking arrangement is
discontinued, the owner(s) shall notify the Director of Municipal
Inspections within 10 days of such change or discontinuance. If the
Director of Municipal Inspections determines that a modification
of the special permit is required and the owner(s) fails to apply
to the Planning Board for such modification within 60 days of
such determination, or if modification of the special permit is not
granted by the Planning Board within 90 days of application
therefor, then the Director of Municipal Inspections shall require
the owner(s) to comply with all applicable parking requirements.
(1)
Noncompliance with this subsection may result in the revocation of
occupancy permits for the violating uses.
(2)
§ 300-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-65
1:623

ARTICLE XI
Signs
[Amended 5-29-2003 by Ord. No. 59]
§ 300-66. Policy and general guidelines. [Amended 12-29-2005 by
Ord. No. 206]
Declaration of policy.
It is hereby declared to be the policy of the City of Beverly that the
protection of property values, the protection of the character of the
various neighborhoods in the City, the encouragement of the sound
development of land throughout the City for its most appropriate
use, and the protection of the public welfare in general requires
strict limitation of all display signs in the City.
(1)
It is the general policy of the City that the primary purpose of a sign
is for the identification of a business and not for advertisement.
The design of the sign must respect and be compatible with the
architecture of the building and surrounding buildings for which or
upon which it is being erected.
(2)
The intent of setting size, design, and location parameters for signs
is not to promote the design of nearly identical signs, but to define
limits within which applicants can be creative.
(3)
Any sign placed on land or on a structure for the purposes of
identification or protection of the same or for advertising a use
conducted thereon shall be deemed to be accessory and incidental
to such land, structure or use. All applications for a building permit
to erect or alter any sign shall be reviewed by the Design Review
Board. It is the purpose of this article to place such limitations on
display of all such signs in order to achieve a sense of order and
aesthetics, to promote attractive commercial areas and entrances
to the City of Beverly, to provide for the display of signs which
are structurally safe and do not interfere with traffic movement,
traffic signals, or traffic signs; and to assure that the signs will
be appropriate to the land, building or use to which they are
appurtenant and be adequate, but not excessive, for the purpose
of identification. With respect to signs identifying business uses,
such regulations have been devised after considering, among other
matters, shopping habits, extent of trade areas, and means of
access to such uses, and are specifically intended, among other
things, to avoid excessive competition among sign displays in their
demand for public attention.
(4)
Any exterior design features of a building or structure that are
associated with a corporate image or identification of a business
shall be considered a sign, or the extension of the area of a sign,
and subject to regulation under this article.
(5)
A.
§ 300-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-66
1:625
§ 300-67. Specific standards by zoning district.
General guidelines. All signs must meet the following general
guidelines regardless of zoning district and shall not violate the
provisions of § 300-69:
(1) The definitions for signs at § 300-5 shall apply to this article.
Sign location. Signs must be located so as not to detract from
a building's architecture. A sign shall not be placed so that it
obscures architectural elements such as roofs, cornices, columns,
arches, windows, details, or other such building features or
ornamentation.
(2)
Style and design of sign. Lettering, shape, and color employed in
a sign shall be compatible with the form, color, and materials of
the building housing the establishment that the sign is identifying.
Signs for different businesses within the same building, or for a
collection of buildings, including but not limited to those which
from a shopping center, shall be of harmonious style and design.
(3)
Sign message. Given a sign's primary purpose is identification, a
sign's message should clearly and simply identify a business. A
sign may include lettering and symbols to indicate the name and
the kind of primary business, service or facility conducted on the
premises, and the year the business was established. The sign may
include a street address.
(4)
Trademark. A sign may incorporate no more than one registered
trademark, logo, or identifying symbol, provided that the
registered trademark, logo, or identifying symbol must be for an
establishment only, not for a commodity or product sold by the
establishment. The area of the registered trademark, logo, or
identifying symbol shall be included in the calculation of the
allowable area of the sign.
(5)
Illumination. Except as otherwise provided, signs may be
illuminated either internally through the use of some sort of
translucent materials (for example, individual letters, opaque,
overhang) with lights behind or with neon tubing or externally
through mounting of incandescent or fluorescent lamps directed at
the sign on the building. The type of illumination employed shall
not distract from the building's architecture. Colored lighting, open
flame, or bare bulbs shall not be used.
(6)
No sign or any portion of any sign shall be allowed to have
changeable messages, except those signs belonging to theaters,
places of worship, nonprofit educational entities.
(7)
In the case of any inconsistencies among the provisions of this
Article XI, the most restrictive provisions shall apply.
(8)
B.
§ 300-66 BEVERLY CODE § 300-67
1:626
Signs permitted in any CG, CC, IR, or IG District.
Wall signs.
One permanent wall sign shall be permitted for each groundfloor
business' primary facade that faces a public way. The
maximum size of the sign shall be determined as follows:
For businesses with up to 30 feet of primary facade: 20
square feet.
[1]
For businesses with a primary facade between 30 feet and
40 feet: 30 square feet.
[2]
For businesses where the primary facade is greater than
40 feet in length, the allowed size of the sign shall be
determined by a formula that, described in general terms,
compares the length of the primary facade, expressed as
a square footage number, with a distance between the
business and a public way. The size is determined as
follows:
If the distance of the closest point of the building to
the nearest lot line abutting a public way is more than
zero foot but not greater than 20 feet, the maximum
sign area shall be the lesser of either 25 square feet or
two times the length of the primary facade (that is, the
length of the primary facade expressed as a square
footage number).
[a]
If the distance of the closest point of the building to
the nearest lot line abutting a public way is more than
20 feet, but not greater than 40 feet, the maximum
sign area shall be the lesser of either 30 square feet or
two times the length of the primary facade (that is, the
length of the primary facade expressed as a square
footage number).
[b]
If the distance of the closest point of the building to
the nearest lot line abutting a public way is more than
40 feet but not greater than 80 feet, the maximum sign
area shall be the lesser of either 60 square feet or two
times the length of the primary facade (that is, the
length of the primary facade expressed as a square
footage number). {For example, if the primary facade
of the building is 50 feet long, then the sign could be
no larger than 60 square feet. [60 square feet is less
than two by 50 (the length of the primary facade) =
100 square feet]}
[c]
If the distance of the closest point of the building
to the nearest lot line abutting a public way is more
[d]
[3]
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-67
1:627
than 80 feet, the sign shall be the lesser of either 150
square feet or two times the length of the primary
facade (that is, the length of the primary facade
expressed as a square footage number). {For example,
if the primary facade of the building is 50 feet long,
then the sign could be no larger than 100 square feet.
[100 square feet (two by 50, the length of the primary
facade) = 100 is less than 150 square feet]}
All signs must be placed in the building's sign band, if one
exists, and the sign must be placed so it does not obscure
architectural details of the building. If a building does not have
a sign band, then the top of any sign shall be no higher than
the middle of the sills of the second-story windows or 15 feet
above grade, whichever is lower. Wall signs shall project no
more than 12 inches out from the building. Mounting hardware
shall be placed to minimize its view from the sidewalk.
(b)
Freestanding signs.
No freestanding sign shall be permitted in the CC, CG, IR, and
IG Districts except in the cases where:
Single building with a single business: a single building
has only one business and lacks visibility from the street
because the entire building is situated more than 200 feet
from the front lot line, or more than 75% of the building
is obscured by topography (ledge, hills, valleys). In this
case, one freestanding sign up to 10 square feet in area is
allowed. The top of the sign shall be no higher than 15 feet
above grade, the sign shall have no more than two faces,
shall not overhang any public way, and shall not be more
than 12 inches deep.
[1]
Single building with several businesses: a single building
has two or more businesses and lacks visibility from the
street because the entire building is situated more than
200 feet from the front lot line, or more than 75% of the
building is obscured by topography (ledge, hills, valleys).
In this case, one freestanding sign up to 30 square feet in
area is allowed. The top of the sign shall be no higher than
15 feet above grade, the sign shall have no more than two
faces, shall not overhang any public way, and shall not be
more than 12 inches deep.
[2]
Several buildings with several businesses: several
buildings have, in the aggregate, more than two
businesses (for example, without limitation, retail
shopping center, business office park consisting of
wholesale, manufacturing, or service businesses) and lack
visibility from the street because all buildings are situated
[3]
(a)
(2)
§ 300-67 BEVERLY CODE § 300-67
1:628
more than 200 feet from the front lot line, or more than
75% of all buildings are obscured by topography (ledge,
hills, valleys). In this case, one freestanding sign up to 35
square feet in area is allowed. The top of the sign shall be
no higher than 15 feet above grade, the sign have no more
than two faces, shall not overhang a public way, and shall
not be more than 12 inches deep.
Freestanding signs for single buildings with several businesses
and for several buildings with several businesses shall employ
a sign that gives the place name of the set of businesses as
one entity or by one name (e.g., "North Beverly Plaza" or
"Cummings Center") and may include the street address within
the square foot area allowed for the sign.
(b)
Window signs.
Upper-floor and ground-floor uses.
One sign is permitted per business, provided it does not
cover any more than the lesser of:
Twenty percent of the window opening in which the
sign is located.
[a]
[b] A maximum of 10 square feet.
[1]
Such signs must be individual letters affixed or painted in
a single window opening (see definition).
[2]
(a)
(3)
Awning signs. One awning sign is permitted for each ground-floor
use, provided that letters are painted on or integral to the awning
fabric, are in a maximum of one line and are no larger than six
inches in height. No internally illuminated awning signs are
allowed.
(4)
Temporary signs.
Temporary exterior signs are allowed as follows:
[1] An application must be filed with the Building Inspector;
The application must state text and time period when the
sign will be displayed;
[2]
[3] Only one sign is allowed at a time per business;
The sign shall be displayed no longer than 14 consecutive
days; and
[4]
No other temporary sign can be applied for until a twentyone-
day no-sign period has passed since the last temporary
sign was displayed.
[5]
(a)
(5)
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-67
1:629
The provisions of this Subsection A(5) shall not apply to retail
businesses from November 15 to January 15.
(b)
Gasoline filling station signs. Gasoline filling stations shall be
allowed the following three types of permanent signs: a primary
facade sign, a canopy sign, and a gasoline price sign; provided,
however, that such signs shall meet all of the other requirements of
this chapter, in addition to those set forth in this subsection.
Canopy signs. Up to two canopy signs are permitted for each
gasoline filling station, provided that they are each a maximum
of one line, not greater than 12 inches in height and not longer
than six feet. Identifying symbols (logo, trademark, etc.), if any,
shall be considered part of the canopy sign when calculating
the maximum allowed size. No internally illuminated canopy
signs are allowed.
(a)
Gasoline price signs.
In addition to signs specified in this section and pump
signs specifically allowed in § 300-68, gasoline filling
stations are also permitted one nonilluminated gasoline
price sign not to exceed nine square feet. All letters and
numbers shall not exceed eight inches in height. The
bottom of the gasoline price sign shall not exceed eight
feet higher than grade.
[1]
The calculation of the maximum size of a gasoline filling
station price sign shall include the gasoline prices, the
company name, if any, and all identifying symbols (logo,
trademark, etc.), if any. No business establishment that
includes a gasoline filling station shall be allowed more
than one gasoline price sign. The gasoline filling station
price sign shall have no more than two faces.
[2]
All signs for the retail sale of food (whether prepackaged
or prepared on the premises under a separate business
name) and accessory items associated with automobile
maintenance and use shall be included in the maximum
allowed signage calculations for gasoline filling stations.
[3]
[4] See also gasoline pump signs in § 300-68M.
(b)
(6)
Residential project signs. Sign may not exceed 20 square feet in
area and six feet in height, and may give the place name of a
multiple-family dwelling complex or single-family subdivision.
(7)
Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall project no more than four
feet from the facade of a building. Only one projecting sign no
larger than seven square feet may be erected per business.
Mounting hardware shall be placed to minimize its view from the
sidewalk. Business owners shall be encouraged to mount a
(8)
§ 300-67 BEVERLY CODE § 300-67
1:630
projecting sign so the top of the sign is no more than 15 feet
above the sidewalk and the bottom of the sign is no less than nine
feet above the sidewalk. Projecting signs shall not be internally
illuminated. [Amended 6-24-2004 by Ord. No. 161; 12-29-2005
by Ord. No. 206]
Sandwich board signs. One sign not exceeding two feet in width
and 3 1/2 feet in height may be permitted within the sidewalk/grass
strip of a public right-of-way or on private property, provided the
following requirements are met: [Amended 6-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 57]
The sign is located in front of and within 12 feet of the main
entrance to the establishment it advertises;
(a)
Placement of the sign allows a minimum of 36 inches of
unobstructed sidewalk clearance between it and any building
or other obstruction;
(b)
The sign must be freestanding and shall not be affixed,
chained, anchored, or otherwise secured to the ground or to
any pole, parking meter, tree, tree grate, fire hydrant, railing,
or other structure;
(c)
The sign must be internally weighted so that it is stable and
windproof;
(d)
The sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way only
during the hours of the establishment's operation;
(e)
No sign shall be placed in a public right-of-way for the duration
of a declared snow emergency;
(f)
The design of the sign (which includes the color, lettering style,
symbols and material) shall complement and be compatible
with the design of the establishment's primary sign(s), abutting
properties, and the general streetscape in the immediate
vicinity of the establishment;
(g)
The City Council issues a permit to allow the sign in
accordance with Chapter 192, Article X, Signs; and
(h)
Adequate liability insurance is provided to the City Clerk and
remains in effect for the duration of the permit issued by the
City Council.
(i)
(9)
Signs permitted in any CN, HD, or BHD District: [Amended 6-24-2004
by Ord. No. 161; 12-29-2005 by Ord. No. 206; 6-20-2007 by Ord.
No. 57; 6-1-2015 by Ord. No. 314]
(1) Wall signs.
B.
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-67
1:631
One permanent wall sign not to exceed a maximum of 20
square feet is permitted for a ground-floor use's primary
facade.
(a)
All signs must be placed in the building's sign band if one
exists and the sign must be placed so it does not obscure
architectural detail of the building. If a building does not have
a sign band, then the top of any sign shall be no higher than the
bottom of the sills of the second-story windows or 15 feet above
grade, whichever is lower. The sign shall project no more than
nine inches out from the building. Mounting hardware shall be
placed to minimize its view from the sidewalk. Lighted signs
may only be externally illuminated.
(b)
Freestanding signs.
No freestanding sign shall be permitted in the CN, HD, or BHD
Districts except in the cases where:
Single building with a single business: a single building
has only one business and lacks visibility from the street
because the entire building is situated more than 200 feet
from the front lot line, or more than 75% of the building
is obscured by topography (ledge, hills, valley). In this
case, one freestanding sign up to 10 square feet in area is
allowed. The top of the sign shall be no higher than 15 feet
above grade, the sign shall have no more than two faces,
shall not overhang any public way, and shall not be more
than 12 inches deep.
[1]
Single building with several businesses: a single building
has two or more businesses and lacks visibility from the
street because the entire building is situated more than
200 feet from the front lot line, or more than 75% of the
building is obscured by topography (ledge, hills, valleys).
In this case, one freestanding sign up to 20 square feet in
area is allowed. The top of the sign shall be no higher than
15 feet above grade, the sign shall have no more than two
faces, shall not overhang any public way, and shall not be
more than 12 inches deep.
[2]
Several buildings with several businesses: several
buildings have, in the aggregate, more than two
businesses (for example, without limitation, retail
shopping center, business office park consisting of
wholesale, manufacturing, or service business) and lack
visibility from the street because all buildings are situated
more than 200 feet from the front lot line, or more than
75% of all buildings are obscured by topography (ledge,
hills, valleys). In this case, one freestanding sign up to 25
square feet in area is allowed. The top of the sign shall be
[3]
(a)
(2)
§ 300-67 BEVERLY CODE § 300-67
1:632
no higher than 15 feet above grade, the sign shall have no
more than two faces, shall not overhang a public way, and
shall not be more than 12 inches deep.
Freestanding signs for single buildings with several businesses
and for several buildings with several businesses shall employ
a sign that identifies the set of businesses as one entity or by
one name (e.g., "North Beverly Plaza" or "Cummings Center")
and may include the street address within the square foot area
allowed for the sign.
(b)
Window signs.
Upper-floor uses. One sign (up to three square feet in size) is
permitted per business. Illuminated signs are not permitted.
(a)
Ground-floor uses. One sign is permitted per business provided
it does not cover more than the lesser of:
Twenty percent of the window opening in which the sign is
located; or
[1]
[2] A maximum of six square feet;
(b)
Such signs must be individual letters affixed or painted in a
single window opening (see definition).
(c)
(3)
Awning signs. One awning sign is permitted for each ground-floor
use, provided that letters are painted on or integral to the awning
fabric, are a maximum of one line and are no larger than six inches
in height. No internally illuminated awning signs are allowed.
(4)
Temporary signs.
Temporary signs are allowed as follows:
[1] An application must be filed with the Building Inspector;
The application must state text and time period when the
sign will be displayed;
[2]
[3] Only one sign is allowed at a time per business;
The sign shall be displayed no longer than 14 consecutive
days; and
[4]
No other temporary sign can be applied for until a twentyone-
day no-sign period has passed since the last temporary
sign was displayed.
[5]
(a)
The provisions of this Subsection B(5) shall not apply to retail
businesses from November 15 to January 15.
(b)
(5)
Gasoline filling station signs. Gasoline filling stations shall be
allowed the following three types of permanent signs: a primary
(6)
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-67
1:633
facade sign, a canopy sign, and a gasoline price sign; provided,
however, that such signs shall meet all of the other requirements of
this chapter, in addition to those set forth in this subsection.
Canopy signs. Up to two canopy signs are permitted for each
gasoline filling station, provided that they are each a maximum
of one line, not greater than 12 inches in height and not longer
than six feet. Identifying symbols (logo, trademark, etc.), if any,
shall be considered part of the canopy sign when calculating
the maximum allowed size. No internally illuminated canopy
signs are allowed.
(a)
Gasoline price signs.
In addition to signs specified in this section and pump
signs specifically allowed in § 300-68, gasoline filling
stations are also permitted one nonilluminated gasoline
price sign not to exceed nine square feet. All letters and
numbers shall not exceed eight inches in height. The
bottom of the gasoline price sign shall not exceed eight
feet higher than grade.
[1]
The calculation of the maximum size of a gasoline filling
station price sign shall include the gasoline prices, the
company name, if any, and all identifying symbols (logo,
trademark, etc.), if any. No business establishment that
includes a gasoline filling station shall be allowed more
than one gasoline price sign. The gasoline filling station
price sign shall have no more than two faces.
[2]
All signs for the retail sale of food (whether prepackaged
or prepared on the premises under a separate business
name) and accessory items associated with automobile
maintenance and use shall be included in the maximum
allowed signage calculations for gasoline filling stations.
[3]
[4] See also gasoline pump signs in § 300-68M.
(b)
Residential project signs. Signs may not exceed 20 square feet in
area and six feet in height, and may give the place name of a
multiple-family dwelling complex or single-family subdivision.
(7)
Projecting signs. Projecting signs shall project no more than four
feet from the facade of a building. Only one projecting sign no
larger than seven square feet may be erected per business.
Mounting hardware shall be placed to minimize its view from the
sidewalk. Business owners shall be encouraged to mount a
projecting sign so the top of the sign is no more than 15 feet
above the sidewalk and the bottom of the sign is no less than nine
feet above the sidewalk. Projecting signs shall not be internally
illuminated.
(8)
§ 300-67 BEVERLY CODE § 300-67
1:634
§ 300-68. Signs not requiring Design Review Board approval.
The following signs shall be allowed by right without the necessity of Design
Review Board (DRB) approval; provided, however, that they shall conform
with the provisions of § 300-66:
Sandwich board signs. One sign not exceeding two feet in width
and 3 1/2 feet in height may be permitted within the sidewalk/grass
strip of a public right-of-way or on private property, provided the
following requirements are met:
The sign is located in front of and within 12 feet of the main
entrance to the establishment it advertises;
(a)
Placement of the sign allows a minimum of 36 inches of
unobstructed sidewalk clearance between it and any building
or other obstruction;
(b)
The sign must be freestanding and shall not be affixed,
chained, anchored, or otherwise secured to the ground or to
any pole, parking meter, tree, tree grate, fire hydrant, railing,
or other structure;
(c)
The sign must be internally weighted so that it is stable and
windproof;
(d)
The sign shall be placed within the public right-of-way only
during the hours of the establishment's operation;
(e)
No sign shall be placed in a public right-of-way for the duration
of a declared snow emergency;
(f)
The design of the sign (which includes the color, lettering style,
symbols and material) shall complement and be compatible
with the design of the establishment's primary sign(s), abutting
properties, and the general streetscape in the immediate
vicinity of the establishment;
(g)
The City Council issues a permit to allow the sign in
accordance with Chapter 192, Article X, Signs, of the City
Code; and
(h)
Adequate liability insurance is provided to the City Clerk and
remains in effect for the duration of the permit issued by the
City Council.
(i)
(9)
Signs erected by or on the order of a governmental agency when limited
to governmental purposes, and excluding any advertising.
A.
Names of building, date of erection, monument citation and
commemorative tablets when made a permanent and integral part of a
building or site, not exceeding five square feet.
B.
§ 300-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-68
1:635
Banners or flags emblematic of or issued by national, state, or local
governments.
C.
D. Holiday decorations and lights when in season.
Signs not to exceed two square feet in size which indicate warnings,
hazards, or public conveniences such as "trespass," "beware of dog,"
and rest room signs.
E.
Signs not to exceed two square feet in size which are necessary for
safety and direction of residents, employees, customers and visitors,
whether in a vehicle or on foot, provided that such signs do not carry
the name or symbol of any product and that the name or symbol of any
business does not take up more than 30% of the sign space.
F.
Signs whose purpose is to identify a house of worship or a community
building, provided that the sign does not exceed 12 square feet in size
and is not internally illuminated.
G.
Signs not to exceed two square feet in size whose purpose is giving only
direction and distance to a specified house of worship or community
buildings, provided that no such sign shall be illuminated.
H.
Home signs, not to exceed two square feet in size, which indicate the
name and address of the occupant(s) of a dwelling.
I.
A sign, not to exceed two square feet, which indicates a permitted
accessory use or home occupation.
J.
One temporary sign, not to exceed six square feet in all residential
districts or 24 square feet in all other districts, which announces the
prospective sale, rent, lease, or trade of, or contracting work done
on, the property. Such sign shall be removed within three days after
the sale, rental, lease, trade, or completion of work on such premises.
Temporary signs announcing an "open house" event for the prospective
sale or lease of a property are allowed, provided such signs are erected
no more than three hours prior to commencement of the event and are
removed within one hour of the close of the event, and provided that no
more than three such signs shall be erected for any one event. "Open
house" event signs are allowed off-premises, subject to the provisions
of this Subsection K. [Amended 6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 57]
K.
Directory boards attached to buildings shall be allowed for the sole
purpose of directing the public to and identifying the location of
occupants or tenants within a building(s), provided that the letters in
directory boards shall not exceed one inch in height; and the total sign
area shall not exceed three square feet.
L.
One sign on the gasoline pump indicating the types and prices of
gasoline, provided the sign shall not exceed one square foot.
M.
Temporary window signs on the first floors of nonresidential buildings,
provided they do not exceed the smaller of six square feet or 20% of the
N.
§ 300-68 BEVERLY CODE § 300-68
1:636
§ 300-69. Prohibited signs.
The following types of signs are prohibited:
area of the window (see definition of "sign area" in § 300-5) and are up
no longer than 14 days.
Any sign displaying flashing or intermittent lights, or lights of changing
degrees of intensity, except a sign indicating time or temperature, with
changes alternating on not less than a five-second cycle when such
time or temperature sign does not constitute a public safety or traffic
hazard, in the judgment of the Building Inspector and the judgment of
the Design Review Board.
A.
Any lighting either by exposed tubing or string of lights outlining a part
or all of a building or affixed to any ornamental feature thereof, except
those items temporarily affixed to a building or other portions of the
premises which denote a particular season of the year or universally
celebrated holiday.
B.
Any sign that obscures a sign displayed by public authority for the
purpose of giving traffic instructions or directions or other public
information.
C.
Any sign that uses the word "stop" or "danger" or otherwise presents or
implies the need or requirement of stopping or caution or the existence
of danger, or which is a copy or imitation of, or which for any reason is
likely to be confused with any sign displayed by public authority.
D.
Any sign that obstructs light or impedes a person's passage through
any window, door, fire escape, stairway, ladder or opening intended to
provide light, air, ingress, or egress for any building, as required by law.
E.
Any sign or sign illumination that causes any direct glare into or upon
any street, or into or upon any building other than the building to which
the sign is affixed.
F.
Any portable sign (except a sandwich board sign), with or without selfcontained
wheels, which is designed and constructed so as not to be
permanently affixed to the land (namely, freestanding) and moved from
one place or location to another. This includes any removable signs
displayed on a vehicle. [Amended 6-20-2007 by Ord. No. 57]
G.
Any sign that violates any provision of any law of the state relative to
outdoor advertising.
H.
Signs constructed, erected or maintained above the roofline of any
building, except with Design Review Board approval.
I.
Any off-premises sign, such as a billboard, which indicates a use or
product not available on the property where the sign is located.
J.
§ 300-68 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-69
1:637
§ 300-70. Permit requirements; design review process.
Except as provided for in § 300-68, no sign shall be erected or an existing
sign altered in any way without review and approval by the Design Review
Board and without issuance of a building permit as required by the Building
Inspector. All such signs shall be subject to the following design review
process:
Any sign which advertises or calls attention to any products,
businesses, or activities which are no longer sold or carried on at the
premises where the sign is located. No such sign shall remain for
more than 30 days beyond the date the business vacates said premises.
Both the landlord and the lessee shall be individually responsible for
removing such signs.
K.
Any right-angle wall sign that project more than four feet from a
building face or wall.
L.
Any sign which, due to its placement, obscures the visibility of motor
vehicles, thus creating a traffic hazard.
M.
N. Any sign not expressly permitted by this chapter.
Application. The applicant shall submit to the Design Review Board
seven copies of the application form describing the design of the
proposed sign along with a colored drawing of the sign to scale, a site
plan, if applicable, and a photograph showing the existing building or
site, and such other material as may be required by the Design Review
Board. The submittal of the application shall be in form and format
as specified by the Design Review Board. The Board may revise such
application requirements, as necessary, from time to time.
A.
Design review application fees. The applicant shall submit to the Design
Review Board the application form, other required materials and the
application fee identified below:
(1) For signs and canopies: $2 per square foot.
(2) For new building construction: $100.
B.
Design Review Board decision. Within 60 days of the receipt of the
application, including all required materials, the Design Review Board
shall either approve or disapprove the application. It is suggested that
the applicant be present at the meeting. Should the DRB fail to take
action within 60 days after receiving an application, the requested sign
shall be deemed approved by the Design Review Board.
C.
Sign permit. Upon notice of approval from the Design Review Board,
the applicant may apply for a sign permit for the proposed signage from
the Building Inspector. In keeping with § 300-22, and in recognition of
the difficulty in regulating the use of all types of signs within the City,
the Design Review Board shall also be assigned the following duties:
D.
§ 300-69 BEVERLY CODE § 300-70
1:638
§ 300-71. Maintenance; enforcement; violations and penalties.
The Design Review Board shall approve or disapprove all signs
proposed now or hereafter within the City of Beverly which are
not expressly allowed by right by this chapter. In approving or
disapproving any particular sign not expressly allowed by this
chapter, the Design Review Board shall take into consideration the
following:
The zoning district, the uses existing in the area, and the
general character of the area.
(a)
The economic and business interests of the party having
erected or proposing to erect the sign.
(b)
The aesthetic appearance of the sign and its overall effect
on the surrounding area, including ensuring that the sign is
consistent with the general policy and adheres to the design
guidelines as defined in § 300-66.
(c)
(1)
The Design Review Board shall not approve the erection of any sign
expressly prohibited by this chapter, other City ordinance, or the
Building Code of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
(2)
All signs and their devices supporting them shall be kept in good repair
and safe condition. This shall mean the absence of rust, broken or
dangling parts, and cracked, peeling, and flaking paint.
A.
The Building Inspector or a designee is authorized to order the repair
or removal of any sign and its supporting structure which in the
judgment of the Building Inspector is deemed unsafe, in disrepair,
or which is erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.
B.
With the exception of § 300-68K, any person, firm or corporation
violating any section or provision of this chapter which pertains to
signage shall be issued a warning and be given 14 days to comply. If
a violation continues unabated past such time, a citation with a fine of
$100 shall be issued for each day willful violation continues. Violations
of § 300-68K shall be punishable by a warning for the first offense and
a fine of $100 for the second and subsequent offenses, with each day
of violation constituting a separate offense. [Amended 6-20-2007 by
Ord. No. 57]
C.
The Building Inspector or a designee shall be responsible for issuing
such warnings and citations for such violations of the provisions of
this article and for enforcing the provisions of this article. [Amended
5-29-2003 by Ord. No. 59]
D.
§ 300-70 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-72
1:639
§ 300-72. Variances. [Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 61]
The Zoning Board of Appeal, by special permit, may allow deviation from the
requirements of this article if it determines that special circumstances or
conditions exist with respect to application of the requirements contained
herein and that such deviation will be in harmony with the general purpose
and intent of this article and the general policy set forth in § 300-66 hereof
and will not be injurious to the neighborhood or adversely affect abutting
properties.
§ 300-72 BEVERLY CODE § 300-72
1:640
ARTICLE XII
Nonconforming Situations
[Amended 7-12-2011 by Ord. No. 57]
§ 300-73. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONCOMPLYING SITUATIONS — Those uses, lots, buildings, structures,
parking spaces, loading spaces, signs, landscaping and other activities that
are subject to the provisions of this chapter, which were not lawfully created
after this chapter was adopted or after amendments to this chapter which
are applicable to those situations were adopted, are in violation of this
chapter and may be called "noncomplying situations."
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES, 10 YEARS OR OLDER — In accordance
with MGL c. 40A, § 7, a structure which has not been in compliance with
this chapter, or with the conditions set forth in any special permit or
variance affecting the structure, for a period of 10 years or more from the
commencement of the violation may not be the subject of an enforcement
action by the City to compel the removal, alteration, or relocation of such
structure. Structures which qualify under MGL c. 40A, § 7, are considered
to be nonconforming structures and are entitled to treatment as such as
provided in this section.
NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS — Those uses, lots, buildings, structures,
parking spaces, loading spaces, signs, landscaping and other activities that
are now subject to the provisions of this chapter which were lawful before
this chapter was adopted, or before amendments to this chapter which are
applicable to the situation were adopted, and such situations do not now
conform to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 300-74. Purpose.
The provisions of this article are intended to achieve the following purposes:
To allow nonconforming situations to continue until they are
discontinued or abandoned.
A.
To encourage change in nonconforming situations toward greater
compliance with the provisions, objectives, and purposes stated in this
chapter.
B.
To limit expansion of a nonconforming use, as measured either by the
amount of floor space or land area used or by the volume of activity
in the use; and to encourage the substitution of other uses, which may
also be nonconforming, but which are more compatible with, and have
fewer adverse impacts on, the surrounding area.
C.
To permit some expansion of nonconforming buildings, provided there
are not demonstrable adverse impacts on adjoining properties.
D.
§ 300-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-74
1:641
§ 300-75. Continuation of nonconforming situations; creation date.
§ 300-76. Effect of special permits, findings and variances.
In the event of the partial destruction of a nonconforming situation, to
permit the reconstruction of the nonconforming situation so that the
owner and tenants, if any, are not subjected to substantial economic
loss while, at the same time, seeking to achieve greater conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and to reduce any adverse impacts on the
surrounding area.
E.
To permit the treatment of nonconforming situations to be varied by
the type of zoning district and the type of nonconformity; i.e., to have a
different approach for uses, structures, parking or lots.
F.
Continuation of nonconforming situations. A use, building, structure,
parking space, loading bay, sign, landscaping or any other activity
which is nonconforming, but not noncomplying, may be continued but
may not be increased or expanded except as may be specifically
authorized by this chapter. If a nonconforming situation is abandoned
or terminated, as set forth below, it may not be resumed except in
compliance with this chapter.
A.
Lawfully created. A use, building, structure, lot, parking space, loading
bay, sign, landscaping or any other activity is considered to be lawfully
created, with respect to zoning requirements, if:
It was in existence on February 23, 1939, when the Beverly Zoning
Ordinance was originally adopted; or
(1)
Subsequent to February 23, 1939, it was permitted by right by
the Beverly Zoning Ordinance and was in existence prior to the
effective date of any amendment which renders it nonconforming,
and, if required at the time of its creation, a building permit or
certificate of occupancy was issued.
(2)
B.
Evidence of lawful creation. As the records of the Building/Inspection
Department in earlier years are incomplete, the Building Inspector or
his designee may accept such evidence of lawful creation for those
years as he/she may deem to be adequate in lieu of official City records.
C.
A use, building, structure, lot, parking space, loading bay, sign,
landscaping or any other activity which is not otherwise permitted
by right and does not comply with this chapter due to the granting
of a variance, a finding in accordance with MGL c. 40A, § 6, or a
special permit is not a nonconforming situation, is not entitled to the
treatments afforded by this chapter and is bound to the conditions of
the special permit, finding or variance, as granted.
A.
In the case of a special permit, finding, or variance which is not entitled
to treatment as a nonconforming situation, the Zoning Board of Appeals
may grant an additional special permit, finding, or variance which
B.
§ 300-74 BEVERLY CODE § 300-76
1:642
§ 300-77. Reversion to nonconformity prohibited.
Once a use, building, structure, lot, parking space, loading space, sign,
landscaping or any other activity which had been nonconforming is brought
into conformity with this chapter, it shall not be permitted to revert to
nonconformity. Once a use, building, structure, lot, parking space, loading
bay, sign, landscaping or any other activity which is nonconforming is
brought into closer conformity with this chapter (i.e., the amount or degree
of nonconformity is reduced), it shall not be permitted to revert to
nonconformity with the provisions of this chapter which is greater than the
closest amount or degree of conformity which it has achieved.
§ 300-78. Changes resulting in noncompliance.
No lot upon which there is a building or for which a building permit
is in force shall be subdivided or otherwise changed in area or shape,
except through public acquisition by eminent domain, so as to result in a
violation, applicable to either the lot or the building, of the dimensional and
other applicable requirements of this chapter. A lot already nonconforming
shall not be changed in area or shape so as to increase the degree of
nonconformity with the requirements of this chapter; a nonconforming lot
may be changed in area or shape to move closer to conformity with the
requirements of this chapter. If land is subdivided, conveyed or otherwise
transferred in violation hereof, no building permit, special permit, variance,
finding, certificate of occupancy or approval of a plan under the Subdivision
Control Law shall be issued with reference to said transferred land until
both the lot retained and the newly created lot(s) meet the requirements of
this chapter.
§ 300-79. Nonconformity resulting from public action.
If, as a result of public acquisition, a use, building, structure, lot, parking
space, loading space, sign, landscaping or any other activity no longer
has the effect of changing, extending or altering said special permit,
finding, or variance, provided the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that:
Such change, extension, or alteration will not be substantially more
detrimental than the existing nonconforming structure or use to
the neighborhood; and
(1)
The structure or use as changed, altered or extended will not
depart further from the intent of this chapter than the prior use or
degrees of use; and
(2)
Such structure or use is not increased in either building volume,
footprint or area by more than 25% after July 12, 2011, unless
the Zoning Board of Appeals finds that the proposed increase
in volume, footprint or area improves the exterior architectural
appearance of the structure, in which event building volume,
footprint or area may be increased up to 50% after July 12, 2011.
(3)
§ 300-76 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-79
1:643
complies with this chapter, it shall be considered to be nonconforming
and entitled to the treatment afforded by this article, provided it was in
compliance at the time of the public acquisition.
§ 300-80. Discontinuance or abandonment.
A nonconforming situation is considered to be discontinued or
abandoned whenever:
(1) It is not used for a period of 24 consecutive months; or
There is evidence of discontinuance or abandonment and it is
apparent that the owner does not intend to resume the
nonconforming situation.
(2)
A.
In the administration of Subsection A(2) above, evidence of
discontinuance or abandonment shall be:
Bringing the use, structure or other nonconformity into compliance
with this chapter; or
(1)
Ceasing to be open to the public for the conduct of business for a
period of six continuous months, and one or more of the following:
Removal of customary equipment or supplies for the operation
of a use.
(a)
(b) Disconnecting electrical, gas or other utility services.
Failure to provide for operation in colder weather, such as
ceasing to heat the building at normal levels required by health
regulations or failing to provide snow removal.
(c)
Issuance of a notice of an unsafe structure by the Director of
Municipal Inspections or designee.178
(d)
(2)
B.
In the event that the Director of Municipal Inspections or designee has
evidence of discontinuance or abandonment, he/she shall communicate
with the owner of record, by certified mail, inquiring as to the owner's
intent and informing the owner of the potential loss in nonconforming
status. Such owner shall be allowed a period of 30 days from the
transmittal of such communication in which to respond and to take
action.179
C.
Discontinuance or abandonment of a part of a nonconforming use,
structure or situation shall not normally be considered to be evidence of
discontinuance or abandonment of the whole unless that part which is
discontinued or abandoned is the part which causes the nonconformity.
D.
178. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-79 BEVERLY CODE § 300-81
1:644
§ 300-81. Change of ownership, tenancy, or management.
The rights of a nonconforming use, structure, building, lot, parking space,
loading bay, landscaping or other situation are not affected by a change
in ownership, tenancy or management unless such ownership, tenancy or
management is specifically a condition of the issuance of a permit.
§ 300-82. Nonconforming uses.
§ 300-83. Nonconforming dwellings and buildings.
A nonconforming use may be continued to the same degree and for the
same purpose but may not be altered, expanded or extended except
as permitted by this section. A nonconforming use shall be considered
to be altered, expanded or extended if there is an increase in the net
floor area, or an increase in the number of employees, or a substantial
increase in the number of automobile or truck traffic trips generated
by the use, or an increase in the hours of operation, or a change
from seasonal to full-time operation, since the use first became
nonconforming.
A.
A nonconforming use is limited to the lot on which it is located and
cannot be relocated to another lot.
B.
Substitution of nonconforming use. The Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA)
may issue a special permit to allow a new use, not otherwise permitted
by right in the zoning district in which the nonconforming use is
located, to be substituted for the existing nonconforming use, subject
to the condition that the new use is no less compatible with the zoning
district in which the nonconforming use is located than the existing
nonconforming use it replaces. In this context, "no less compatible"
shall mean it complies with the criteria set forth in § 300-91B of this
chapter.
C.
If a new use, not otherwise permitted by right in the zoning district
in which it is located, is allowed by a special permit granted under
Subsection C above, the new substituted use shall be considered to be
the nonconforming use. The previous nonconforming use shall not be
reestablished.
D.
One-family or two-family dwelling.
Building permit or special permit required.
An existing nonconforming one-family or two-family dwelling
which is nonconforming with respect to a minimum yard
setback may be enlarged or extended in any other direction in
compliance with this chapter by up to 25% in either building
volume, footprint or area after July 12, 2011, through the
issuance of a building permit as provided in Article XIV.
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 300-81 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-83
1:645
An existing nonconforming one-family or two-family dwelling
which is nonconforming with respect to a minimum yard
setback may be enlarged or extended in any other direction
in compliance with this chapter by more than 25% in either
building volume, footprint or area after July 12, 2011, provided
the ZBA grants a special permit in accordance with § 300-91B.
(b)
That part of an existing nonconforming dwelling which is
nonconforming with respect to a minimum yard setback may be
enlarged or extended in that yard, provided the ZBA grants a
special permit and provided that the degree of nonconformity is not
greater than 50% of the required minimum yard setback.
(2)
Other than one- or two-family dwelling.
An existing nonconforming building, other than a one-family or
two-family dwelling, which is nonconforming with respect to a
minimum yard setback may be enlarged or extended in any other
direction in compliance with this chapter by the issuance of a
building permit, provided that such structure or use is not
increased in either building volume, footprint or area by more
than 25% after July 12, 2011, unless the Zoning Board of Appeals
determines that the proposed increase in volume, footprint or area
improves the exterior architectural appearance of the structure, in
which event building volume, footprint or area may be increased
up to 50% after July 12, 2011, provided all other uses, structures
and activities on the lot comply fully with the requirements of this
chapter.
(1)
An existing nonconforming building, other than a one-family or
two-family dwelling which is nonconforming with respect to any
zoning provision other than a minimum yard setback may not be
enlarged or extended except by special permit from the ZBA.
(2)
B.
Noncomplying buildings.
If a building, or a part of a building, does not comply with the
applicable dimensional standards other than minimum lot area or
minimum lot frontage, or those that were in effect when it was
constructed, and the building was constructed in accordance with
a building permit issued by the City except for such dimensional
noncompliance, it shall be considered to be a nonconforming
building, and entitled to treatment as such, if the following
conditions are met:
The noncompliance has existed for at least six years, during
which time no enforcement action under the provisions of
Article XIV of this chapter has been taken; and
(a)
The noncompliance was not created or increased by changes
in lot lines after the construction of the building.
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 300-83 BEVERLY CODE § 300-83
1:646
§ 300-84. Nonconforming lots.
A lot which does not comply with the provisions of this chapter with respect
to minimum lot area, minimum lot frontage, or minimum lot width or with
the requirements then in effect at the time of recording or endorsement
of the plan, whichever occurred first, may not be subdivided or otherwise
changed in area or shape, except through public action, so as to be in
violation of the provisions of this chapter. A lot already nonconforming with
respect to those provisions shall not be changed in area or shape so as
to increase the degree of noncompliance. A lot which is nonconforming
with respect to those provisions may be changed to be made closer in
compliance, but once brought closer into compliance, i.e., the amount or
degree of nonconformity is reduced, it shall not be permitted to revert to
a degree of noncompliance which is greater than the closest amount or
degree of compliance which it has achieved.
§ 300-85. Nonconforming off-street parking and loading.
If a building, or a part of a building, does not comply with the
applicable dimensional standards, other than minimum lot area or
minimum lot frontage, or those that were in effect when it was
constructed but the building was not constructed in accordance
with a building permit duly issued or there is no evidence a building
permit was issued, the ZBA may grant a special permit for the
continued use of the building under the provisions of § 300-91.
(2)
Existing nonconforming parking spaces or loading space. Any off-street
parking spaces or loading spaces in existence on the effective date
of this chapter or thereafter established, which serve a building or
use, may not be reduced in number or changed in location or design
contrary to the requirements of Article X of this chapter so as to
increase the degree of nonconformity with the requirements of that
article.
If the use of an existing structure or lot which does not have
sufficient parking or loading (including a use which has no offstreet
parking or loading) is changed to a different type of use for
which a different number of parking spaces or loading spaces is
required as set forth in Article X of this chapter and there is no
increase in the net floor area, then the following rules shall apply:
If there is a net increase in the number of required parking
spaces or loading space resulting from a change to an existing
nonconforming situation, that net increase in required parking
spaces or loading space as set forth in Article X of this chapter
shall be provided unless the special permit granting authority
for the respective zoning district shall grant a waiver from the
requirement to provide additional parking spaces or loading
space if it finds that one or more of the following criteria are
met:
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 300-83 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-85
1:647
That the current parking and/or loading supply for the
existing use is adequate to serve the expected parking
demand of the nonconforming situation, as changed.
[1]
That sufficient parking or loading space exists on-street
and/or in nearby public parking lots to meet the expected
increase in parking supply needed for the nonconforming
situation, as changed.
[2]
If it is proposed to increase the net floor area of a building, whether
by addition to the exterior of the building or by internal
reconstruction, and the building does not have sufficient off-street
parking or loading, full compliance with Article X of this chapter
for the entire building shall be a condition of the issuance of a
building permit for the construction of the increase of net floor area
unless the special permit granting authority shall grant a waiver in
accordance with Subsection A(1)(a).
(2)
Parking spaces or loading spaces in existence as of the date of any
zoning or other ordinance change that renders existing parking
spaces or loading space nonconforming, which serve existing uses,
may be counted toward the number needed for the increase in the
net floor area of an existing building or the change from one type
of use to another, but not for a new building, even if they do not
conform to the requirements of Article X, provided they comply
to the maximum extent practicable. An applicant seeking such
credit for existing parking spaces or loading space shall first submit
an off-street parking and loading plan certified by a registered
land surveyor or professional engineer showing the number and
dimensions of existing parking spaces and/or loading space, the
type of surfacing material, as well as documentation as to the
spaces' existence prior to the adoption of the ordinance change
which rendered the parking situation nonconforming. If the
existing paved area is not marked off into parking spaces or loading
space, such spaces or loading space, complying with §§ 300-63 and
300-64, shall be delineated on the plan. To qualify, an existing
parking space or loading space shall be entirely on the same lot as
the use it serves, or on a contiguous lot, or on a nearby lot provided
that it is located within 500 feet of the main entrance to the use it
serves.
(3)
Parking and loading requirements for a building destroyed, damaged or
demolished.
If a building for which sufficient off-street parking or loading is not
provided is destroyed, damaged or demolished by the owner, the
building may be reconstructed or replaced if otherwise permitted
by this chapter, without providing additional parking spaces or
loading space, provided the new use is the same type and degree
of use (see § 300-59) as the use before the destruction, damage
or demolition, or is a type of use that requires the same or fewer
(1)
B.
§ 300-85 BEVERLY CODE § 300-85
1:648
§ 300-86. Repair and reconstruction.
parking spaces or loading space. If parking spaces and/or loading
spaces were provided before the destruction, damage or
demolition, at least the same number of spaces and/or loading
spaces shall be provided.
If the reconstructed building will be occupied by a different use,
for which a greater number of parking spaces or loading space
is required, full compliance with Article X of this chapter for the
entire building shall be a condition of the issuance of any building
permit for the reconstruction or replacement of the building.
(2)
If the building is reconstructed with more net floor area than
previously existed, full compliance with Article X of this chapter
will be required unless:
The special permit granting authority for the zoning district in
which the property is located grants a waiver of the parking
requirement for the additional net floor area in accordance
with Subsection A(1)(a); and
(a)
At least the same number of parking spaces and/or loading
space that was provided before the destruction, damage, or
demolition are provided.
(b)
(3)
Continuance; repairs. Routine maintenance and repairs are permitted
to a nonconforming structure, building, sign, parking space, loading
space, landscaping, or other nonconforming situation to maintain it in
sound condition and presentable appearance. With respect to signs, the
term "routine maintenance and repairs" shall not include any changes
to colors, text, lighting mechanism, or location. Such activities must
be approved by the Design Review Board and may be subject to the
issuance of a permit by the Building Inspector.
A.
Reconstruction after destruction (by right). Any nonconforming use,
structure, building, sign, parking space, loading space, landscaping,
or other nonconforming situation which is destroyed or damaged by
explosion, collapse, fire, storm, natural disaster or other catastrophic
event which is beyond the control of the owner, to the extent of not
more than 50% of its replacement cost, as determined by the Director
of Municipal Inspections or designee, may be reconstructed through
the issuance of a building permit, provided that:180
Such structure or use is not increased in volume, footprint, or area
by more than 25% in either building volume, footprint, or area; and
(1)
The reconstruction conforms to the current requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent practicable in the opinion of the
(2)
B.
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-85 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-86
1:649
§ 300-87. Vesting of rights during adoption of amendments.
Director of Municipal Inspections or designee. In this context,
"maximum extent practicable" shall consider extreme site
conditions, such as steep grades, the presence of ledge or other
unsuitable soil conditions, or the shape and configuration of the lot.
Reconstruction after destruction (by special permit). The ZBA may
grant a special permit for the reconstruction of a nonconforming use,
structure, building, sign, parking space or loading space or other
nonconforming situation which is destroyed or damaged by explosion,
collapse, fire, storm, natural disaster or other catastrophic event which
is beyond the control of the owner, to the extent of more than 50%
of its replacement cost, as determined by the Director of Municipal
Inspections or designee, or by the proposed voluntary action of the
owner to demolish, in whole or in part, provided the ZBA determines
that:181
Such structure or use is not increased in either building volume,
footprint or area by more than 50%.
(1)
The reconstruction conforms to the current requirements of this
chapter to the maximum extent practicable as described in
Subsection B above.
(2)
In the case of the reconstruction of a nonconforming use, it
complies with the standards for the substitution of a
nonconforming use described in § 300-82C above.
(3)
C.
A use, building, structure, sign, parking space, loading space,
landscaping, or other situation which would comply with the provisions
of this chapter at the time at which a building permit is issued or
a special permit is granted but would not comply with a proposed
amendment to this chapter shall be considered to be nonconforming
and may be completed, continued or maintained, provided that:
The building permit was issued or special permit was granted
before the first publication of notice of public hearing on the
proposed amendment (the filing of an application for either a
building permit or a special permit is not sufficient to vest rights);
and
(1)
Substantial physical construction or start of operations is begun
within six months of the issuance of a building permit or within
two years of the grant of a special permit and is carried through
to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable in
the opinion of the Director of Municipal Inspections or designee. If
the construction is not completed within 18 months of the issuance
of the building permit, the rights to nonconforming status shall
(2)
A.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-86 BEVERLY CODE § 300-87
1:650
§ 300-88. Certificate of occupancy or registration.183
The Director of Municipal Inspections or designee may issue a certificate of
occupancy or certificate of registration of nonconformity that acknowledges
the existence of a use, structure, building, lot, sign, parking space, loading
space, landscaping or other situation which is believed to be
nonconforming. The issuance of either certificate shall not be a final
determination by the Director of Municipal Inspections or designee, unless
so stated, that the apparent nonconformity was lawfully created but is a
means of recording the size, characteristics and degree of nonconformity at
the time of issuance of the certificate.
cease and the construction shall comply with this chapter, as
amended.182
In the event of the filing and subsequent approval of a definitive
subdivision plan, an exemption from an amendment to this chapter and
a right to be treated under the previously existing provisions of this
chapter may be vested as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 6.
B.
In the event of the filing and subsequent endorsement of an "approval
not required" plan, referred to in MGL c. 41, § 81P, of the Subdivision
Control Law (MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG), an exemption from an
amendment to this chapter affecting the use of land only and a right
to be treated under the previously existing provisions of this chapter
may be vested as set forth in MGL c. 40A, § 6. Such exemption shall
apply only in the case of the endorsement of a plan showing a division
of land, as defined in MGL c. 41, § 81L, of the Subdivision Control Law,
in which there is a change in lot lines and shall not apply in the case
of the endorsement of a plan which confirms existing lot lines without
change.
C.
In the event that rights have been vested under a previous version
of the Zoning Ordinance, an owner may proceed as if that version of
the Zoning Ordinance applied to his/her property or he/she may use
the most current version of the Zoning Ordinance but must use either
version of the Zoning Ordinance fully and cannot select provisions of
both versions.
D.
182. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
183. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-87 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-88
1:651

ARTICLE XIII
Board of Appeals
[Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 300-89. Continuance and authority; fees; hearings; records.
The Board of Appeals in existence when this amendment shall take effect
shall continue, subject to its existing rules and procedures, the authorities
conferred thereon by Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws, and
the provisions of this chapter.
There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of five members who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. The terms
of the appointed members shall be such that one expires on January 31
of each year. Any vacancy on the Board shall be similarly filled for any
unexpired term, and such Board shall annually elect a Chairman from
its own members.184
A.
There shall be five associate members of the Board of Appeals, who
shall be appointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council; and
in case of a vacancy, inability to act, or interest on the part of a regular
member of the Board, his or her place shall be filled by an associate
member, who shall have all powers and duties of the member whose
place he or she fills.185
B.
Any person whose application has been refused may appeal therefrom
within 60 days. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed,
together with a fee of $10, with the Building Inspector, who shall
transmit the appeal to the Board at once, and deposit the fee with the
City Collector. The fee for a special permit or variance application shall
be $150; the fee for an administrative appeal shall be $200; or fees as
set from time to time by the Board of Appeals.186
C.
The cost of advertising of the hearings shall be paid for by the petitioner
to the Clerk of the Board of Appeals.
D.
After such notice to the appellant, to the Inspector and to other such
parties as the Board may order, and after 14 days' published notice, a
hearing shall be had, and the Board may by a four-fifths vote affirm,
annul, or modify the proposal in harmony with the intent and purpose
of the chapter but not otherwise.
E.
The Board of Appeals shall keep a detailed record of its proceedings.
The record shall indicate the vote of each member upon each question,
F.
184. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
185. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
186. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-89 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-89
1:653
§ 300-90. Scope of authority.
Upon appeal from the decision by an administrative official, the Board
of Appeals shall decide any question involving the interpretation of any
provision of this chapter.
§ 300-91. Special permit uses. [Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 57]
including whether the member was absent or failed to vote; the reason
or reasons for the Board's decision; and the official action taken.
The Board of Appeals may authorize the uses set forth in this chapter
by special permits, subject to the provisions of this article, except
the Planning Board, not the Board of Appeals, will be the special
permit granting authority for special permits in the CC, WD or WDR
District (except for bed-and-breakfast establishments), the IR Overlay
or WSPOD District, and for special permits concerning floor area ratio
(FAR) bonus, pork-chop-shaped lots, deviations from the requirements
for off-street parking, congregate elderly housing and inclusionary
housing. The City Council, not the Board of Appeals, will be the special
permit granting authority for special permits concerning the residential
reuse of existing and former public buildings.
A.
Before taking final action on applications for special permit uses, the
Board of Appeals and Planning Board shall consider whether the
following and other conditions are met:
That the specific site is an appropriate location for the proposed
use, and that the character of adjoining uses will not be adversely
affected.
(1)
That no factual evidence is found that property values in the
district will be adversely affected by such use.
(2)
That no undue traffic and no nuisance or unreasonable hazard will
result.
(3)
That adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the
proper operation and maintenance of the proposed use.
(4)
That there are no valid objections from abutting property owners
based on demonstrable fact.
(5)
That adequate and appropriate City services are or will be available
for the proposed use.
(6)
B.
In granting approval of an application for a special permit use, the
special permit granting authority may attach all reasonable and
necessary conditions to assure that the uses of surrounding properties
are adequately safeguarded and that the intent of the Comprehensive
Plan and this chapter are maintained.
C.
§ 300-89 BEVERLY CODE § 300-91
1:654
§ 300-92. Variances.
Construction or operations under a special permit shall conform to any
subsequent amendment of this chapter unless the use or construction
is commenced within a period of six months after the issuance of the
permit and, in cases involving construction, unless such construction is
continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as
is reasonable.
D.
A special permit shall lapse after two years, and including such time
required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal, from the
grant thereof, if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced
except for good cause or, in the case of permit for construction, if
construction has not begun by such date except for good cause.
E.
The special permit granting authority shall adopt rule and regulations
relative to the issuance of special permits. A copy of the rules and
regulations are filed with the City Clerk.
F.
The Board of Appeals may grant variances, including variances for use
in any nonresidential district (but no use variance may be granted in
any R Districts), to the strict application of any of the requirements of
this chapter only for reasons of practical difficulty and demonstrable
and substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the appellant, and
only where the Board finds that: [Amended 6-26-1992]
There are special circumstances or conditions applying to the land
or building for which the variance is sought (such as, but not
limited to, the exceptional narrowness, shallowness or shape of
the property in question, or exceptional topographical conditions),
which circumstances or conditions are peculiar to such land or
building but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is
located, and the application of the standards of this chapter would
deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the property.
(1)
The specific variance as granted by the Board is the minimum
variance that will grant reasonable relief to the owner and is
necessary for a reasonable use of the land or building.
(2)
The granting of the variance will be in harmony with the general
purpose and intent of this chapter, and will not be injurious to the
neighborhood or otherwise detrimental to the public welfare. In
addition to considering the character and use of nearby buildings
and land, the Board, in determining its finding, shall take into
account the number of persons residing or working in such
buildings or upon such land and the present and probable future
traffic conditions.
(3)
A.
In acting on any variance, the Board of Appeals shall consider one
or more of those factors set forth under § 300-91B as appropriate,
and shall prescribe any conditions and safeguards that it deems to
B.
§ 300-91 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-92
1:655
§ 300-93. Temporary use variances.
§ 300-94. Procedures for special permits, findings and variances.
[Amended 7-17-2013 by Ord. No. 57]
be necessary or desirable. These conditions cannot require continued
ownership of the land or structure by the application, petitioner, or
owner.
The Board of Appeals may grant a special permit for the removal
of topsoil, sand, gravel, or other natural materials for commercial
purposes as a temporary nonconforming use in an IR or IG District,
provided that the following conditions apply:
The Board of Appeals shall hold a public hearing after notifying
all interested parties, all as provided by Chapter 40A of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
(1)
The applicant shall furnish a plan showing present and proposed
conditions and state a time of completion.
(2)
The Board of Appeals shall consider the neighborhood and its
future development in passing on applications.
(3)
The applicant shall furnish a performance bond of an amount
determined by the Board of Appeals and surety satisfactory to the
City Treasurer.
(4)
The applicant shall authorize the City to use the proceeds of the
bond to restore the property to a condition not detrimental to
the neighborhood or its future development if the work is not
completed within two years of the proposed time or within a
granted extension of time. An extension of time may be granted by
the Planning Board.
(5)
Temporary use permits shall be granted for a period not to exceed
five years and may be annually at the discretion of the Board.
(6)
A.
The Board of Appeals may grant a variance for a nonconforming
building, structure, or use incidental to the development of a
subdivision or other construction project in any R District, including
such accessory uses as a construction office, real estate sales office,
and storage of materials and supplies located on the tract or lot to
which such use is accessory. A temporary use permit for such use or
building shall be issued only upon written agreement of the owner,
or his or her agent, to remove such building or structure within 30
days after completion of construction or the issuance of a certificate of
occupancy for the last house of a subdivision. Such temporary permit
shall be issued for a period not to exceed three years and may be
renewed annually at the discretion of the Board.
B.
§ 300-92 BEVERLY CODE § 300-94
1:656
§ 300-95. Fees for appeals and applications. [Amended 6-11-2007 by
Ord. No. 35187]
All appeals and applications filed with the Board of Appeals shall be
accompanied by a fee to cover publication of hearing notices and other
administrative expenses, such fee to be in accordance with the schedule
adopted by the Board of Appeals and approved by the City Council and
payable to the City of Beverly.
Procedural requirements for special permits, findings and variances
shall be in accordance with Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General
Laws, on file with the City Clerk. Optional procedural requirements
of Chapter 40A are not included in this chapter. The Zoning Board of
Appeals shall be the authority to grant special permits and variances,
except the Planning Board, not the Zoning Board of Appeals, will be
the special permit granting authority for special permits in the CC,
WD or WDR District (except for bed-and-breakfast establishments),
the IR Overlay or WSPOD District and for special permits concerning
floor area ratio (FAR) bonus, pork-chop-shaped lots, deviations from
the requirements for off-street parking, Congregate elderly housing and
inclusionary housing. The City Council, not the Board of Appeals, will
be the special permit granting authority for special permits concerning
the residential reuse of existing and former public buildings.
A.
Subsequent to a special permit, finding, or variance granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, minor modifications to the application and/
or plan may be made from time to time in accordance with applicable
City ordinances and regulations. The development approved under such
special permit, finding, or variance shall otherwise be in accordance
with the approved plans and such conditions, as may be included, in the
decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals.
B.
The applicant shall notify the Zoning Board of Appeals in writing well
in advance of any such modification, which shall not be effective until
approved by vote of the Zoning Board of Appeals. The developer shall
also submit a plan depicting such modification. Should the Zoning
Board of Appeals determine that such revisions are not minor, it shall
order that an application for modification of a special permit, finding or
variance be filed and a public hearing be held in the same manner as
set forth for such applications.
C.
187. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art.
III).
§ 300-94 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-95
1:657

ARTICLE XIV
Administration and Enforcement
[Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No. 35]
§ 300-96. Building Inspector.
§ 300-97. Permits required.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector and he or she shall have
the powers necessary to administer and enforce the provisions of this
chapter.
A.
Said official shall keep a record of all applications for permits issued,
with a notation of any special conditions involved. He shall file and
safely keep copies of all plot plans submitted, and the same shall be a
part of his or her records.
B.
No building or structure shall be erected, added to or altered and no
excavation shall be started until a building permit therefor shall have
been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the building complies
with all provisions of this chapter.
A.
No land or building shall be occupied, used, or changed in use until
a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building
Inspector stating that the proposed use of such land or building
complies with all the provisions of this chapter.
B.
A certificate of occupancy shall be applied for at the same time
application is made for a building permit and shall be issued following
an inspection of the premises by the Building Inspector and his or her
finding that all provisions of this chapter have been met.
C.
Applications for building permits and certificates of occupancy shall be
made in duplicate on forms provided by the Building Inspector, each
to be accompanied by a plot plan drawn to scale showing all lots and
required yard dimensions, the size and location of all buildings and
uses, and all other information as may be required by the Building
Inspector to process said application. The proposed handling of water
supply and sewage disposal shall be described on all applications and
shown on the plot plan.
D.
For purposes of administration, such permit and application procedure
involving a structure may be made at the same time and combined with
the permits required under the State Building Code.
E.
Where applications are denied by the Building Inspector, the specific
reasons for so doing shall be stated fully on the filed copies of the
application and one copy returned to the applicant.
F.
All valid permits must be exercised within 12 months after date of
issuance. If the valid permit is not exercised, a renewal permit must be
applied for.
G.
§ 300-96 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-98
1:659
§ 300-98. Site plan review of commercial, industrial and multifamily
developments. [Amended 11-21-1988]
Projects requiring site plan review are listed in Tables I and II below.
Table I lists those projects involving new construction which are subject
to site plan review. Table II lists those projects involving expansion of
existing structures which are subject to site plan review. In addition,
any project granted a special permit for additional building height by
the Planning Board in accordance with § 300-40D(2), (3) or (5) shall be
subject to site plan review. [Amended 7-1-1992; 6-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 314]
Table I: New Construction
Zoning Classification
Building Size Requiring Site Plan
Review
IG 5,000 square feet
IR 25,000 square feet or more than 1
structure on a lot
CG Lot coverage over 65%
CC 1,000 square feet
CN 1,000 square feet
BHD 1,000 square feet
HD 5,000 square feet
Multifamily Over 10 units; more than 2 townhouses or
similar building type on a single lot
Table II: Expansion Construction
Zoning Classification
Percent Increase in Gross
Square Footage Requiring Site
Plan Review
IG-zoned buildings over 10,000
square feet
30%
IR-zoned buildings over 25,000
square feet or more than 1
structure on a lot
30%
CG-zoned buildings with total lot
coverage exceeding 65%
1%
CC-zoned buildings over 1,000
square feet
40%
CN-zoned buildings over 1,000
square feet
40%
BHD-zoned buildings over 5,000
square feet
20%
A.
§ 300-98 BEVERLY CODE § 300-98
1:660
Table II: Expansion Construction
Zoning Classification
Percent Increase in Gross
Square Footage Requiring Site
Plan Review
HD-zoned buildings over 5,000
square feet
20%
Multifamily buildings over 10
units or more than 2 townhouses
or similar building type on a lot
20%
Projects consisting of a brewery, distillery, winery, as defined in § 300-5,
Definitions, of the of this chapter, containing 10,000 square feet of
gross floor area or greater, and that are proposed within an existing
building must seek site plan approval from the Planning Board. Site
plan review applies for new construction or expansion as established
above. [Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
B.
Procedure. [Amended 4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 49; 6-1-2015 by Ord.
No. 314]
Applicants shall submit to the Planning Board 10 copies of an
application for site plan review and 10 sets of plans, size 24 inches
by 36 inches. The applicant shall also submit 10 sets of plans, size
11 inches by 17 inches. The applicant shall also file one copy of the
site plan review application with the City Clerk.
(1)
An application for site plan review shall also be accompanied by the
following:
A list of the names and addresses of all property owners of
record who share a common property line with any portion of
the property specified on the site plan review application and
plan;
(a)
A filing fee of $35 per 1,000 square feet gross floor area
(minimum of $350, maximum of $5,000) for site plan review;
or $350 for a modification of site plan review; and
(b)
Written permission from the owner of the property to apply for
site plan review, if the applicant is not the owner.
(c)
(2)
At least seven days prior to the date of the public hearing, the
Planning Board shall advertise the public hearing in a newspaper
of local circulation and shall send written notice by mail to all
abutters.
(3)
Final action on the site plan shall be taken by the Planning Board
after a public hearing has been held and within 65 days of the date
of the public hearing.
(4)
C.
§ 300-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-98
1:661
All applications for site plan review shall be forwarded to both the
Parking and Traffic Commission and the Design Review Board for
their comments and recommendations. The recommendations of
this board and commission shall be received by the Planning Board
within 30 days of submission to the board/commission. Failure to
forward comments within 30 days will be deemed conclusion of
review by the Design Review Board or the Parking and Traffic
Commission. All applications for site plan review will also be
forwarded to the City Engineer for his review and approval.
(5)
The Beverly Harbor Management Authority (BHMA) shall be given
notice and forwarded applications for projects seeking site plan
review in the Beverly Harbor District and may comment on a
project in accordance with Chapter 15, § 15-34B, of the City Code
and the Acts of 1987, Chapter 221.
(6)
Failure of the Planning Board to act within 65 days of the public
hearing shall be deemed as conclusion of review and it shall
forthwith make its endorsement on said plan and, on its failure to
do so, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate to the same effect. The
Planning Board shall communicate to the appropriate municipal
officials and to applicant the results of its review.
(7)
The Planning Board may waive any of the requirements of this
section if deemed in the best interest of the City to do so.
(8)
Contents of plan. A plan accompanying an application for site plan
review shall be drawn to whatever scale necessary to show clearly all
site features, and shall include or be accompanied by the following:
(1) A locus map drawn at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet;
The location and name of all streets in the immediate vicinity of
the proposed project, with a notation as to whether the street is a
public or private right-of-way;
(2)
(3) Zoning and historic district boundary lines;
(4) Existing and proposed contour lines at one- or two-foot intervals;
The location and dimensions of all existing and proposed buildings
on the site, and on abutting properties; elevation and facade
treatment plans of all proposed buildings and signs;
(5)
Information on the location, size, and capacity of existing and
proposed utilities which will service the project (water, sewer,
electric, etc.) as well as hydrant location(s), and design plans and
specifications/information for HVAC equipment and other noiseemitting
equipment proposed on the roof of the building(s) or
elsewhere on site;
(6)
Information on the method of surface and subsurface drainage
disposal; location, type, and intensity of lighting; location, size,
(7)
D.
§ 300-98 BEVERLY CODE § 300-98
1:662
§ 300-99. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-11-2007 by Ord. No.
35]
type, and number of existing and proposed landscape features;
location and dimensions of signage; location of waste and refuse
disposal facilities, and snow removal plans for the property post
construction, and adequacy of same;
Calculations of amount of parking required, and the location, size,
and type of parking, loading and unloading, and service areas;
(8)
Information sufficient to demonstrate that satisfactory
arrangements will be made to facilitate traffic movement to, from,
and within the site, such arrangements to be subject to the review
and approval of-the Parking and Traffic Commission ("sufficient
information" may require the submission of a traffic study); and
(9)
Any additional data (including but not limited to drainage studies,
demographic studies, shadow studies, etc.) which the Planning
Board may deem necessary to evaluate the proposed project as it
relates to surrounding areas, anticipated traffic and public safety
and the intent of the Comprehensive Plan and this chapter.
(10)
Modification to approved site plan. Subsequent to a site plan granted by
the Planning Board pursuant to this section, minor modifications to the
site plan may be made from time to time in accordance with applicable
City ordinances and regulations. The development approved under such
site plan shall otherwise be in accordance with the approved plans and
such conditions, as may be included, in the decision of the Planning
Board. The developer shall notify the Planning Board in writing well
in advance of any such modification, which shall not be effective until
approved by vote of the Planning Board. The developer shall also
submit a plan depicting such modification. Should the Planning Board
determine that such revisions are not minor, it shall order that an
application for a modification of site plan be filed and a public hearing
be held in the same manner as set forth in this section. [Amended
4-9-2008 by Ord. No. 49]
E.
If at any time the Building Inspector finds that any construction or
use has been commenced in violation of this chapter, he or she shall
immediately notify the owner or agent of the nature of the violation in
writing and order the abatement of such violation.
A.
Unless another penalty is provided for violations of specific provisions
of this chapter, failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter or
with any specific conditions and safeguards imposed by the Board of
Appeals or the Planning Board in granting a variance, special permit,
or site plan review, or any plan(s) specifically cited in either board's
approval(s), shall cause the violator to be liable for a fine not to exceed
$50 for each day such violation continues unabated after the remedy
of same is ordered by the Building Inspector. In addition, the Building
B.
§ 300-98 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-99
1:663
§ 300-100. Severability; when effective.
§ 300-101. Amendments.
Proposed amendments to this chapter shall be made in accordance with the
procedures provided by Chapter 40A of the Massachusetts General Laws on
file with the City Clerk. Optional provisions of Chapter 40A concerning the
amendment process are not included in this chapter.
Inspector may elect to withhold occupancy permits until any such
failure is remedied to the respective board's satisfaction. [Amended
2-16-2016 by Ord. No. 013]
Wherever any violation of this chapter occurs, any person may file a
complaint in regard thereto in writing to the Building Inspector. The
Building Inspector shall immediately investigate said complaint and,
finding a violation to exist, shall act according to Subsection A.
C.
If any section, paragraph, subdivision, clause, phrase, or provision of
this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, the
same shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any part
of provisions thereof other than the part so decided to be invalid or
unconstitutional.
A.
The fact that the present zoning regulations are inadequate to properly
safeguard the general public welfare, health, peace, and safety, creates
an urgency and an emergency, and requires that this chapter become
effective immediately upon its passage.
B.
§ 300-99 BEVERLY CODE § 300-101
1:664
ARTICLE XV
Affordable Housing188
[Added 7-17-2007 by Ord. No. 103]
§ 300-102. Purposes and intent.
The purpose of this article is:
§ 300-103. Applicability. [Amended 7-9-2009 by Ord. No. 72;
6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 144A]
To provide affordable housing choices throughout the City, in
furtherance of the housing goals of the City of Beverly Master Plan and
the City of Beverly Affordable Housing Plan.
A.
To provide for a diverse, balanced and inclusive community, with
housing for persons of all income levels as a matter of basic fairness
and social responsibility.
B.
To assure that affordable housing is made available on an equal basis
to all eligible households without regard to race, religion, age, sex or
other class status as defined in the federal Fair Housing Act of 1968, as
amended.
C.
To encourage the inclusion of affordable housing in all new residential
and mixed-use developments.
D.
This article applies to any development that results in or contains six
or more residential dwelling units. The types of development subject to
the provisions of this article include, without limitation, the following:
A division of land resulting in the creation of six or more residential
lots. Developments shall not be segmented to avoid compliance
with this section. "Segmentation" shall mean divisions of land that
would cumulatively result in an increase of six or more residential
lots above the number existing on a parcel of land or contiguous
parcels in common ownership or control 24 months prior to the
application. Where such segmentation occurs, it shall be subject
to Article XV. A subdivision or division of land shall mean any
subdivision as defined in the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41,
§§ 81K to 81GG, or any division of land under MGL c. 41, § 81P,
when such division of land results in lots for residential use.
(1)
New residential construction or new mixed-use construction that
includes six or more dwelling units.
(2)
A development of six or more new dwelling units that involves
the redevelopment, reconstruction or rehabilitation of an existing
multifamily building or structure, if such development results in an
(3)
A.
188. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 315, Inclusionary Housing Regulations.
§ 300-102 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-103
1:665
§ 300-104. Housing affordability. [Amended 6-19-2017 by Ord. No.
144A]
increase of six or more units in the number of dwelling units in the
original structure.
A development that will change the use of an existing building from
nonresidential to residential use.
(4)
This article does not apply to nursing homes, projects meeting the
definition of subsidized elderly housing or congregate elderly housing,
nor to the rehabilitation of any building or structure wholly or
substantially destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty; provided,
however, that no rehabilitation or repair shall increase the number of
dwelling units on the lot as existed prior to the damage or destruction
thereof, except in conformance with this article.
B.
Any other development with dwelling units to which this article does
not otherwise apply may elect to be subject to this article, provided
the development meets all applicable requirements herein. Special
permits authorized under this article for developments with six or more
dwelling units may also be granted to any other development with
dwelling units, in the discretion of the Planning Board.
C.
Except as provided below, each affordable unit created under this
article shall be sold or rented by using one of the following affordability
scenarios:
No less than 12% of dwelling units shall be affordable to a
household with income at or below 80% of the area median income
that applies to subsidized housing in the City of Beverly, as
reported annually by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development (HUD), adjusted for household size.
(1)
No less than 8% of dwelling units shall be affordable to a household
with income at or below 60% of the area median income that
applies to subsidized housing in the City of Beverly, as reported
annually by HUD, adjusted for household size.
(2)
No less than 10% of dwelling units shall be affordable to a
household where at least 1/2 of the required affordable units for
households with income at or below 60% of area median income;
the remaining affordable units may be sold or rented to households
with incomes up to 80% of area median income, adjusted for
household size, subject to approval by the Planning Board.
(3)
A.
In the instance of a fraction, a fraction of a lot or dwelling unit shall be
rounded up to the nearest whole number. Nothing in this section shall
preclude a developer from providing more affordable housing units
than required hereunder.
B.
§ 300-103 BEVERLY CODE § 300-104
1:666
§ 300-105. Planning Board regulations.
The Planning Board shall adopt affordable housing regulations to
administer this article and may from time to time revise said regulations,
following a public hearing for which notice has been given in accordance
with MGL c. 40A, § 11.189
§ 300-106. (Reserved)190
§ 300-107. Location and comparability of affordable units.
Development projects creating or containing six to nine dwelling units
as established in § 300-103 shall provide one affordable unit sold or
rented to a household with income at or below 80% of the area median
income that applies to subsidized housing in the City of Beverly, as
reported annually by HUD, adjusted for household size.
C.
Affordable units shall be dispersed throughout a development and be
comparable to market-rate units in exterior building materials and
finishes; overall construction quality; and energy efficiency. Interior
finishes shall be in accordance with the Planning Board's affordable
housing regulations.191
A.
Affordable units in two-family, semidetached and multifamily dwellings
shall generally be similar in size (in gross floor area) to market-rate
units of the same type; provided, however, that the gross floor area
of the affordable units shall not be less than the minimum floor area
required by the Department of Housing and Community Development
(DHCD) for units eligible for the subsidized housing inventory as local
initiative program (LIP) units.
B.
For a development of detached one-family dwellings in a zoning district
in which said dwellings are permitted as of right, the following shall
apply:
Affordable detached one-family dwellings may be smaller than
market-rate dwellings, but in no event shall the gross floor area of
any affordable unit be less than the minimum floor area required
under the regulations or guidelines of the local initiative program
except by special permit from the Planning Board.
(1)
Alternatively, up to 20% of the units may be in two-family,
semidetached or multifamily dwellings of not more than three
units, and all or a majority of the required affordable units may be
located in said dwellings; provided, however, that the units shall
(2)
C.
189. Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Inclusionary Housing Regulations.
190. Editor's Note: Former § 300-106, Housing affordability, was repealed 6-19-2017 by Ord.
No. 144A. See now § 300-104.
191. Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Inclusionary Housing Regulations.
§ 300-104 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-107
1:667
§ 300-108. Methods of providing affordable units.
conform to the Planning Board's affordable housing regulations
and shall not be concentrated in one part of the development.
In a development of multifamily units, affordable units shall be
dispersed throughout the buildings and the floors of each building,
such that no single building or floor therein has a disproportionate
percentage of affordable units.
D.
In a development of homeownership units, the affordable units may
be restricted for occupancy by eligible homebuyers or renters, or sold
to nonprofit organizations or public agencies that provide and manage
rental housing to low- or moderate-income households.
E.
Construction of affordable units on the locus of the development ("onsite
units") shall be permitted as of right in any development and is the
preferred method of providing affordable units under this article.
A.
The Planning Board may grant a special permit for one or more of the
following alternative methods, including any combination thereof. In
granting a special permit hereunder, the Planning Board may impose
any conditions it deems necessary to assure compliance with this
article:
Off-site units, or the provision of comparable affordable units on
another site in the City of Beverly, subject to site plan review under
§ 300-98 or § 300-110 of this chapter, as applicable. Off-site units
need not be located in the same zoning district as the development.
(1)
Payment of a fee in lieu of affordable units to the City of Beverly
Affordable Housing Trust Fund. This provision shall apply only to
developments of homeownership units. The fee per affordable unit
shall be determined by Planning Board regulations in accordance
with § 300-105 above.192
(2)
Donation of developable land in the City of Beverly to the Beverly
Housing Authority, the Beverly Affordable Housing Coalition, Inc.
or a comparable entity determined at the discretion of the Planning
Board, provided the receiving organization agrees in writing to
accept the land and the applicant demonstrates to the Planning
Board's satisfaction that said land is developable for an equivalent
number of affordable units in conformance with this chapter.
Donated land need not be located in the same zoning district as the
development and shall be subject to a deed restriction limiting its
use to mixed-income or affordable housing. [Amended 6-19-2017
by Ord. No. 144A]
(3)
B.
In the R-6, RMD, RHD, RSD, CN, CC or CG District, if the developer
provides a greater number of affordable units on site than the minimum
C.
192. Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Inclusionary Housing Regulations.
§ 300-107 BEVERLY CODE § 300-108
1:668
§ 300-109. Dimensional and density regulations for on-site units.
required to comply with § 300-106 above, the Planning Board may grant
a special permit for "credit units" to reduce the number of affordable
units that must be provided under this article in another development
in a different location, whether in the same zoning district or a different
zoning district. The developer may apply the credit units to a future
project or transfer the credits in writing to another developer, provided
that the credit units are used within 10 years from the effective date of
the special permit.
The following dimensional and density regulations shall apply to any
development that provides all of the required affordable units as onsite
units; provided, however, that for purposes of determining a
development's base maximum density and required percentage of
affordable units under § 300-106 above, the building and area
requirements set forth in Subsection D of §§ 300-30 through 300-34
shall apply.
In the R-90, R-45, R-22, R-15 or R-10 District, for each on-site
affordable unit, the applicant may propose one additional dwelling
unit over that which would otherwise be permitted in the district.
The minimum lot area for any lot in the development shall be not
less than 85% of the minimum lot area in Subsection D of §§ 300-30
through 300-34, as applicable.
(1)
In the R-6 District, for each on-site affordable unit, the applicant
may propose one additional dwelling unit over that which would
otherwise be permitted, except that if the development includes
two-family or semidetached units and the required percentage of
affordable units results in an odd number, the applicant may
propose an additional unit in order to build an even number of
units. The minimum lot area shall be not less than 85% of the
minimum lot area for a detached one-family dwelling, nor less than
80% of the minimum lot area for a two-family or semidetached
dwelling, as set forth in § 300-35D.
(2)
In the RMD, RHD and RSD Districts, for each on-site affordable
unit, the applicant may propose two additional dwelling units over
the number of units that would otherwise be permitted in the
district. The minimum lot area shall be not less than 85% of the
minimum lot area for a detached one-family dwelling, nor less
than 80% of the minimum lot area per unit for a two-family or
semidetached dwelling, nor less than 70% of the minimum lot area
per unit for a multifamily unit, as set forth in Subsection D of
§§ 300-36 through 300-38, as applicable.
(3)
In the CN District, for each on-site affordable unit, the applicant
may propose two additional dwelling units over the number of units
that would otherwise be permitted in the least restrictive adjacent
(4)
A.
§ 300-108 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-109
1:669
§ 300-110. Submission requirements and procedures for on-site and
off-site units.
residential district. The minimum lot area shall be in accordance
with Subsection A(1) through (3) above, as applicable.
The Planning Board may grant a special permit to increase the total
number of units for any development that provides at least 50% of the
required affordable housing units on site and the balance of such units
off site, or to waive any other dimensional or density requirements in
the applicable zoning district(s) when doing so furthers the purposes
of this article and is not inconsistent with the City of Beverly Master
Plan; provided that no special permit granted hereunder shall result
in a total number of dwelling units exceeding the maximum number
allowable under Subsection A above, and provided further that neither
the maximum building height nor the number of required off-street
parking spaces may be varied or waived by the Planning Board.
B.
The applicability of site plan review under § 300-98 shall be based
on the maximum number of dwelling units allowable in accordance
with building and area requirements for the applicable zoning district.
When a development of multifamily or townhouse units would not be
subject to said § 300-98 except for the provision of on-site affordable
units under Subsection A above, site plan review shall be conducted in
accordance with § 300-110C below.
C.
No building permit shall be issued until the Planning Board has
reviewed and acted upon a site plan submitted by the applicant in
accordance with this section.
A.
A development that is subject to site plan review under § 300-98 or
300-55 of this chapter shall be reviewed in accordance with the
provisions of said sections. The Planning Board may request
information in addition to the required site plan contents in § 300-98C
or 300-55, and impose conditions on its approval of the site plan to
assure that the development complies with §§ 300-106, 300-107,
300-108 and 300-109 above.
B.
For a development that is not subject to § 300-98 or 300-55, the
applicant shall submit a site plan that conforms to the application
requirements set forth in § 300-98C and the Planning Board's
affordable housing regulations.193
The Planning Board shall conduct an administrative review of the
site plan at a posted open meeting, and may refer the plan to the
Design Review Board for comments and recommendations.
(1)
The Planning Board shall take final action on the site plan within 35
days of the date of the open meeting, and may impose conditions
(2)
C.
193. Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Inclusionary Housing Regulations.
§ 300-109 BEVERLY CODE § 300-110
1:670
§ 300-111. Submission requirements and procedures for special
permits.
For any development that requires a special permit under this article, the
Planning Board shall be the special permit granting authority. Application,
review and decision procedures shall be in accordance with § 300-91 and
the Planning Board's affordable housing regulations.194
§ 300-112. Phased construction.
Affordable units shall be constructed or otherwise provided in proportion
to market-rate units. Proportionality shall be determined by the number of
building or occupancy permits issued for affordable and market-rate units,
or lot releases, as applicable. Affordable units shall not be the last units to
be built in any development covered by this article.
§ 300-113. Selection of affordable unit purchasers or renters.
The selection of purchasers or renters for affordable units shall be carried
out under an affirmative marketing plan approved by the City Planning
Director prior to the issuance of any building permits for the development.
§ 300-114. Preservation of affordability.
on its approval of the site plan to assure that the development
complies with §§ 300-104, 300-105, 300-106 and 300-107 above.
Failure of the Planning Board to act within 35 days of the open
meeting shall be deemed as conclusion of review and it shall
forthwith make its endorsement on said plan and, on its failure to
do so, the City Clerk shall issue a certificate to the same effect.
For a development that constitutes a subdivision under MGL c. 41,
§§ 81K through 81GG, site plan review may be extended by written
agreement of the applicant and Planning Board for purposes of
coordinating the review and decision periods of this section and the
Subdivision Control Law.
(3)
Affordable units provided under this section shall be subject to an
affordable housing restriction that contains limitations on use,
occupancy, resale and rents, and provides for periodic monitoring to
verify compliance with and enforce said restriction. The affordable
housing restriction shall run with the land and be in force in perpetuity
or for the maximum period allowed by law, and be enforceable under
the provisions of MGL c. 184, § 26 or §§ 31 and 32.
A.
The applicant shall be responsible for preparing and complying with
any documentation that may be required by DHCD to qualify affordable
units for listing on the Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory as
LIP units.
B.
194. Editor's Note: See Ch. 315, Inclusionary Housing Regulations.
§ 300-110 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-114
1:671
For a development that provides on-site or off-site affordable units:
No building permit shall be issued until the applicant executes
an enforceable agreement with the City and provides evidence
acceptable to the Planning Director that the agreement has been
recorded at the Essex County Registry of Deeds.
(1)
For an affordable homeownership unit, no certificate of occupancy
shall be issued until the applicant submits documentation
acceptable to the Planning Director that an affordable housing
deed rider has been signed by the homebuyer and recorded at the
Essex County Registry of Deeds.
(2)
C.
For a development that provides affordable units through a fee in lieu of
units, no building permit shall be issued until the applicant pays at least
5% of the total required fee to the Beverly Affordable Housing Trust
Fund. Additionally, no more than 50% of the certificates of occupancy
shall be issued until the applicant pays at least 50% of the total required
fee to the Beverly Affordable Housing Trust Fund. Ten percent of the
total number of certificates of occupancy shall be withheld until the
applicant submits evidence acceptable to the Planning Director that
the remaining balance has been paid to the Affordable Housing Trust
Fund. The Planning Board may modify the schedule for fee payment for
projects covered by a single occupancy permit.
D.
For a development that provides affordable units through a land
donation, no building permits shall be issued until the applicant submits
evidence acceptable to the Planning Director that the land has been
conveyed to the receiving organization identified in the Planning
Board's special permit and an affordable housing restriction has been
recorded at the Essex County Registry of Deeds.
E.
§ 300-114 BEVERLY CODE § 300-114
1:672
ARTICLE XVI
Artist Live/Work Requirements
[Added 4-19-2016 by Ord. No. 014]
§ 300-115. General description and purpose.
§ 300-116. Applicability.
Artist live/work, as defined in § 300-5, is permitted by right in the CC
District and by special permit, granted by the Planning Board, in the IG,
BHD, WDR, RHD, and RMD Districts. The underlying regulations and
standards pertaining to the above-named districts apply, unless they conflict
with the standards herein, which shall take precedence.
§ 300-117. Development standards.
The requirements of this article seek to support and grow the
production of the arts in appropriate zoning districts by allowing the
live/work arrangements for the production of art uses, as defined in
§ 300-5, that are consistent with the character of the surrounding
neighborhood.
A.
This article is established to facilitate the following objectives:
Provide for the appropriate development of units that incorporate
both living and working space.
(1)
Provide an affordable living and working environment for artists
and other small creative businesses.
(2)
Provide flexibility for the development of live/work units,
particularly within existing buildings.
(3)
Provide locations where appropriate new art use or creative
enterprise can start up.
(4)
Provide opportunities for people to live in mixed-use industrial and
commercial areas where compatible with existing uses.
(5)
Protect existing and potential industrial uses and nearby
residential uses from conflicts with each other.
(6)
Ensure that the exterior design of live/work buildings is compatible
with the exterior design of commercial, industrial, and residential
buildings in the area, while remaining consistent with the
predominant workspace character of live/work buildings.
(7)
B.
In residential and commercial zones, all living space shall be contiguous
with and made an integral part of the working space; however, direct
access between living and working areas shall not be required.
A.
The residential dwelling area and working space that comprise an artist
live/work unit shall not be separately rented or sold.
B.
§ 300-115 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-117
1:673
The layout and design of an artist live/work project shall be compatible
in character and scale with surrounding areas, as determined by the
special permit granting authority (SPGA).
C.
Artist live/work units shall be designed and constructed with the
particular needs of artists in mind (e.g., appropriate ventilation, noisedampening
capability, soundproofing, etc.) and less attention can be
paid to providing high-end interior finishes, in keeping with the intent
that these be functional work spaces.
D.
Where permitted, artist live/work units located at street level are
subject to the development standards for ground-floor retail or
commercial establishments as follows:
A minimum of 80% of a structure's street-front facade at street
level shall be occupied by nonresidential uses, including the studio,
work space, and/or gallery.
(1)
In districts where artist live/work units are permitted at street
level, owner or employee parking for live/work units is prohibited
in front of the building.
(2)
Artist live/work in the CC District shall be subject to the Downtown
Design Guidelines.
(3)
The above standards related to ground-floor work space are not
required of live/work units in single-purpose residential districts or
on streets where the predominant ground-floor use is residential.
(4)
E.
In preexisting single-family structures, studio work space and/or retail
may be permitted within an accessory building that meets the
dimensional requirements of this chapter, at the discretion of the SPGA.
However, work is not permitted to occur outside of a structure in
noncommercial areas, unless approved by the SPGA.
F.
Retail sales of art produced on-site, lessons provided in the resident's
form of art (e.g., dance, music), or other activities requiring customer
visitation should occur at reasonable hours, so as not to impede the
quality of life of adjacent residential users. Operating hours can be set
by the SPGA, except in the CC District, where the use is permitted by
right.
G.
Storage of materials or supplies outdoors, for purposes other than
those permitted in the allowable zone in which the use is located, shall
be prohibited.
H.
I. Artist live/work projects are subject to Article XV, Affordable Housing.
Priority in all artist live/work units created by special permit under this
article shall be given to working artists.
J.
§ 300-117 BEVERLY CODE § 300-117
1:674
§ 300-118. Performance standards.
The following performance standards shall apply to all artist live/work
projects:
§ 300-119. Parking requirements.
§ 300-120. Sign standards.
Sign requirements of the zoning district shall be consistent with Article XI,
Signs. The special permit granting authority may modify such standards for
Deed restrictions are required for artist live/work units that are
declared as part of the building permit process, or in administrative
review, or both, for by-right projects in the CC District.
K.
The applicant/owner must show procedures to demonstrate that artist
live/work units are marketed to and occupied by artists, subject to
review by the Planning Department.
L.
Noise and vibration. Every artist live/work unit shall be designed and
operated in such a manner that it does not produce excessive noise or
vibration beyond the working space.
A.
Odor. Every artist live/work unit shall be designed and operated in such
a manner that it does not emit a noxious odor or fumes beyond the
working space or provides proper ventilation so as not to negatively
impact adjacent units.
B.
Smoke. Every artist live/work unit shall be designed and operated in
such a manner that it does not emit smoke beyond the working space.
C.
Dust and dirt. Every artist live/work unit shall be designed and operated
in such a manner that it does not emit any dust or dirt beyond the
working space.
D.
Parking standards will remain the same as for residential uses in the
RHD, RMD, BHD, WDR and CC Zoning Districts as established in
Article X, Parking and Loading Requirements. No additional parking is
required for the work space as this is intended to be occupied by the
same user.
A.
Where residential use is not permitted in the district, such as the IG
District, then the following parking standards apply:
For artist live/work units of less than 1,500 square feet, one
parking space is required for each unit.
(1)
For artist live/work units greater than 1,500 square feet, required
parking will be based on the applicable parking standard for the
nonresidential use or the closest similar use as determined by the
Zoning Administrator.
(2)
B.
§ 300-117 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-120
1:675
artist live/work as appropriate and pursuant to a recommendation by the
Design Review Board.
§ 300-121. Special permit criteria.
When approving a special permit under this article, the special permit
granting authority shall make findings, in addition to any specific
requirements or criteria set forth in § 300-91B of this chapter, that the
project proposal meets the following additional criteria:
That the proposed project is consistent with the purpose statement
described above and designed to accommodate and be attractive to
artists and other users as defined as "art use" in § 300-5.
A.
That the proposed project is consistent with the development standards
in § 300-117 and performance standards in § 300-118.
B.
The impacts of noise, vibration, odor, smoke, and dust, or other impacts,
of the proposed uses to ensure the safety and health of residents,
visitors, and neighbors. If necessary, techniques may be required to
prevent the transmission of noise, vibration, odor, smoke, and/or dust.
C.
§ 300-120 BEVERLY CODE § 300-121
1:676
ARTICLE XVII
Sale and Distribution of Recreational Marijuana
[Added 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 386; amended 1-7-2019 by Ord. No.
213A]
§ 300-122. Marijuana establishments.
Purpose. In addition to the general purposes of the City of Beverly
Zoning Ordinances, the purpose of this article is to ensure the
responsible development and location of state-licensed marijuana
establishments in the City of Beverly in accordance with applicable
state and local laws and regulations, to provide standards for the
placement and operation of marijuana establishments that ensure and
protect the public health, safety, and welfare, to mitigate and/or limit
any undue impact on adjacent or neighboring uses due to the
geographic location of any marijuana establishment, to promote
geographic distribution, and to mitigate and/or limit any undue impact
on the natural environment of the operation of any and all marijuana
establishments as defined herein.
A.
Applicability. This article applies to all marijuana establishments.
All marijuana establishments shall require a special permit from
the Zoning Board of Appeals in accordance with the requirements
of this article and the general criteria for granting a special permit
contained in § 300-91 of this chapter.
(1)
Marijuana establishments subject to the Zoning Ordinance of the
City of Beverly, § 300-98, Site plan review of commercial, industrial
and multifamily developments, shall require site plan review by the
Planning Board in accordance with the aforementioned section, in
addition to meeting the requirements of this section.
(2)
Use restrictions for marijuana establishments are established in
the Beverly Code of Ordinances, Chapter 300, Article VII, District
Regulations.
(3)
B.
General provisions.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity to operate a marijuana
establishment without both a valid final license issued by the state
licensing authority under MGL c. 94G and a special permit from the
City of Beverly Zoning Board of Appeals.
(1)
Any marijuana establishment that obtains a special permit shall
thereafter annually provide to the Director of Municipal
Inspections a copy of its CCC license demonstrating that the
marijuana establishment continues to hold a current, valid license
issued by the CCC. Said license shall be provided within 14 days of
receipt of such.
(2)
C.
§ 300-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-122
1:677
In the event that more than one marijuana establishment is located
on the same premises, each marijuana establishment shall require
a special permit from the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(3)
A special permit issued for a marijuana establishment is not
transferable or assignable to a different location or a different type
of marijuana establishment.
(4)
The special permit requirements set forth in this article shall be in
addition to, and not in lieu of, any other licensing and permitting
requirements imposed by other state or local law, regulation, or
ordinance.
(5)
Review procedure. Upon receipt of an application for special
permit, the Zoning Board of Appeals ("ZBA") shall distribute a
copy of the application and relevant materials as described in
Subsection F (Application requirements) below for review and
comment to Fire Department, Police Department, Engineering
Department, Director of the Health Department, and Planning
Department. The Departments shall review and provide comment
to the ZBA for its consideration of the special permit application
and the requirements established herein. The Departments shall
provide comment to the Board within 30 calendar days of receipt
of a complete application.
(6)
Peer review. The Zoning Board of Appeals and/or Planning Board
may require an applicant to pay for reasonable consulting fees
to provide peer review of the application or subsections of the
application for a special permit, pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53G and/
or any other applicable law. Such fees shall be held by the City in
accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 44, § 53G.
(7)
General requirements.
Dimension and height requirements. Marijuana establishments
must meet the setback, height, and lot coverage requirements of
the zoning district in which the facility is located.
(1)
Buffer.
No marijuana retailer or medical marijuana treatment center
shall be located within:
Five hundred feet of any pre-existing public or private
school providing education in kindergarten or any of
grades one through 12;
[1]
Five hundred feet of any pre-existing state-licensed child
care facility, including day-care center, preschool, or
afterschool facility;
[2]
Five hundred feet of any pre-existing City of Beverlyowned
library;
[3]
(a)
(2)
D.
§ 300-122 BEVERLY CODE § 300-122
1:678
Three hundred feet of any pre-existing City of Beverlyowned
park, playground, and/or recreation area; or
[4]
Two thousand feet of another marijuana retailer or
medical marijuana treatment center, provided that this
buffer shall not apply to a marijuana retailer and a medical
marijuana treatment center operating at the same
premises as a co-located marijuana operation.
[5]
All other marijuana establishments shall not be subject to the
buffer requirements in 935 CMR 500.110(3).
(b)
For the purposes of siting standards for this article, distance
shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest point
of the property line in question to the nearest point of the
property line where the marijuana establishment is proposed
to be located.
(c)
Whether or not a use is "pre-existing" is determined as of the
date that the applicant files its state license application with
the Cannabis Control Commission.
(d)
Marijuana establishments shall be located only in a permanent,
fully enclosed building and not within any mobile or temporary
facility or enclosure, and shall not have drive-up or window service.
(3)
Hours of operation: The hours of operation for marijuana retailers
or RMDs shall be consistent with those of liquor stores under MGL
c. 138, § 15.
(4)
Requirements specific to marijuana cultivator establishments: The
cultivation and processing of marijuana is not considered
agriculture under MGL c. 128, § 1A, and is subject to MGL c. 94G,
§ 12.
(5)
Performance standards.
Odor. All odors, smoke, vapor, fumes, gases, pesticides,
insecticides, chemicals, and/or particulate matter resulting from
the storage, processing, manufacture, and/or cultivation of
marijuana or marijuana products shall be effectively confined or
disposed of so as to prevent the emission of any noxious odors, air
pollution and public nuisance.
(1)
Waste disposal. All waste containing marijuana or marijuana byproducts
resulting from the storage, processing, manufacture, and/
or cultivation of marijuana or marijuana products shall be disposed
of in compliance with 935 CMR 500.105, General Operational
Requirements For Marijuana Establishments, any other applicable
operational requirements that may be promulgated by the
Cannabis Control Commission, and any other applicable state and
(2)
E.
§ 300-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-122
1:679
local laws, ordinances, codes, and/or regulations; and otherwise in
a manner that does not create a public nuisance.
Noise. Noise generated by marijuana establishments shall conform
at a minimum to applicable state and local noise regulations,
including the Massachusetts Department of Environmental
Protection's Division of Air Quality noise regulations, 310 CMR
7.10; the Beverly Board of Health Regulations, Chapter 400, Article
XI, Noise Control; and all relevant State Health Department
regulations.
(3)
Light/visual impacts.
Light emitted from grow lights used in production facilities
shall not be visible outside the facility.
(a)
Marijuana plants, products, and accessories shall not be visible
to a person from the exterior of the marijuana establishment.
(b)
(4)
Parking. All marijuana establishments shall comply with the City
of Beverly Ordinance Chapter 300, Article X, Parking and Loading
Requirements, unless a greater number of spaces are required
under special permit based on the transportation analysis provided
by the applicant.
(5)
Security. All marijuana establishments shall comply with 935 CMR
500.110, Security Requirements for marijuana establishments, and
any other relevant security regulations that may be promulgated
by the Cannabis Control Commission, in order to demonstrate that
there is a limited undue burden on City public safety officials as a
result of the proposed establishment.
(6)
Emergency response. All marijuana establishments shall develop
an emergency response plan to protect the health and safety of
employees, patrons, and the general public; and to limit undue
burden on City public safety officials as a result of the proposed
establishment. The emergency response plan shall be filed with the
Beverly Fire Department and Beverly Police Department pursuant
to MGL c. 94G, § 12(h).
(7)
Energy and environmental standards. All marijuana establishments
shall prepare and follow an energy and environmental standards
report to ensure the site design and management of any such
marijuana establishment is done in such a manner that has a
minimal detrimental impact on the environment. Any energy and
environmental standards report shall address the following:
Energy use. The report shall include detailed analysis and
data regarding the proposed energy use for any marijuana
establishment that is not a marijuana retailer or medical
marijuana treatment center. the analysis shall include, but
(a)
(8)
§ 300-122 BEVERLY CODE § 300-122
1:680
not be limited to, details regarding energy efficiency and
conservation efforts.
Water use. The report shall include detailed analysis and data
regarding the proposed water use for any marijuana
establishment that is not a marijuana retailer or medical
marijuana treatment center. the analysis shall include, but not
be limited to, details regarding the adequacy of the water
supply, surface and subsurface drainage, technology utilized to
keep tainted water from entering public water systems.
(b)
Application requirements.
The applicant shall submit a statement:
Disclosing all of the marijuana establishment's owners,
including officers, directors, partners, managers, and/or any
other individuals or entities having direct or indirect authority
over the management, policies, security, and/or operation of
the establishment; and
(a)
Providing a description of facility operations including staffing,
hours of operation, distribution and logistics, and management
and oversight of operations.
(b)
(1)
The applicant shall submit proof of a valid provisional or final
license issued by the Cannabis Control Commission for the
proposed marijuana establishment by submitting copies of all
required licenses, registrations, and permits issued by the
commonwealth and any of its agencies.
(2)
The applicant shall submit proof of site control and right to use the
premises proposed for the marijuana establishment in the form of a
deed, executed lease, valid purchase and sale agreement, or other
suitable option for such site control that documents the applicant's
legal right to control the site.
(3)
The applicant shall provide a site plan prepared by a
Massachusetts-registered architect, professional engineer or other
appropriate designation, and at a minimum include site and
building details consistent with the Zoning Board of Appeals rules
and regulations.
(4)
Security plan. The applicant shall submit a security plan
demonstrating compliance with § 300-122E(6). The Beverly Chief
of Police or his designee shall review and provide written comment
to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(5)
Emergency response plan. The applicant shall submit an
emergency response plan demonstrating compliance with
§ 300-122E(7). The Beverly Fire Chief or designee and Beverly
(6)
F.
§ 300-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-122
1:681
Chief of Police or designee shall review and provide written
comment to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
Odor control plan. The applicant shall submit an odor control plan
demonstrating compliance with § 300-122E(1). The Director of the
Health Department shall review and provide written comment to
the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(7)
Waste disposal plan. The applicant shall submit a waste disposal
plan demonstrating compliance with § 300-122E(2). The Director of
the Health Department and Engineering Department shall review
and provide written comment to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(8)
Energy and environmental standards report. The applicant shall
submit an energy and environmental standards report
demonstrating compliance with § 300-122E(8). The Engineering
Department and Municipal Inspection Department shall review and
provide written comment to the Zoning Board of Appeals.
(9)
Parking and transportation analysis. The applicant shall provide
a transportation analysis prepared by a qualified transportation
specialist acceptable to the Zoning Board of Appeals, at a
minimum, modeling the expected origin and frequency of client and
employee trips to the site, peak times of business with the expected
number of vehicles entering and exiting the property, the expected
modes of transportation used by clients and employees, and the
frequency and scale of deliveries to and from the site.
(10)
Location. The applicant shall submit a plan signed by a licensed
surveyor depicting compliance with the linear distance
requirements set forth in herein.
(11)
Special permit criteria. When approving a special permit under this
article, the Zoning Board of Appeals shall make findings, in addition
to any specific requirements or criteria set forth in § 300-91B, Special
permit uses, of this chapter, that the project proposal meets the
following additional criteria:
That the applicant demonstrates the establishment will meet all
permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the
commonwealth and will be in compliance with all applicable state
laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, MGL c. 94G,
Regulation of the Use and Distribution of Marijuana Not Medically
Prescribed, 935 CMR 500, Adult Use of Marijuana, 935 CMR 501,
Medical Use of Marijuana, and 935 CMR 502, Co-located Adult-Use
and Medical-Use Marijuana Operations:
(1)
That the applicant complies with § 300-123D, General
requirements, and § 300-123E, Performance standards, of this
chapter.
(2)
G.
H. Waiver of buffer requirements through special permit.
§ 300-122 BEVERLY CODE § 300-122
1:682
Buffer requirements may be reduced or waived by the Zoning
Board of Appeals if the applicant demonstrates the following in
addition to the criteria set forth in § 300-91B, Special permit uses,
of this chapter:
The marijuana establishment is separated from the preexisting
use by a natural or manmade physical barrier that
sufficiently limits access to the marijuana establishment from
the property containing the pre-existing use; and
(a)
The marijuana establishment is not readily visible from the
nearest point of the property line of the pre-existing use, and
that any visibility may be eliminated or significantly reduced
through landscaping or site improvements;
(b)
(1)
If buffer requirements are waived the Zoning Board of Appeals
may require additional conditions, including but not limited to,
landscaping or fencing to further protect neighboring and preexisting
uses from nuisance or unreasonable hazard.
(2)
Modifications. Subsequent to a special permit being granted by the
Zoning Board of Appeals, the marijuana establishment shall notify the
Zoning Board of Appeals in writing of any proposed modification and
submit a plan depicting the modification before such modification is
implemented. The Zoning Board of Appeals shall initially make a
determination as to whether or not the modification is minor. If the
Zoning Board of Appeals determines that the proposed modifications
are not minor, it shall order that an application for modification of a
special permit be filed and a public hearing be held in the same manner
as set forth for such applications.
I.
Prohibition against nuisances. No activity shall be permitted in
connection with a marijuana establishment that creates a public
nuisance.
J.
Violation. All provisions of § 300-99 of the Beverly Zoning Ordinances
shall apply except that any violation shall be subject to a fine of $300 for
each day such violation continues unabated after the remedy of same is
ordered by the Building Inspector.
K.
Severability. The provisions of this article are severable, and invalidity
of any section, subdivision, subsection, paragraph, or other part of this
article shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remainder
of this ordinance. For any provision of this article that conflicts with
another state or local ordinance, the most restrictive provision shall
apply.
L.
§ 300-122 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-122
1:683

ARTICLE XVIII
Solar Energy Systems
[Added 6-18-2018 by Ord. No. 067B]
§ 300-123. through § 300-134. (Reserved)
§ 300-135. Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the responsible
development of large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems.
These regulations shall include, but not be limited to, standards for
placement, design, construction, operation, monitoring, modification,
and removal of such installations that address public safety, minimize
impacts on scenic, natural, and historic resources, support the goal
of reducing carbon emissions, protect residential properties and
neighborhoods, and provide adequate financial assurance for the
eventual decommissioning of installations if necessary.
A.
Applicability. This section applies to large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems, including associated equipment and structures. This
section shall also pertain to physical modifications that materially alter
the type, configuration, or size of ground-mounted solar energy systems
or related equipment.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall require
a site plan review in accordance with the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Beverly in addition to meeting the requirements of
this section. Use restrictions for large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems are established in Article VII, District Regulations.
(1)
The Planning Board shall be the granting authority for any special
permit for a large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system. In
addition to the design performance standards set forth in
§ 300-135H, systems requiring a special permit shall comply with
§ 300-91, Special permit uses.
(2)
B.
General requirements.
The construction of all large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall be consistent with all applicable local, state, and
federal requirements, including but not limited to all applicable
safety, construction, electrical, and communications requirements.
(1)
Prior to the issuance of a building permit for the construction of
a large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system, an emergency
response plan shall be provided to the Beverly Fire Department,
along with emergency contact information. No building permit
shall be issued before the Fire Chief has approved the emergency
response plan. During and after construction, keys to all gate locks
shall be provided to the Beverly Fire Department.
(2)
C.
§ 300-123 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-135
1:685
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a complete copy of the
Stormwater Management Report and Checklist shall be provided
to the Planning Department, the Municipal Inspections/Building
Department, the Planning Board, the Conservation Commission,
and emergency services.
The report shall include the names, addresses, and contact
information, including twenty-four-hour emergency contact
information for all construction-period project operators,
including the project owner and all project contractors and/
or subcontractors. Changes and updates to the site operator
contact information must be provided, in writing, to the
Municipal Inspections/Building Department within one
business day of any changes/updates.
(a)
(3)
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall
provide the Municipal Inspections/Building Department with
documentation that the utility company that operates the electrical
grid where the large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system is
to be located is informed of the intent of the applicant to install an
interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall
be exempt from this requirement.
(4)
Prior to final approval by the Electrical Inspector and the Municipal
Inspections/Building Department, an operations and maintenance
(O&M) plan shall be submitted to the Planning Board, the
Municipal Inspections/Building Department, the Conservation
Commission, and emergency services.
The plan shall include measures for maintaining safe access
to the installation, stormwater, and vegetation controls, as
well as general procedures for operational maintenance of the
installation.
(a)
The plan shall include the names, addresses, and contact
information for the site owner and site operator (if different),
a description of emergency response measures including
procedures for shutting down the installation, a checklist of
inspection items, a schedule for implementing routine and
emergency maintenance activities, and a long-term pollution
prevention plan consistent with the requirements of the
MassDEP Stormwater Management Standards.
(b)
At such a time that the responsible party(ies) transition or
change, an updated O&M plan shall be submitted to the
Planning Board, the Municipal Inspections/Building
Department, the Conservation Commission, and emergency
services within five business days of the change.
(c)
(5)
Prior to issuance of a building permit, the applicant shall submit
documentation of actual or prospective access and control of the
project site sufficient to allow for construction and operation of
(6)
§ 300-135 BEVERLY CODE § 300-135
1:686
the proposed large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system. If a
lease or rental agreement is used to satisfy this requirement, said
lease or rental agreement shall be for a period of not less than 10
years, and shall include a clause that expressly permits the use of
the property for the construction, maintenance, and use of a largescale
solar energy system.
Emergency shutoff procedures must be clearly indicated at each
ingress point to the site. Each ingress point shall restrict access to
authorized personnel only.
(7)
Prior to final approval by the building inspector, all landscape areas
must be complete in accordance with the landscape plan.
(8)
Site plan review.
All large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall undergo
site plan review by the Planning Board prior to construction,
installation, or modification.
(1)
All plans and maps shall be prepared, stamped, and signed by a
professional engineer licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
(2)
Required documents. The applicant shall provide the following
documents to the Planning Department as part of the site plan
review process:
A site plan showing:
Property lines and physical features, including roads, for
the project site;
[1]
Proposed changes to the landscape of the site, including
grading, vegetation clearing and planting, exterior
lighting, screening vegetation or structures, and new
structures, including their height;
[2]
Blueprints or drawings of the large-scale ground-mounted
solar energy system signed by a professional engineer
licensed to practice in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts showing the proposed layout of the system
and any potential shading from nearby structures;
[3]
One- or three-line electrical diagram detailing the largescale
ground-mounted solar energy system, associated
components, and electrical interconnection methods, with
all National Electrical Code compliant disconnects and
overcurrent devices;
[4]
Documentation of the major system components to be
used, including the PV panels, mounting system, and
[5]
(a)
(3)
D.
§ 300-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-135
1:687
inverter, and environmental containment of oils if greater
than 50 gallons used in equipment;
Name, address, and contact information for the proposed
system installer;
[6]
Name, address, telephone number, and signature of the
property owners, the applicant, the developer, and any
other party that produced material to support the special
permit application or site plan;
[7]
Name, contact information, and signature of any agents
representing the owner or applicant;
[8]
Provision of water, including what is needed for fire
protection;
[9]
[10]Locations of local or national historic districts;
List of any hazardous materials proposed to be located on
the site in excess of household quantities and a plan to
prevent their release into the environment;
[11]
Locations of permanently protected open space, priority
habitat areas, and a BioMap 2 Critical Natural Landscape
Core Habitat mapped by the Natural Heritage and
Endangered Species Program (NHESP) and "habitat of
potential regional or statewide importance," also known as
"important habitat" mapped by the DEP; and
[12]
Documentation of how all system components shall be
secured to the ground in a manner that ensures their
stability in severe weather conditions.
[13]
(b) Proof of liability insurance;
Documentation of actual or prospective access and control of
the project site;
(c)
(d) Operations and maintenance plan;
(e) Emergency response plan;
(f) Stormwater Management Report and Checklist;
(g) Description of financial surety that satisfies Subsection K(3);
Zoning district designation and the zoning overlay(s) for the
parcel(s) of land comprising the project site;
(h)
Evidence of utility notification as described in Subsection C(4);
and
(i)
(j) Landscape plan that satisfies Subsection F.
§ 300-135 BEVERLY CODE § 300-135
1:688
Dimension and height requirements.
Setbacks.
Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
located so that the entirety of any system and associated
equipment falls within the setback requirements.
(a)
In districts where large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems are permitted by right, the building setback
requirements of the underlying zoning shall apply.
Where lots abut residential districts, setbacks from the lot
line(s) adjacent to the residential parcel shall be 50 feet.
[1]
(b)
In districts where large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems require a special permit, setback requirements shall
be as follows:
Front yard: The front yard depth shall not be less than 75
feet.
[1]
Side yard: Each side yard shall have a depth of at least 50
feet.
[2]
Rear yard: The rear yard depth shall not be less than 50
feet.
[3]
(c)
(1)
Appurtenant structures. All appurtenant structures to large-scale
ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be subject to the City
of Beverly's Zoning Ordinance requirements concerning the bulk of
structures, setbacks, open space, parking, and building coverage
requirements for the underlying zoning. All such appurtenant
structures, including, but not limited to, equipment shelters,
storage facilities, fencing, transformers, and substations, shall be
architecturally compatible with each other. Structures shall be
screened from view by vegetation and/or joined or clustered to
avoid adverse visual impacts.
(2)
Height of structures. The height of any structure associated with a
large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system shall not exceed
20 feet. The height of any solar panel from ground level shall not
exceed 20 feet.
(3)
Lot coverage. The lot coverage requirements of the underlying
zoning district and any applicable overlay districts shall apply.
However, the lot coverage shall be based upon permeability rather
than use. Only nonpermeable surfaces on the ground will be
considered lot coverage.
(4)
E.
F. Landscape plan and buffering.
§ 300-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-135
1:689
Landscaping shall be provided and maintained in accordance with
the site plan approved by the Planning Board.
(1)
If a property owner (or designated representative) of a lot from
which the proposed installation can be seen without obstruction
requests a visual rendering of the proposed installation from a
vantage point of their choosing on said lot, the applicant shall
submit one as part of the site plan review. The visual rendering
must accurately reflect the horizontal and vertical scale of the
installation, accessories, and landscape screening.
(2)
Landscaping shall be provided and maintained on the site to screen
the solar energy system, the accessory facilities, and appurtenant
structures as set forth below. Landscape screening shall be
provided adjacent to:
Abutting properties where a front, side, or rear lot line of the
solar energy system site adjoins (or is separated by a public
way from) a residential district or an existing residential use,
as follows:
Landscape screening shall consist of planting, the
plantings to be of such height and depth as is needed
and as determined by the Planning Board during site plan
review to adequately screen from view the solar energy
system, accessories, appurtenant structures, and light
sources.
[1]
Such a strip shall contain a continuous screen of planting
of vertical habit in the center of the strip not less than
three feet in width and six feet in height to maintain a
dense screen throughout the year.
[2]
At least 75% of the plantings shall consist of evergreens
and shall be evenly spaced along the length of the buffer
strip.
[3]
In lieu of continuous planting, a solid brick, stone, or
wood fence of a design approved by the Planning Board,
or a planted earthen berm of a design approved by the
Planning Board, may be established and maintained with
the plantings in an amount of no less than 20% of the
amount required above.
[4]
Removal of healthy trees over five inches in diameter at
breast height (DBH) shall be minimized in the buffer strip
to the maximum extent practicable. Any such trees as are
removed shall be replaced on site, one tree to be replaced
for each tree removed. New or replacement trees must be
at least two inches DBH.
[5]
(a)
(3)
§ 300-135 BEVERLY CODE § 300-135
1:690
All landscaped areas, including, but not limited to, walls
and fences, shall be properly maintained. Plantings that
die shall be replaced within one growing season by the
property owner. Plantings shall be maintained in
accordance with the site plan for the duration of the
presence of a solar energy system on the site.
[6]
When abutting public ways, in addition to landscaping in front
and side yards mentioned above, landscape screening shall
consist of planting, the plantings to be of such height and
depth as is needed and determined by the Planning Board
during site plan review to screen adequately from view any
unshielded light source, generated or reflected, either inside
or outside.
(b)
Relief by special permit.
Relief from setback, dimension, and height requirements, and
landscape and buffering requirements, may be sought through
special permit from the Planning Board. The Planning Board may
consolidate the review of all applications that come under its
jurisdiction into one review procedure.
(1)
A special permit for the aforementioned relief will only be awarded
if the large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system meets the
following criteria:
The solar energy system serves as a canopy for a parking lot or
serves as another similar use; or
(a)
The applicant provides a description of the solar energy system
and the technical, economic, and other reasons for the
proposed location and design, to be prepared and signed by a
registered professional engineer; and
(b)
Systems requiring a special permit shall comply with § 300-91,
Special permit uses.
(c)
(2)
G.
Design and performance standards.
Lighting. Outdoor lighting, including lighting on the exterior of a
building or lighting in parking areas, shall be arranged to minimize
glare and light spilling over the neighboring properties. Except for
low-level intensity pedestrian lighting, all other lighting shall be
designed and located so that:
(a) The luminaire (LED) has an angle of cutoff less than 76°;
A line drawn from the height of the luminaire (LED) along
the angle of cutoff intersects the ground at a point within the
development site;
(b)
(1)
H.
§ 300-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-135
1:691
The bare light bulb, lamp, or light source is completely
shielded from direct view at any point five feet above the
ground on neighboring properties or streets;
(c)
Lighting shall be directional to preclude light pollution of
neighbors or the night sky and shall be Dark Sky compliant and
meet International Dark Sky FSA certification requirements;
(d)
The owner/manager shall be responsible for maintenance of
lighting systems. Lighting shall not be kept on after 9:00 p.m.
unless there is an emergency or it is required for safety
purposes as determined by the Beverly Fire Department.
(e)
Signage. Signs on large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall comply with the City of Beverly Sign Ordinance
and all other applicable requirements from Beverly's Code of
Ordinances.195 A sign shall be required to identify only the owner or
manager and provide a twenty-four-hour emergency contact phone
number.
(2)
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts shall be made to place all
utility connections from large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions,
shape, and topography of the site, as well as any requirements
of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility
interconnections may be aboveground if required by the utility
provider.
(3)
Roads. Access roads shall be constructed to minimize grading,
removal of stone walls or trees, and minimize impacts of
environmental or historic resources. All access roads must be
approved by the Beverly Fire Department.
(4)
Hazardous materials. Hazardous materials stored, used, or
generated on site shall not exceed the amount for a very small
quantity generator of hazardous waste as defined by the DEP
pursuant to MassDEP regulations 310 CMR 30.000, and shall meet
all requirements of the DEP, including storage of hazardous
materials in a building with an impervious floor that is not adjacent
to any floor drains to prevent discharge to the outdoor
environment. If any hazardous materials, including, but not limited
to, lithium ion (storage batteries), are used within the solar electric
equipment, then impervious containment areas capable of
controlling and containing any release of hazardous materials to
the environment and to prevent potential contamination of
groundwater are required. A list of any hazardous materials
proposed to be located on the site and a plan to prevent their
release shall be provided to the Planning Board and Fire
(5)
195. Editor's Note: See Art. XI, Signs.
§ 300-135 BEVERLY CODE § 300-135
1:692
Department. The use of cadmium telluride solar panels is
prohibited in the City of Beverly.
Noise. Noise generated by large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems and associated equipment and machinery shall
conform, at a minimum, to applicable state and local noise
regulations, including the DEP's Division of Air Quality noise
regulations, 310 CMR 7.10.
(6)
Visual impacts and glare.
The solar energy system, including all accessories and
appurtenant structures shall be designed to minimize visual
impacts, including preserving natural vegetation to the
maximum extent possible, blending in equipment with the
surroundings and adding vegetative buffers to provide an
effective visual barrier from adjacent roads and screen
abutting residential properties, regardless of development
status. Siting shall be such that the view of the solar energy
system from locations off site shall be minimal.
(a)
Reasonable efforts shall be made to design solar energy
systems to prevent reflected solar radiation or glare from
becoming a public nuisance or hazard to adjacent buildings,
roadways, or properties. Such efforts may include, but not
be limited to, deliberate placement and arrangement, antireflective
materials, solar glare modeling, and screening in
addition to required landscaping. (See Subsection F.)
(b)
(7)
Safety and environmental standards.
Emergency services. Prior to the issuance of a building permit
for the construction of a large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
system, the applicant shall provide a copy of the project summary,
electrical schematic, and site plan to the Fire Chief. The owner or
manager shall cooperate with local emergency services to develop
the emergency response plan. All means of shutting down the
solar energy system shall be clearly marked. A responsible person
shall be identified for public inquiries throughout the life of the
installation. The identity of this person may be updated at any
time. No building permit shall be issued before the Fire Chief has
approved the site plan and emergency response plan.
(1)
Land clearing and soil erosion. The facility shall be designed to
minimize impacts to environmentally sensitive land. The clearing
of natural vegetation shall be limited to what is necessary for
the construction, operation, and maintenance of the large-scale
ground-mounted solar energy system. Topsoil will not be removed
from the site. Clear cutting of forest shall not exceed five acres.
The facility design shall minimize the use of concrete and other
impervious materials to the maximum extent possible.
(2)
I.
§ 300-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-135
1:693
Habitat impacts. Large-scale ground-mounted solar energy
systems shall not be located on Permanently Protected Open Space
or Priority Habitat and BioMap 2 Critical Natural Landscape Core
Habitat area mapped by the Natural Heritage and Endangered
Species Program (NHESP), and shall be designed to minimize
impacts to "Habitat of Potential Regional or Statewide Importance"
or "Important Habitat" mapped by the DEP to the maximum
feasible extent.
(3)
Monitoring, maintenance, and annual reporting.
Solar energy system conditions. Solar energy systems shall be
maintained in good condition. Maintenance shall include, but not
be limited to, painting, structural repairs, and maintaining the
integrity of security measures. Site access shall be maintained to
a level acceptable to the Fire Chief as provided in the emergency
response plan. The owner or manager of the facility shall be
responsible for the cost of maintaining the solar energy system and
any access roads.
(1)
Modifications. All material modifications to a large-scale groundmounted
solar energy system made after issuance of the required
building permit shall require approval by the Municipal Inspections
Department.
(2)
Annual reporting. All solar energy systems requiring a site plan
review shall provide annual reports to the Planning Department
and the Municipal Inspections Department no later than 45 days
after the end of the calendar year. The annual report shall be
provided by either the owner of the system or the individual in
charge of operation and maintenance, and shall include, but not
be limited to, control of vegetation, noise and light standards, and
adequacy of road access. The annual report shall also provide
information on the maintenance completed during the course of the
year, the amount of electricity generated by the facility, and the
amount of surety available for decommissioning or indemnification.
[See Subsection K(3).]
(3)
J.
Abandonment, decommissioning, financial surety, and indemnification.
Removal requirements. Any large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy system which has reached the end of its useful life or has
been abandoned consistent with Subsection K(2) of this section
shall be removed. The owner or manager shall physically remove
the installation no more than 150 days after the date of
discontinued operations. The owner or manager shall notify the
Planning Department by certified mail of the proposed date of
discontinued operations and plans for removal. Decommissioning
shall consist of:
Physical removal of all large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems, structures, equipment, security barriers, and
(a)
(1)
K.
§ 300-135 BEVERLY CODE § 300-135
1:694
appurtenant structures, including, but not limited to,
equipment shelters, storage facilities, transformers, and
substations, and transmission lines from the site;
Disposal of all solid and hazardous waste in accordance with
local, state, and federal waste disposal regulations.
(b)
Stabilization or revegetation of the site as necessary to
minimize erosion. The Planning Board may allow the owner
or manager to leave landscaping or designated below-grade
foundations in order to minimize erosion and disruption to
vegetation.
(c)
Abandonment. Absent written notice of the proposed date of
decommissioning or written notice of extenuating circumstances,
the solar energy system shall be considered abandoned when it
fails to operate for more than one year without the written consent
of the Planning Board. Upon written request from the Municipal
Inspections/Building Department, addressed to the contact address
provided and maintained by the owner and operator as required
above, the owner or operator shall provide evidence to the
Municipal Inspections/Building Department demonstrating
continued use of the installation. Failure to provide such evidence
within 30 days of such written request shall be conclusive evidence
that the installation has been abandoned. If the owner or manager
of the solar energy system fails to remove the installation in
accordance with the requirements of this section within 150 days
of abandonment or the proposed date of decommissioning, the
City of Beverly retains the right, after receipt of an appropriate
court order, to enter and remove an abandoned, hazardous, or
decommissioned large-scale ground-mounted solar energy system.
As a condition of site plan or special permit approval, the
application, system owner, and/or landowner shall agree to allow
entry to remove an abandoned or decommissioned installation. The
City's cost for the removal will be charged to the property owner.
(2)
Financial surety. Owners or managers of large-scale groundmounted
solar energy systems shall provide a form of surety, either
through escrow account, bond, or other form approved by the
Planning Board, to cover the cost of removal in the event the City
must remove the installation and remediate the landscape, in an
amount and form determined to be reasonable by the Planning
Board, but in no event to exceed more than 125% of the cost
of removal and compliance with the additional requirements set
forth herein, as determined by the project proponent and the City.
Such surety will not be required for municipal-owned facilities.
The project proponent shall submit a full inclusive estimate of the
costs associated with removal, prepared by a qualified engineer.
The amount shall include a mechanism for calculating increased
removal costs due to inflation. The owner or manager shall
replenish the surety as necessary to maintain an adequate amount,
(3)
§ 300-135 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-135
1:695
§ 300-136. Small-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems.
as determined by the Planning Board in accordance with the
requirements of this section.
Indemnification. The owner/manager(s) of the large-scale groundmounted
solar energy system shall indemnify and hold harmless
the City of Beverly and/or any of its citizens from any and all
liabilities, losses and/or damages, including reasonable attorney
fees, resulting from the failure of the owner/operator(s) to comply
with the terms of this section and/or negligence in the operations
and maintenance of any structures built in accordance with it.
Any surety provided for in this section shall be available for the
aforementioned indemnification.
(4)
Severability. The provisions of this section are severable, and invalidity
of any section, subdivision, subsection, paragraph, or other part of this
section shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remainder of
this section. For any provision of this section that conflicts with another
state or local ordinance, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
L.
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the responsible
development of small-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems.
Small-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be considered
accessory structures to both residential and nonresidential uses.
A.
Applicability. This section applies to small-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems, including associated equipment. Small-scale groundmounted
solar energy systems are permitted by right as accessory uses.
B.
General requirements.
Small-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be
permitted anywhere in a side or rear yard of any lot if they:
(a) Have rear yard setbacks of at least 10 feet;
Conform to side yard setback requirements of the underlying
zoning district for principal uses;
(b)
(c) Are not located between a building wall and any street; and
Are no taller than 10 feet in height or a height equal to 1/2 the
distance to the nearest lot line, to a maximum of 20 feet.
(d)
(1)
Small-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be located
so that the entirety of any system and associated equipment falls
within the setback requirements.
(2)
All small-scale ground-mounted solar energy systems must comply
with all applicable local, state, and federal requirements, including
but not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and
communications requirements.
(3)
C.
§ 300-135 BEVERLY CODE § 300-136
1:696
Special permits. A special permit from the Planning Board shall be
required for any small-scale, ground-mounted solar energy system that
does not meet the aforementioned requirements. When considering
a special permit, the Planning Board shall consider the additional
performance standards required for large-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems in § 300-135H, as well as additional landscaped
buffering to reduce visual impacts on adjacent properties. However,
approval of a special permit is not contingent on the strict application
of these performance standards.
Systems requiring a special permit shall comply with § 300-91,
Special permit uses.
(1)
D.
Design and performance standards.
Lighting, visual impacts, and glare.
Outdoor lighting for the purpose of illuminating small-scale
ground-mounted solar energy systems is not permitted. The
solar energy system, including all accessories and appurtenant
structures, shall be designed to minimize visual impacts,
including preserving natural vegetation to the maximum extent
possible, blending in equipment with the surroundings and
adding vegetative buffers to provide an effective visual barrier
from adjacent roads and screen abutting residential
properties, regardless of development status. Siting shall be
such that the view of the solar energy system from locations
off-site shall be minimal.
(a)
Reasonable efforts shall be made to design solar energy
systems to prevent reflected solar radiation or glare from
becoming a public nuisance or hazard to adjacent buildings,
roadways, or properties. Such efforts may include, but not
be limited to, deliberate placement and arrangement, antireflective
materials, solar glare modeling, and screening in
addition to required landscaping.
(b)
(1)
Utility connections. Reasonable efforts shall be made to place all
utility connections from small-scale, ground-mounted solar energy
systems underground, depending on appropriate soil conditions,
shape, and topography of the site, as well as any requirements
of the utility provider. Electrical transformers for utility
interconnections may be aboveground if required by the utility
provider.
(2)
Noise. Noise generated by small-scale ground-mounted solar
energy systems and associated equipment and machinery shall
conform at a minimum to applicable state and local noise
regulations, including the DEP's Division of Air Quality noise
regulations, 310 CMR 7.10.
(3)
E.
§ 300-136 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-137
1:697
§ 300-137. Roof-mounted solar energy systems.
§ 300-138. through § 300-139. (Reserved)
Purpose. The purpose of this section is to encourage the responsible
development of roof-mounted solar energy systems. Roof-mounted solar
energy systems shall be considered accessory structures to both
residential and nonresidential uses.
A.
Applicability. This section applies to roof-mounted solar energy
systems, including associated equipment. Roof-mounted solar energy
systems are permitted by right in all districts as accessory uses.
B.
General requirements.
All roof-mounted solar energy systems must comply with all
applicable local, state, and federal requirements, including but
not limited to all applicable safety, construction, electrical, and
communications requirements.
(1)
All roof-mounted solar energy systems located in a local historic
district shall comply with all applicable local, state, and federal
requirements, including but not limited to Chapter 168, Article
I, Historic Districts, of the Beverly Code of Ordinances, and the
Historic Districts Act, MGL c. 40C, § 6. This section states that
before any building located in a local historic district is constructed
or altered in a way that affects exterior architectural features, a
certificate of appropriateness, a certificate of nonapplicability, or
a certificate of hardship must be issued. Such certificates shall be
issued by the Beverly Historic District Commission.
(2)
Roof-mounted solar energy systems shall not extend more than five
feet above the highest point of the roof.
(3)
C.
Special permits. A special permit from the Planning Board shall be
required for any roof-mounted solar energy system that does not meet
the height requirement. Systems requiring a special permit shall
comply with § 300-91, Special permit uses.
D.
§ 300-137 BEVERLY CODE § 300-138
1:698
ARTICLE XIX
Smart Growth or Transit Oriented Overlay Districts
[Added 11-20-2017 by Ord. No. 507]
§ 300-139. Beverly Smart Growth Overlay District (SGOD).
Purpose. The purpose of this § 300-140 is to establish the Beverly
Smart Growth Overlay District (SGOD), to encourage smart growth in
accordance with the purposes of MGL Chapter 40R and to support
development that meets the following objectives:
To provide an opportunity for residential and mixed-use
development in an underutilized area of the City.
(1)
To promote development that is pedestrian-friendly and beneficial
to surrounding neighborhoods.
(2)
To ensure high-quality site planning, architecture and landscape
design that enhances the distinct visual character and identity of
Beverly and provides an environment with safety, convenience and
amenity.
(3)
To provide for a diversified housing stock at a variety of costs,
including affordable housing, and in housing types that meet the
needs of Beverly's population.
(4)
To generate positive tax revenue, and to benefit from the financial
incentives provided by MGL c. 40R, while providing the opportunity
for new multifamily housing development in Beverly.
(5)
A.
Definitions. For purposes of this § 300-140, the following definitions
shall apply. All capitalized terms shall be defined in accordance with
the definitions established under the MGL c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00
or Subsection B, Definitions, or as set forth in the PAA Regulations. To
the extent that there is any conflict between the definitions set forth in
Subsection B or the PAA Regulations and the Enabling Laws, the terms
of the Enabling Laws shall govern.
AFFORDABLE HOMEOWNERSHIP UNIT — An Affordable Housing unit
required to be sold to an Eligible Household.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING — Housing that is affordable to and occupied
by Eligible Households.
AFFORDABLE HOUSING RESTRICTION — A deed restriction of
Affordable Housing meeting statutory requirements in MGL c. 184, § 31
and the requirements of Subsection F(6) of this section.
AFFORDABLE RENTAL UNIT — An Affordable Housing unit required to
be rented to an Eligible Household.
APPLICANT — The individual or entity that submits a Project for Plan
Approval.
B.
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:699
AS-OF-RIGHT — A use allowed under Subsection E without recourse to
a special permit, variance, zoning amendment, or other form of zoning
relief. A Project that requires Plan Approval by the PAA pursuant to
Subsections I through M shall be considered an As-of-Right Project.
DEPARTMENT or DHCD — The Massachusetts Department of Housing
and Community Development, or any successor agency.
DESIGN STANDARDS — Provisions of Subsection M made applicable to
Projects within the SGOD that are subject to the Plan Approval process.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more living and sleeping rooms providing
complete living facilities for the use of one or more individuals
constituting a single family or household, with permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. The term shall not
include a hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast, rooming house, hospital, or
other accommodation used for transient lodging.
ELIGIBLE HOUSEHOLD — An individual or household whose annual
income is less than 80% of the area-wide median income as determined
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD), adjusted for household size, with income computed using HUD's
rules for attribution of income to assets.
ENABLING LAWS — MGL Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 59.00.
MIXED-USE DEVELOPMENT PROJECT — A Project containing a mix of
residential uses and nonresidential uses, as allowed in Subsection E(2),
and subject to all applicable provisions of this § 300-140.
MONITORING AGENT or ADMINISTERING AGENT — The Department
of Planning and Community Development, pursuant to Subsection F(2),
to review and implement the affordability requirements affecting
Projects under Subsection F.
MULTIFAMILY — A residential dwelling containing four or more
dwelling units.
PAA REGULATIONS — The rules and regulations of the PAA adopted
pursuant to Subsection I(3).
PLAN APPROVAL — Standards and procedures which those Projects
identified Subsection I(1) that are proposed within the SGOD must meet
pursuant to Subsections I through M and the Enabling Laws.
PLAN APPROVAL AUTHORITY (PAA) — The local approval authority
authorized under Subsection I(2) to conduct the Plan Approval process
for purposes of reviewing Project applications and issuing Plan
Approval decisions within the SGOD.
PROJECT — A Residential Project or Mixed-Use Development Project
undertaken within the SGOD in accordance with the requirements of
this § 300-140.
RESIDENTIAL PROJECT — A Project that consists solely of residential,
parking, and accessory uses, as further defined in Subsection E(1).
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:700
SGOD — The Smart Growth Overlay District established in accordance
with this § 300-140.
ZONING BYLAW — The Zoning Bylaw of the City of Beverly.
Overlay District.
Establishment. The Smart Growth Overlay District, hereinafter
referred to as the "SGOD," is an overlay district having a land area
of approximately 5.06 acres in size that is superimposed over the
underlying zoning district and is shown on the official City Zoning
District Map as set forth in § 300-8 of this chapter.
(1)
C.
Applicability of SGOD.
Applicability of SGOD. An applicant may seek development of a
Project located within the SGOD in accordance with the provisions
of the Enabling Laws and this § 300-140, including a request for
Plan Approval by the PAA, if necessary. In such case,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the Zoning Bylaw, such
application shall not be subject to any other provisions of the
Zoning Bylaw, including limitations upon the issuance of building
permits for residential uses related to a rate of development or
phased growth limitation or to a local moratorium on the issuance
of such permits, or to other building permit or dwelling unit
limitations.
(1)
Underlying zoning. The SGOD is an overlay district superimposed
on all underlying zoning districts. The regulations for use,
dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing
the underlying zoning district(s) shall remain in full force, except
for those Projects undergoing development pursuant to this
§ 300-140. Within the boundaries of the SGOD, a developer may
elect either to develop a Project in accordance with the
requirements of the Smart Growth Zoning, or to develop a Project
in accordance with requirements of the regulations for use,
dimension, and all other provisions of the Zoning Bylaw governing
the underlying zoning district(s).
(2)
Administration, enforcement, and appeals. The provisions of this
§ 300-140 shall be administered by the Building Commissioner,
except as otherwise provided herein. Any legal appeal arising out
of a Plan Approval decision by the PAA under Subsections I through
M shall be governed by the applicable provisions of MGL Chapter
40R. Any other request for enforcement or appeal arising under
this § 300-140 shall be governed by the applicable provisions of
MGL Chapter 40A.
(3)
D.
Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted As-of-Right for
Projects within the SGOD.
E.
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:701
Residential Projects. A Residential Project within the SGOD may
include:
(a) Multifamily residential use(s);
Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses,
including surface, garage-under, and structured parking (e.g.,
parking garages); and
(b)
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses.
(c)
(1)
Mixed-Use Development Projects.
A Mixed-Use Development Project within the SGOD may
include:
Multifamily residential use, provided that the minimum
allowable as-of-right density requirements for residential
use specified in Subsection G(1) shall apply to the
residential portion of any Mixed-Use Development Project;
[1]
Any of the following nonresidential uses: office, medical,
educational, research and development, recreational and/
or civic uses;
[2]
Parking accessory to any of the above permitted uses,
including surface, garage-under, and structured parking
(e.g., parking garages); and
[3]
Accessory uses customarily incidental to any of the above
permitted uses.
[4]
(a)
The total gross floor area devoted to nonresidential uses within
a Mixed-Use Development Project shall not exceed 33% of the
total gross floor area of the Project.
(b)
(2)
Housing and housing affordability.
Number of Affordable Housing units. For all Projects, not less than
20% of housing units constructed shall be Affordable Housing. For
Projects that include rental Dwelling Units, 25% of such units must
be Affordable Rental Units; however the PAA may grant a waiver
to reduce the number of Affordable Housing units to not less than
20% if it determines the Project will not be financially feasible
when providing 25% of rental units as Affordable Housing. For
purposes of calculating the number of units of Affordable Housing
required within a Project, any fractional unit shall be deemed to
constitute a whole unit.
(1)
Monitoring Agent. A Monitoring Agent, which may be the local
housing authority or other qualified housing entity, shall be
designated by the PAA, chief executive, or other designated
(2)
F.
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:702
municipal official (the "designating official"). In a case where the
Monitoring Agent cannot adequately carry out its administrative
duties, upon certification of this fact by the designating official
or by DHCD, such duties shall devolve to and thereafter be
administered by a qualified housing entity designated by the
designating official. In any event, such Monitoring Agent shall
ensure the following, both prior to issuance of a building permit for
a Project within the SGOD, and on a continuing basis thereafter, as
the case may be:
Prices of Affordable Homeownership Units are properly
computed; rental amounts of Affordable Rental Units are
properly computed;
(a)
Income eligibility of households applying for Affordable
Housing is properly and reliably determined;
(b)
The housing marketing and resident selection plan conforms
to all requirements, have been approved by DHCD specifically
with regard to conformance with MGL c. 40R and 760 CMR
59.00, and are properly administered;
(c)
Sales and rentals are made to Eligible Households chosen in
accordance with the housing marketing and resident selection
plan with appropriate unit size for each household being
properly determined and proper preference being given; and
(d)
Affordable Housing Restrictions meeting the requirements of
this section are approved by DHCD specifically with regard to
conformance with MGL c. 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, recorded
with the proper Registry of Deeds.
(e)
Submission requirements.
As part of any application for Plan Approval for a Project
within the SGOD submitted under Subsections I through M (or,
for Projects not requiring Plan Approval, prior to submission
of any application for a building permit), the Applicant must
submit the following documents to the PAA and the Monitoring
Agent:
Evidence that the Project complies with the cost and
eligibility requirements of Subsection F(4);
[1]
Project plans that demonstrate compliance with the
requirements of Subsection F(5); and
[2]
A form of Affordable Housing Restriction that satisfies the
requirements of Subsection F(6).
[3]
(a)
These documents in combination, to be submitted with an
application for Plan Approval (or, for Projects not requiring
Plan Approval, prior to submission of any application for a
(b)
(3)
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:703
building permit), shall include details about construction
related to the provision, within the development, of units that
are accessible to the disabled and appropriate for diverse
populations, including households with children, other
households, individuals, households including individuals with
disabilities, and the elderly.
Cost and eligibility requirements.
Affordable Housing shall comply with the following
requirements:
Affordable Housing required to be offered for rent or sale
shall be rented or sold to and occupied only by Eligible
Households.
[1]
For an Affordable Rental Unit, the monthly rent payment,
including utilities and parking, shall not exceed 30% of
the maximum monthly income permissible for an Eligible
Household, assuming a family size equal to the number
of bedrooms in the unit plus one, unless other affordable
program rent limits approved by the DHCD shall apply.
[2]
For an Affordable Homeownership Unit, the monthly
housing payment, including mortgage principal and
interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes,
condominium and/or homeowners' association fees,
insurance, and parking, shall not exceed 30% of the
maximum monthly income permissible for an Eligible
Household, assuming a family size equal to the number of
bedrooms in the unit plus one.
[3]
(a)
Prior to the granting of any Plan Approval for a Project, the
Applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the
Monitoring Agent, that the method by which such affordable
rents or affordable purchase prices are computed shall be
consistent with state or federal guidelines for affordability
applicable to the City of Beverly.
(b)
(4)
Design and construction. Units of Affordable Housing shall be
finished housing units. Units of Affordable Housing shall be
dispersed proportionately throughout the Project of which they
are part, across all unit types and be comparable in original
construction quality, size and exterior design to the other housing
units in the Project. The bedroom-per-unit average for the
Affordable Housing must be equal to or greater than the bedroomper-
unit average for the unrestricted/market-rate units.
(5)
Affordable Housing restriction. Each Project shall be subject to
an Affordable Housing Restriction which is recorded with the
appropriate Registry of Deeds or District Registry of the Land
Court and which contains the following:
(6)
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:704
Specification of the term of the Affordable Housing Restriction,
which shall be no less than 30 years;
(a)
The name and address of the Monitoring Agent, with a
designation of its power to monitor and enforce the Affordable
Housing Restriction;
(b)
Floor plans, locations and descriptions of the Affordable
Homeownership Unit(s) and initially designated Affordable
Rental Unit(s), as applicable, by address/unit number and
number of bedrooms, with total units and percentages. Such
restriction shall apply individually to the specifically identified
Affordable Homeownership Unit and shall apply to a
percentage of rental units of a rental Project or the rental
portion of a Project with the initially designated Affordable
Rental Units identified in, and able to float subject to approval
by DHCD in accordance with, the corresponding Affirmative
Fair Housing Marketing Plan (AFHMP) and DHCD's AFHMP
guidelines.
(c)
Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection plan,
to which the Affordable Housing is subject, and which includes
an affirmative fair housing marketing program, including
public notice and a fair resident selection process. The plan
shall designate the household size appropriate for a unit with
respect to bedroom size and provide that the preference for
such unit shall be given to a household of the appropriate size;
(d)
A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at the
initial sale or initial rental and upon all subsequent sales and
rentals from a list of Eligible Households compiled in
accordance with the housing marketing and selection plan;
(e)
Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of a rental
unit or the maximum resale price of a homeownership unit will
be set;
(f)
A requirement that only an Eligible Household may reside
in Affordable Housing and that notice of any lease of any
Affordable Rental Unit shall be given to the Monitoring Agent;
(g)
Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the
terms and provisions of the affordable housing restriction by
the Monitoring Agent;
(h)
Provision that the restriction on an Affordable Homeownership
Unit shall run in favor of the Monitoring Agent and/or the
municipality, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and
shall limit initial sale and resale to and occupancy by an
Eligible Household;
(i)
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:705
Provision that the restriction on Affordable Rental Units in a
rental Project or rental portion of a Project shall run with the
rental Project or rental portion of a Project and shall run in
favor of the Monitoring Agent and/or the municipality, in a
form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit rental and
occupancy to an Eligible Household;
(j)
Provision that the owner(s) or manager(s) of Affordable Rental
Unit(s) shall file an annual report to the Monitoring Agent,
in a form specified by that agent certifying compliance with
the affordability provisions of this section and containing such
other information as may be reasonably requested in order to
ensure affordability; and
(k)
A requirement that residents in Affordable Housing provide
such information as the Monitoring Agent may reasonably
request in order to ensure affordability.
(l)
Costs of housing marketing and selection plan. The housing
marketing and selection plan may make provision for payment by
the Project Applicant of reasonable costs to the Monitoring Agent
to develop, advertise, and maintain the list of Eligible Households
and to monitor and enforce compliance with affordability
requirements.
(7)
Age restrictions. Nothing in this § 300-140 shall permit the
imposition of restrictions on age upon Projects unless proposed or
agreed to voluntarily by the Applicant. However, the PAA may, in
its review of a submission under Subsection F(3), allow a specific
Project within the SGOD designated exclusively for the elderly,
persons with disabilities, or for assisted living, provided that any
such Project shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state
and local fair housing laws and regulations and not less than 25%
of the housing units in such a restricted Project shall be restricted
as affordable units.
(8)
Phasing. For any Project that is approved and developed in phases
in accordance with Subsection I(4), the percentage of affordable
units in each phase shall be at least equal to the minimum
percentage of Affordable Housing required under Subsection F(1).
Where the percentage of Affordable Housing is not uniform across
all phases, the unit dispersal and bedroom proportionality
requirements under Subsection F(5) shall be applied proportionate
to the Affordable Housing provided for in each respective phase.
(9)
No waiver. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein, the
affordability provisions in this Subsection F shall not be waived
unless expressly approved in writing by DHCD.
(10)
G. Dimensional and density requirements.
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:706
Table of Requirements. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
in this Zoning Bylaw, the dimensional requirements applicable in
the SGOD are as follows:
Multifamily/Mixed-Use
As-of-Right density (residential) Up to 20 units per acre
Sohier Road setback 10 feet
Tozer Road setback 10 feet
Rear/Northern setback 10 feet
Building height 38 feet
(1)
Parking requirements. The parking requirements applicable for
Projects within the SGOD are as follows:
Number of parking spaces.
Unless otherwise approved by the PAA, the following minimum/
maximum numbers of off-street parking spaces shall be
provided by use, either in surface parking, within garages or
other structures:
Use
Minimum/Maximum Off-
Street Parking Spaces
Required
Multifamily residential
1-bedroom units 1 per unit
2-bedroom units 2 per unit
3+-bedroom units 2 per unit
Office 1 for every 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Medical 1 for every 150 square feet
of gross floor area
Educational 1 for each 500 square feet of
floor space
Research and development 2.5 per 1,000 square feet of
gross floor area
Recreational/Civic 1 per 400 square feet of
gross floor area
(a)
The PAA may allow for additional visitor parking spaces beyond
the two per residential unit maximum spaces per unit if
deemed appropriate given the design, layout and density of
the proposed residential or other development. The PAA may
allow for a decrease in the required parking as provided in
Subsections H(2) and H(3) below.
(b)
(1)
H.
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:707
Shared parking. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein,
the use of shared parking to fulfill parking demands noted above
that occur at different times of day is strongly encouraged.
Minimum parking requirements above may be reduced by the PAA
through the Plan Approval process if the Applicant can
demonstrate that shared spaces will meet parking demands by
using accepted methodologies (e.g., the Urban Land Institute
Shared Parking Report, ITE Shared Parking Guidelines, or other
approved studies).
(2)
Reduction in parking requirements. Notwithstanding anything to
the contrary herein, any minimum required amount of parking may
be reduced by the PAA through the Plan Approval process, if the
Applicant can demonstrate that the lesser amount of parking will
not cause excessive congestion, endanger public safety, or that a
lesser amount of parking will provide positive environmental or
other benefits, taking into consideration:
The availability of surplus off-street parking in the vicinity of
the use being served and/or the proximity of a bus stop or
transit station;
(a)
The availability of public or commercial parking facilities in the
vicinity of the use being served;
(b)
Shared use of off-street parking spaces serving other uses
having peak user demands at different times;
(c)
Age or other occupancy restrictions which are likely to result
in a lower level of auto usage;
(d)
Impact of the parking requirement on the physical
environment of the affected lot or the adjacent lots, including
reduction in green space, destruction of significant existing
trees and other vegetation, destruction of existing dwelling
units, or loss of pedestrian amenities along public ways; and
(e)
(f) Such other factors as may be considered by the PAA.
(3)
Location of parking. Any surface parking lot shall, to the maximum
extent feasible, be located at the rear or side of a building, relative
to any principal street, public open space, or pedestrian way.
(4)
Plan approval of Projects: general provisions.
Plan Approval. An application for Plan Approval shall be reviewed
by the PAA for consistency with the purpose and intent of
Subsections I through M. Such Plan Approval process shall be
construed as an As-of-Right review and approval process as
required by and in accordance with the Enabling Laws. All Projects
shall be subject to the Plan Approval process.
(1)
I.
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:708
Plan Approval Authority (PAA). The Planning Board, consistent with
MGL Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, shall be the Plan Approval
Authority (the "PAA"), and it is authorized to conduct the Plan
Approval process for purposes of reviewing Project applications
and issuing Plan Approval decisions within the SGOD.
(2)
PAA regulations. The Plan Approval Authority may adopt
administrative rules and regulations relative to Plan Approval.
Such rules and regulations, along any associated application forms,
guidelines, fee schedules and other application materials to which
Applicants are subject, must be approved by the Department of
Housing and Community Development.
(3)
Project phasing. An Applicant may propose, in a Plan Approval
submission, that a Project be developed in phases, provided that
the submission shows the full buildout of the Project and all
associated impacts as of the completion of the final phase, and
subject to the approval of the PAA. Any phased project shall comply
with the provisions of Subsection F(9).
(4)
Plan Approval procedures.
Preapplication. Prior to the submittal of a Plan Approval
submission, a "concept plan" may be submitted to help guide the
development of the definitive submission for Project buildout and
individual elements thereof. The concept plan is intended to be
used as a tool for both the Applicant and the PAA to ensure that
the proposed Project design will be consistent with the Design
Standards and other requirements of the SGOD. Such concept plan
should reflect the following:
(a) Overall building envelope areas;
(b) Open space and natural resource areas; and
General site improvements, groupings of buildings, and
proposed land uses.
(c)
(1)
Required submittals. An application for Plan Approval shall be
submitted to the PAA on the form provided by the PAA [along
with application fee(s)], which shall be as set forth in the PAA
Regulations. The application shall be accompanied by such plans
and documents as may be required and set forth in the PAA
Regulations. For any Project that is subject to the affordability
requirements of Subsection F, the application shall be
accompanied by all materials required under Subsection F(3). All
site plans shall be prepared by a certified architect, landscape
architect, and/or a civil engineer registered in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts. All landscape plans shall be prepared by a
certified landscape architect registered in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts. All building elevations shall be prepared by a
certified architect registered in the Commonwealth of
(2)
J.
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:709
Massachusetts. All plans shall be signed and stamped, and
drawings prepared at a scale of one inch equals 40 feet (1"=40') or
larger, or at a scale as approved in advance by the PAA.
Filing. An Applicant for Plan Approval shall file the required
number of copies of the application form and the other required
submittals as set forth in the PAA Regulations with the City Clerk
and a copy of the application, including the date of filing certified
by the City Clerk, shall be filed forthwith with the PAA.
(3)
Circulation to other boards. Upon receipt of the application, the
PAA shall immediately provide a copy of the application materials
to the City Council, Board of Appeals, Board of Health,
Conservation Commission, Fire Department, Police Department,
Building Commissioner, Department of Public Services, the
Monitoring Agent, Design Review Board, Parking and Traffic
Commission, and other municipal officers, agencies or boards for
comment. Any such board, agency or officer shall provide any
written comments within 60 days of its receipt of a copy of the plan
and application for approval.
(4)
Hearing. The PAA shall hold a public hearing for which notice has
been given as provided in § 11 of MGL Chapter 40A. The decision
of the PAA shall be made, and a written notice of the decision filed
with the City Clerk, within 120 days of the receipt of the application
by the City Clerk. The required time limits for such action may
be extended by written agreement between the Applicant and the
PAA, with a copy of such agreement being filed in the office of the
City Clerk. Failure of the PAA to take action within said 120 days or
extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be an approval of
the Plan Approval application.
(5)
Peer review. The Applicant shall be required to pay for reasonable
consulting fees to provide peer review of the Plan Approval
application, pursuant to MGL c. 40R, § 11(a). Such fees shall be
held by the City in a separate account and used only for expenses
associated with the review of the application by outside
consultants, including, but not limited to, attorneys, engineers,
urban designers, housing consultants, planners, and others. Any
surplus remaining after the completion of such review, including
any interest accrued, shall be returned to the Applicant forthwith.
(6)
Plan Approval decisions.
Plan Approval.
Plan Approval shall be granted where the PAA finds that:
The Applicant has submitted the required fees and
information as set forth in the PAA Regulations; and
[1]
(a)
(1)
K.
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:710
The Project as described in the application meets all of
the requirements and standards set forth in this § 300-140
and the PAA Regulations, or a waiver has been granted
therefrom; and
[2]
Any significant adverse potential impacts of the Project on
nearby properties have been adequately mitigated.
[3]
Compliance with condition K(1)(a)[2] above shall include
written confirmation by the Monitoring Agent that all
requirements of that subsection have been satisfied. The PAA
may attach conditions to the Plan Approval decision that are
necessary to ensure substantial compliance with this
§ 300-140, or to mitigate any significant adverse potential
impacts of the Project on nearby properties.
(b)
Plan disapproval. A Plan Approval application may be disapproved
only where the PAA finds that:
The Applicant has not submitted the required fees and
information as set forth in the regulations; or
(a)
The Project as described in the application does not meet all of
the requirements and standards set forth in this § 300-140 and
the PAA Regulations, or that a requested waiver therefrom has
not been granted; or
(b)
It is not possible to adequately mitigate significant adverse
project impacts on nearby properties by means of suitable
conditions.
(c)
(2)
Waivers. Upon the request of the Applicant and subject to
compliance with MGL c. 40R, 760 CMR 59.00, and Subsection
F(10), the Plan Approval Authority may waive dimensional and
other requirements of § 300-140, including the Design Standards,
in the interests of design flexibility and overall Project quality, and
upon a finding of consistency of such variation with the overall
purpose and objectives of the SGOD, or if it finds that such waiver
will allow the Project to achieve the density, affordability, mix of
uses, and/or physical character allowable under this § 300-140.
(3)
Project phasing. The PAA, as a condition of any Plan Approval, may
allow a Project to be phased at the request of the Applicant, or it
may require a Project to be phased for the purpose of coordinating
its development with the construction of planned infrastructure
improvements (as that term is defined under 760 CMR 59.00), or
to mitigate any extraordinary adverse Project impacts on nearby
properties. For Projects that are approved and developed in
phases, unless otherwise explicitly approved in writing by the
Department in relation to the specific Project, the proportion of
affordable units shall be at least equal to the minimum percentage
of Affordable Housing required under Subsection F(1).
(4)
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:711
Form of decision. The PAA shall issue to the Applicant a copy
of its decision containing the name and address of the owner,
identifying the land affected, and the plans that were the subject
of the decision, and certifying that a copy of the decision has
been filed with the City Clerk and that all plans referred to in the
decision are on file with the PAA. If 20 days have elapsed after
the decision has been filed in the office of the City Clerk without
an appeal having been filed or if such appeal, having been filed,
is dismissed or denied, the City Clerk shall so certify on a copy
of the decision. If a plan is approved by reason of the failure of
the PAA to act in a timely manner, the City Clerk shall make such
certification on a copy of the application. A copy of the decision
or application bearing such certification shall be recorded in the
Registry of Deeds for the county and district in which the land is
located and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the
owner of record or recorded and noted on the owner's certificate
of title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the
Applicant.
(5)
Validity of decision. A Plan Approval shall remain valid and shall
run with the land indefinitely, provided that construction has
commenced within two years after the decision is issued, which
time shall be extended by the time required to adjudicate any
appeal from such approval and which time shall also be extended
if the Project proponent is actively pursuing other required permits
for the Project or there is other good cause for the failure to
commence construction, or as may be provided in a Plan Approval
for a multi-phase Project.
(6)
Change in plans after approval by PAA.
Minor change. After Plan Approval, an Applicant may apply to
make minor changes in a Project involving minor utility or building
orientation adjustments, or minor adjustments to parking or other
site details that do not affect the overall buildout or building
envelope of the site, or provision of open space, number of housing
units, or housing need or affordability features. Such minor
changes must be submitted to the PAA on redlined prints of the
approved plan, reflecting the proposed change, and on application
forms provided by the PAA. The PAA may authorize such changes at
any regularly scheduled meeting, without the need to hold a public
hearing. The PAA shall set forth any decision to approve or deny
such minor change by motion and written decision, and provide a
copy to the Applicant for filing with the City Clerk.
(1)
Major change. Those changes deemed by the PAA to constitute a
major change in a Project because of the nature of the change in
relation to the prior approved plan, or because such change cannot
be appropriately characterized as a minor change as described
above, shall be processed by the PAA as a new application for Plan
Approval pursuant to Subsections I through M.
(2)
L.
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:712
Design Standards.
Adoption of Design Standards. The Plan Approval Authority may
adopt, by simple majority vote, Design Standards which shall be
applicable to development Projects subject to Plan Approval by
the Plan Approval Authority. Such Design Standards cannot extend
beyond the scope of the elements explicitly permitted under 760
CMR 59.04(1)(f). Design Standards must be objective and not
subjective and may only address the scale and proportions of
buildings, the alignment, width, and grade of streets and sidewalks,
the type and location of infrastructure, the location of building and
garage entrances, off-street parking, the protection of significant
natural site features, the location and design of on-site open
spaces, exterior signs, and buffering in relation to adjacent
properties. DHCD, at its discretion, may require Design Standards
to contain graphics illustrating a particular standard or definition
in order to make such standard or definition clear and
understandable.
(1)
Purpose. The Design Standards are adopted to ensure that the
physical character of Projects within the SGOD:
(a) Will be complementary to nearby buildings and structures;
Will be consistent with the Comprehensive Housing Plan, an
applicable master plan, an area-specific plan, or any other plan
document adopted by the City; and
(b)
Will provide for high-density, quality development consistent
with the character of building types, streetscapes, and other
community features traditionally found in densely settled areas
of the City or in the region of the City.
(c)
(2)
DHCD approval. After adopting Design Standards, the PAA shall
submit Design Standards to DHCD for approval. Design Standards
shall not take effect until approved by DHCD and filed with the
Town Clerk. In submitting proposed Design Standards for DHCD
approval, the PAA shall also submit sufficient documentation
clearly showing that the proposed Design Standards will not add
unreasonable costs to development Projects or unreasonably
impair the economic feasibility of a development Project. A letter
from a developer, property owner or other interested party
indicating that the Design Standards will not add unreasonable
costs or unreasonably impair the economic feasibility of a
development Project shall not constitute sufficient documentation.
At its discretion, DHCD may disapprove Design Standards if it finds
that the PAA has not adopted objective Design Standards or has not
submitted such documentation.
(3)
Plan Approval. An application for Plan Approval that has been
submitted to the City Clerk pursuant to this § 300-140 shall not be
(4)
M.
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:713
subject to Design Standards that have not been approved by DHCD
and filed with the City Clerk.
Severability. If any provision of this § 300-140 is found to be invalid by
a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of § 300-140 shall not
be affected but shall remain in full force. The invalidity of any provision
of this § 300-140 shall not affect the validity of the remainder of the
Zoning Ordinance of the City of Beverly, Massachusetts.
N.
§ 300-139 BEVERLY CODE § 300-139
1:714
Chapter 315
INCLUSIONARY HOUSING REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Inclusionary housing — See Ch. 300, Art. XV.
§ 300-139 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 300-139
1:715

ARTICLE I
Purpose and General Requirements
§ 315-1. Purpose.
These submission requirements, procedures and supplemental regulations
(the "regulations") explain the process that applicants must follow to obtain
approval of a development that is subject to Article XV, Affordable Housing,
of Chapter 300, Zoning, of the City Code.
§ 315-2. Ordinance requirements.
The Inclusionary Housing Ordinance was adopted by the City of Beverly
in July 2007. It requires any residential development of six or more
lots or dwelling units to include 12% of its units as affordable housing.
As defined in the ordinance, an "affordable housing unit" is a dwelling
unit that is affordable to and occupied by a low- or moderate-income
household and meets state requirements for listing on the Chapter
40B Subsidized Housing Inventory. Since inclusionary housing units
do not require a comprehensive permit under Massachusetts General
Law Chapter 40B, their eligibility for the Subsidized Housing Inventory
relies on the provisions of 760 CMR 56.00, Local Initiative Program
(LIP). As an aid to applicants, the Planning Board has referenced
portions of the current LIP regulations below. However, the applicant
is responsible for understanding, confirming and complying with LIP
requirements, as they may be amended from time to time, because
failure to do so may result in delayed issuance of approvals by the
Planning Board or other City officials with jurisdiction over the
project.196
A.
Applicants proposing a project that is subject to the Inclusionary
Housing Ordinance may comply by (1) including affordable units in the
proposed development or (2) providing affordable housing through an
alternative method set forth in Chapter 300, § 300-108B, subject to
Planning Board special permit approval. The City's preference is for
"inclusion units," or units incorporated on the locus of the development.
The procedures for each option are outlined separately in these
regulations.
B.
196. Editor's Note: This subsection was amended to change "10 or more lots or dwelling units"
to "six or more lots or dwelling units" in conjunction with a zoning amendment adopted by
the City Council 6-19-2017 by Ord. No. 144A. (See Ch. 300, Art. XV.)
§ 315-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-2
1:717

ARTICLE II
Developments with Inclusion (On-Site) Units
§ 315-3. Calculation of required number of affordable housing
units.
§ 315-4. Density bonus.
At least 12% of all housing units created in a project subject to the
City's Inclusionary Zoning Ordinance must be affordable. If the
calculation results in a fraction, then that fraction must be "rounded
up" to the nearest whole number.
A.
If a residential project is located in a zoning district where the only
permitted residential use is a detached single-family home, up to 20%
of the total number of units (market-rate and affordable) may be in twofamily,
semidetached or multifamily dwellings of not more than three
units, and all or a majority of the affordable units may be located in said
dwellings. Note that, to the extent possible, affordable units must not
be concentrated in one part of the development.
Example Calculations
Standard
Number of
Proposed Single-
Family Lots
Number of
Proposed
Multifamily Units
Base density 10 50
Affordable housing
requirement
1.2 units (rounds to
2 units)
6 units
Market-rate units 8 44
Number of units
permitted in two-family,
semidetached or
multifamily dwellings of
not more than 3 units
2 N/A
B.
See Chapter 300, Zoning, § 300-109, which permits, by right, density
bonuses in certain zoning districts when affordable housing units are
provided on site. Minimum lot area requirements for developments with
inclusion (on-site) units are somewhat smaller than for developments
that provide affordable housing through one of the alternative methods
listed in Chapter 300, § 300-108B. This adjustment has been made to
encourage the construction of on-site units and to discourage election
of the alternative methods.
A.
Example calculations of how density bonus and minimum lot area
adjustment work together. A developer proposes an eleven-lot
subdivision on three acres in an R-10 Zone. Assuming the road and
other improvements will take up 20,680 square feet, the developer has
110,000 square feet remaining to divide into house lots. A developer
B.
§ 315-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-4
1:719
§ 315-5. Submission requirements.
proposes a one-hundred-fifty-unit multifamily development on a tenacre
lot in the RSD Zoning District. Pursuant to Chapter 300, Article
XV, the inclusionary housing requirements and density bonuses would
be as follows:
Standard
Number of
Proposed Single-
Family Lots (R-10)
Number of
Proposed
Multifamily Units
(RSD)
Developable area 110,000 square feet 10 acres
Base density 11 150
Affordable housing
requirement
2 18
Market-rate units 9 132
Estimated density bonus
(one additional marketrate
dwelling unit per
affordable unit provided
on-site in R-10; 2 in RSD)
2 36
Actual density bonus
(applying minimum lot
area requirement of 85%
in R-10; 70% in RSD)
1 22
Final density 12 (10 market-rate +
2 affordable)
172 (154 market-rate
+ 18 affordable)
The following information is required for all applicable projects in
addition to those requirements found in Chapter 300, Zoning,
§ 300-110:
A complete inclusionary housing application form (See Appendix
A197).
(1)
Application fees. In addition to application fees required under
the Planning Board's Subdivision Rules and Regulations198 or other
filing fees (e.g., site plan review), the applicant shall pay the
inclusionary housing application fee shown on the application form
and in the Planning Board's regulations governing fees and fee
structures ("fee regulations"). Costs for review by any consultants
retained by the Planning Board shall be in addition to this amount
and are the sole responsibility of the applicant pursuant to the fee
regulations.
(2)
A.
197. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
198. Editor's Note: See Ch. 375, Subdivision of Land.
§ 315-4 BEVERLY CODE § 315-5
1:720
§ 315-6. Application procedure.
One original and 11 copies of the application and materials required
pursuant to § 315-5 above [excluding plans because they will be submitted
pursuant to § 315-5A(3) and (4) above] shall be submitted to the Planning
Board. One copy of the application only shall be submitted to the City Clerk.
For developments subject to site plan review under Chapter 300,
§ 300-98 or 300-54, the development shall be reviewed in
accordance with said sections and these regulations.
(3)
For developments not subject to Chapter 300, § 300-98 or 300-54,
the applicant shall submit a site plan that conforms to the
application requirements set forth in Chapter 300, § 300-98C, and
these regulations.
(4)
Identification of the lot or lots proposed for inclusion (on-site) units,
together with the type of dwelling unit(s).
(5)
Sufficient data to determine compliance with Chapter 300,
§ 300-104, Housing affordability, and § 300-106, Minimum
percentage of affordable units.
(6)
For inclusion (on-site) units, sufficient data to determine
compliance with Chapter 300, § 300-109, Dimensional and density
regulations for on-site units.
(7)
Elevations, sample floor plans and interior finish specifications for
typical market-rate and affordable housing units. If the applicant
intends to sell market-rate lots individually to homebuilders, the
applicant may request to defer submission of building plans until
a later date and the Planning Board will not unreasonably deny
the request. However, as a condition of inclusionary housing site
plan approval, no building permit will be issued for any units in
the development until plans for both the market-rate and affordable
units have been reviewed and approved by the Beverly Planning
Board.
(8)
Draft regulatory agreement, affordable housing deed rider and
affirmative marketing plan (§ 315-11 of these regulations). These
documents shall be submitted no later than the date of submission
of the inclusionary housing application.
(9)
Together, the inclusionary housing application form, application fees,
required data, site plan, building elevations, sample floor plans and
interior finishes specifications shall comprise the submission required
by Chapter 300, § 300-110.
B.
For applicable projects that also require submission of a subdivision
plan, site plan review or special permit application with the Planning
Board, the applicant shall simultaneously submit an inclusionary
housing application.
C.
§ 315-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-7
1:721
§ 315-7. Decision criteria.
§ 315-8. Maximum affordable purchase prices and rents.
Maximum affordable purchase prices and maximum affordable rents shall
be affordable to low- or moderate-income homebuyers or tenants in the
development. Maximum affordable purchase prices and maximum
affordable rents shall adhere to the current low- or moderate-income limits
as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development
(HUD) applicable to the City of Beverly and shall satisfy the Massachusetts
Department of Housing and Community Development's Local Initiative
Program (LIP) affordability requirements. The applicant shall submit a
proposed schedule of maximum affordable purchase prices or rents with the
inclusionary housing application.
§ 315-9. Construction schedule.
Inclusion (on-site) units must be constructed in proportion to (at the same
rate as) market-rate units to comply with Chapter 300, § 300-112, Phased
construction and shall be determined on the basis of occupancy permits
issued by the Building Department unless the Planning Board elects to
measure compliance by lot releases. If certificates of occupancy have not
been issued for the affordable units when the applicant applies for
additional occupancy permits or lot releases for market-rate units, the
Building Inspector shall have the right to withhold occupancy permits for
The inclusionary housing site plan will be acted upon in accordance
with the procedures set forth in Chapter 300, Article XV. To the
maximum extent possible, the Planning Board will coordinate its review
of the inclusionary housing site plan and a subdivision plan, site plan
and/or special permit (where applicable), recognizing that these
reviews are governed by different review and decision standards.
A.
The Planning Board may impose one or more of the following conditions
on its approval of the site plan:
Approval of elevations, sample floor plans and interior finish
specifications for typical market-rate and affordable housing units
prior to the issuance of a building permit (if such plans have not
been approved as part of the application).
(1)
Relocation of the inclusion (on-site) units to another lot or lots
within the development or modification to the elevation drawings
or floor plans in order to further the objectives of Chapter 300,
§ 300-107, Location and comparability of affordable units.
(2)
Modifications to the marketing plan, construction schedule,
affordable unit purchase prices or rents, and related elements of
the inclusionary housing site plan application, where necessary to
further the objectives of Chapter 300, Article XV.
(3)
B.
§ 315-7 BEVERLY CODE § 315-9
1:722
the market-rate units until the affordable units are completed. Inclusion (onsite)
units shall not be the last units to be built in any development.
§ 315-10. Comparable unit requirements.
Inclusion (on-site) units must be generally comparable to market-rate units
in the development. "Comparable" will be determined according to the
following standards.
For detached single-family dwellings, inclusion (on-site) units must be
similar in size; i.e., they must offer the same number of bedrooms as
the average market-rate unit. For example, if all of the development's
single-family homes are four-bedroom units, the inclusion (on-site) units
must also have four bedrooms because state regulations require overall
proportionality of affordable and market-rate units in a single
development In certain circumstances, the Planning Board will consider
reasonable exceptions to the principle of overall proportionality. For
example, if a development with inclusion units consists of several
approval not required (ANR) lots on a street where the surrounding
homes are smaller than the proposed new market-rate homes, the
applicant may request that the inclusion units be designed for
comparability in size to established homes in the same neighborhood,
provided the homes are generally in good condition. This request may
be made as part of the inclusionary housing site plan application and
the Planning Board may approve the same without requiring the
applicant to seek a special permit.
A.
As an alternative to designating single-family homes as inclusion (onsite)
units, the Planning Board will allow inclusion (on-site) units to
be located in two-family, semidetached or multifamily dwellings of not
more than three units pursuant to Chapter 300, § 300-107C(2). These
dwellings must conform to the design standards specified in § 300-107
and the following. Each unit must be separated by a common wall,
have an at-grade entrance to one unit on the front facade and an atgrade
entrance to the other units on a side other than the primary
facade, such that when viewed from the road, the dwelling appears to
be a detached single-family dwelling. The Planning Board will consider
alternatives to achieve the same goal of creating a dwelling that
appears to be a detached single-family dwelling when viewed from
the street. When more than one inclusion (on-site) unit is sited in a
single building, the building shall be equal in gross floor area to a
typical market-rate, detached single-family dwelling in the development
in order to achieve general comparability of scale and built form. The
purpose of this requirement is to assure that inclusion units will be
generally indistinguishable from market-rate units.
B.
Inclusion (on-site) units must be comparable to market-rate units in
exterior building materials and finishes, construction quality and
energy efficiency, including mechanical equipment and plumbing,
insulation, windows, and heating and cooling systems. However,
inclusion units may have different interior finishes and features,
C.
§ 315-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-10
1:723
§ 315-11. Preservation of affordability.
provided that such finishes and features are durable, of good quality
and consistent with contemporary standards for new housing. The
Planning Board reserves the right to consult with the Building Inspector
to verify the durability and quality of interior finishes proposed by
the applicant and to require reasonable changes to better achieve
comparability of units.
For homeownership developments, a "comparable" inclusion (on-site)
unit may be made available for rent to a low- or moderate-income
tenant at an affordable rent. The ordinance does not specify that
"comparable" requires a 1:1 relationship between the form of
ownership or occupancy for market-rate units and inclusion units. An
applicant who plans to provide a comparable unit for rent rather than
for sale must provide evidence satisfactory to the Planning Board that
the rental unit will be managed by a qualified entity that has prior
successful property management experience with affordable housing.
D.
Affordable housing units created by the Inclusionary Housing
Ordinance must be eligible for listing on the Chapter 40B Subsidized
Housing Inventory. Toward that end, the applicant is required to enter
into a regulatory agreement with the City of Beverly and DHCD. The
Planning Board encourages that applicants use the state's "model"
regulatory agreement, which is not part of these regulations and is
attached for informational purposes only (see Appendix B199). To reduce
delays, applicants are required to submit a draft regulatory agreement
with the inclusionary housing application so that regulatory agreement
details can be worked out during the permitting process. It is the
applicant's responsibility to prepare a complete regulatory agreement
for signature by the City and DHCD, to obtain the necessary signatures
and to record a fully executed agreement at the Registry of Deeds prior
to the issuance of any building permits (or in the case of a subdivision,
lot releases).
A.
In addition, for-sale units must be protected by a deed rider that
"locks in" an affordable housing purchase price upon resale. The City
encourages applicants to use the state's "model" affordable housing
deed rider (see Appendix C200). Applicants are required to submit a
draft affordable housing deed rider with the inclusionary housing
application so that details can be worked out during the permitting
process. This document must be fully executed and submitted to the
Planning Department prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy,
and must also be recorded with the Registry of Deeds at the time of
transfer of ownership.
B.
Finally, the regulatory agreement requires an annual monitoring
procedure to verify that affordable homeownership units remain owner-
C.
199. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
200. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 315-10 BEVERLY CODE § 315-11
1:724
§ 315-12. Marketing plan.
occupied and that affordable rental units are occupied by low- or
moderate-income tenants at rents they can afford. The applicant is
responsible for making monitoring arrangements with an organization
qualified to provide this service on behalf of the City. Since DHCD will
not approve affordable housing units for inclusion in the Subsidized
Housing Inventory unless a satisfactory monitoring plan is in place, it
is in the applicant's interest to purchase this service from a qualified
organization.
DHCD requires that all Chapter 40B eligible housing units be sold
or rented under an approved marketing plan. The purpose of the
marketing plan is to assure that as many qualified, income-eligible
homebuyers or tenants as are reasonably possible are aware of an
affordable housing opportunity and that the units will be made available
on a nondiscriminatory basis.
A.
Although there are many low- or moderate-income households seeking
affordable housing, the marketing process is sometimes difficult. As an
aid to applicants, the Planning Board has included sample marketing
plan information in an exhibit to these regulations (see Appendix D201).
It is the applicant's responsibility to prepare a final marketing plan,
provide a draft for review by the Planning Board, and submit the final
plan to DHCD for its approval. The marketing plan must be approved
by DHCD prior to the issuance of any occupancy permits and/or lot
releases.
B.
201. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 315-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-12
1:725

ARTICLE III
Alternatives to Providing Inclusion (On-Site) Units
§ 315-13. Alternatives authorized but not required.
Chapter 300, Zoning, § 300-108B, authorizes the Planning Board to grant
a special permit for a proposed alternative to inclusion units. However,
the Planning Board is not required to issue a special permit and reserves
the right to deny one in order to implement the intent of the Inclusionary
Housing Ordinance as stated in § 300-102. The following is a list of the
possible alternatives to providing inclusion (on site) units and their
respective requirements.
§ 315-14. Off-site affordable housing units.
Applicants may apply for a special permit to provide equivalent
affordable units in another location in Beverly, following the
requirements in § 315-5 of these regulations. The procedures for
determining the adequacy and acceptability of off-site units may require
considerable time and expense for the applicant. However, in the
absence of inclusion units, the City prefers off-site units because the
goal of the Inclusionary Housing Ordinance is to create affordable
housing. This option is available to interested applicants and the
Planning Board will consider a special permit if all of the requirements
listed in this section are met.
A.
On or before the date of application for a special permit, the applicant
must have site control of either (a) land that will be used to build offsite
units or (b) existing housing units that will be proposed as offsite
units. In the case of land that will be used to build new off-site
units, the special permit application must be accompanied by evidence
satisfactory to the Planning Board that the land is developable for
the required number of affordable units under existing zoning and
subdivision regulations without variances, waivers or needed approvals
of any kind, including from other bodies having regulatory authority
over the development or any portion thereof (such as the Conservation
Commission and Board of Health), unless such variances, waivers or
approvals have already been obtained from such other authority.
Satisfactory evidence will include, at minimum, a site analysis prepared
by a registered professional engineer, an appraisal report prepared by
a Massachusetts-certified appraiser and dated within one year of the
application, and documentation of any variances or waivers received.
B.
If the applicant's off-site unit proposal involves existing housing units,
the special permit application must demonstrate to the Planning
Board's satisfaction that all of the following conditions have been or will
be met:
Evidence that the applicant will own the proposed location of the
off-site units prior to the issuance of any building permits for
market-rate units in the development.
(1)
C.
§ 315-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-14
1:727
§ 315-15. Fee in lieu of units. [Amended 7-18-2017]
The housing unit(s) has (have) no violations of the State Building
Code or Article II of the State Sanitary Code.
(2)
The housing unit(s) has (have) no lead paint hazards, as evidenced
by a lead paint inspection or certificate of compliance with the
MA Lead Paint Law (indicating that lead paint hazards have been
abated in accordance with Department of Public Health
requirements).
(3)
The housing unit(s) is (are) vacant or are occupied by the seller
or a qualified tenant pursuant to Chapter 300, § 300-104A, and
no existing low- or moderate-income residential tenants will be
displaced as a result of acquiring the unit(s) to satisfy the
requirements of § 300-108B(1).
(4)
The housing unit(s) is (are) generally comparable to market-rate
units in the proposed development and of equal or greater quality
than homes in the surrounding neighborhood, considering the
standards for comparability in § 315-10 of these regulations.
(5)
Approved off-site units must also comply with the same project
schedule, affordability provisions and marketing plan requirements that
apply to inclusion units (§§ 315-9, 315-11 and 315-12). The applicant
may sell an approved off-site unit(s) to the Beverly Housing Authority
or another nonprofit development organization that will be responsible
for renting the unit(s) or marketing the unit(s) to eligible first-time
homebuyers or that will retain ownership of the unit(s) and manage it
as affordable rental housing.
D.
Applicants may apply for a special permit to pay a fee in lieu of creating
affordable units. This provision applies to homeownership
developments only. For each affordable unit provided through a fee in
lieu of units, the cash payment shall be equal to 35% of the median
of single-family home or condominium sale prices in the Beverly
neighborhood in which the applicant is developing its units, for the
three fiscal years immediately prior to the current fiscal year in which
the application is made. The City of Beverly's Assessors' Office shall
define the neighborhoods, as per its Neighborhood Codes, and
determine which sales fall into its defined neighborhoods. The Planning
Board shall update the fee schedule annually without a public hearing,
shortly after the close of each fiscal year. See Appendix E for the
current fee schedule.202
A.
If there were no sales during any of the three fiscal years in the
subject Neighborhood Code, the applicant shall rely on a comparable
Neighborhood Code that had sales in each of the three fiscal years, as
determined by the City of Beverly's Assessors' Office.
B.
202. Editor's Note: Appendix E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 315-14 BEVERLY CODE § 315-15
1:728
§ 315-16. Land donation.
Chapter 300, § 300-108B(2), requires that fees in lieu of units shall be
paid to the City's Affordable Housing Trust Fund. (Note: The Beverly
Affordable Housing Trust Fund was established as Chapter 33, Article
I on February 6, 2017.) Fee-in-lieu-of-unit payments shall be made in
accordance with § 300-114D.
C.
Applicants may apply for a special permit to provide affordable housing
through a donation of buildable land. The applicant may propose to
donate buildable land to the Beverly Housing Authority or a comparable
entity approved by the Planning Board.
A.
The Planning Board reserves the right to approve or deny a land
donation based on the following criteria:
The site's location; e.g., whether the location is at least as
appropriate for new housing as the site the applicant plans to
develop without inclusion units;
(1)
The site's development potential under existing zoning and other
development requirements and regulations;
(2)
The probability of affordable units being constructed on the land
within a reasonable period of time, to be determined by evidence
that the nonprofit organization and/or Housing Authority is willing
to accept the land and commits to the production of units; and
(3)
The experience of the proposed nonprofit organization as a
developer and/or manager of affordable housing.
(4)
B.
The applicant who proposes a land donation shall submit a site analysis,
prepared by a registered professional engineer, which demonstrates
to the Planning Board's satisfaction that the land is developable for
the required number of affordable units under existing zoning and
subdivision regulations without variances, waivers or needed approvals
of any kind, including from other bodies having regulatory authority
over the development or any portion thereof (such as the Conservation
Commission and Board of Health), unless such variances, waivers or
approvals have already been obtained from such other authority. An
appraisal report prepared by a Massachusetts-certified appraiser and
dated within six months of the application must also be submitted.
Donated land shall be subject to a restriction assuring its perpetual use
for mixed-income or affordable housing.
C.
§ 315-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-16
1:729

ARTICLE IV
Special Permits
§ 315-17. Requirements.
Inclusionary housing special permits and inclusionary housing applications
shall be filed simultaneously. Pursuant to Chapter 300, Zoning, § 300-111,
application, review and decision procedures shall be in accordance with
Chapter 300, § 300-91, and with the provisions of MGL c. 40A, § 9. In
addition, each special permit application must satisfy the Planning Board
that it meets the following requirements based on the applicable section:
Section 300-107C(1), reduction of gross floor area for affordable
detached one-family dwellings: provide calculations comparing the
minimum gross floor area required under the regulations or guidelines
of the Local Initiative Program to the proposed gross floor area of the
affordable detached one-family dwellings and the average gross floor
area of the market-rate dwellings.
A.
Section 300-108B, alternative methods of providing affordable units:
Refer to Article III of these regulations for requirements.
B.
Section 300-108C, credit units: The Planning Board may grant a special
permit for "credit units" if the developer provides a greater number
of affordable units on-site than is required. These "extra" units may
be applied to another development in a different location in order to
reduce the number of affordable units in that project. The credit units
must be applied within 10 years from the effective date of the special
permit. Developers must adhere to the following requirements:
The special permit application must be filed simultaneously with
the inclusionary housing application.
(1)
The developer must specify the number of affordable units to be
credited.
(2)
Credit units will be subject to the affordability and comparability
requirements of Chapter 300, Article XV.
(3)
Purchase and rent prices for the credit units are subject to the
affordability and market conditions of the time the units are applied
to a future project.
(4)
C.
Section 300-109B, density bonus for development with on-site and offsite
affordable units: Off-site units under this section shall meet the
description of off-site units provided in § 300-108B(1).
D.
§ 315-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 315-17
1:731
Chapter 350
OPEN SPACE RESIDENTIAL DESIGN GUIDELINES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open space residential design — See Ch. 300,
§ 300-54.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 375.
§ 350-1. Consistency with ordinance.
The conceptual plans, preferred plan and OSRD site plan shall be consistent
with and shall not conflict with Chapter 300, Zoning, § 300-54, Open space
residential design (OSRD) site plans, Subsection E, General design process,
Subsection F(3), Design standards, and Subsection H(1), Open space
requirements.
§ 350-2. Fees.
Filing fees for an open space residential design site plan are found in the
Planning Board regulations governing fees and fee schedules, as may be
amended from time to time, which are incorporated herein by reference.
§ 350-3. Submission of plans and documents: initial review.
Procedure. The initial review shall follow the procedures of Chapter
300, § 300-54, Subsection C(1)(a) through (e). In the course of the
initial review, applicants shall submit to the Planning Board each of the
following:
One original and 12 copies of the initial review application. The
applicant shall also file one copy of the initial review application
with the City Clerk.
(1)
Twelve copies of each of the following plans sized at 24 inches by
36 inches and 10 copies sized at 11 inches by 17 inches. (Includes
site context map, existing condition/site analysis map, conceptual
plans, yield plan and preferred plan. Note that the yield plan may
be submitted at any time before submission of the preferred plan
and that the preferred plan shall not be submitted until the
conceptual plans have been reviewed and discussed by the
Planning Board.)
(2)
A.
Site context map. This map illustrates the tract in connection to its
surrounding neighborhood. Based upon existing data sources and field
inspections, it should show various kinds of major natural resource
areas or features that cross parcel lines or that are located on adjoining
lands. This map enables the Planning Board to understand the site in
relation to what is occurring on adjacent properties. This map shall
B.
§ 315-17 BEVERLY CODE § 350-3
1:732
be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet unless the Planning
Department shall approve another scale.
Existing conditions/site analysis map. This map familiarizes officials
with existing conditions on the tract. Based upon existing data sources
and field inspections, this base map locates and describes noteworthy
resources that should be left protected through sensitive subdivision
layouts. These resources include but are not limited to the primary
conservation areas and additional conservation areas identified in
Chapter 300, § 300-54, Subsection E(1). This map shall be drawn at a
scale of one inch equals 40 feet unless the Planning Department shall
approve another scale.
C.
Conceptual plans. In accordance with Chapter 300, § 300-54,
Subsection C(1)(b), conceptual plans "shall not be detailed, but shall
show the general features of the site and the possible locations of
structures and ways."
The conceptual plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals
40 feet unless the Planning Department shall approve another
scale. The plans shall provide sufficient information to form a clear
basis for discussion and selection of a preferred plan.
(1)
Submission of two conceptual plans showing alternative
development configurations is required; the submission of three
conceptual plans is strongly encouraged.
(2)
The conceptual plans shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer, and licensed landscape architect.
(3)
The conceptual plans shall contain at least the following
information:
The tract/subdivision name, boundaries, north point, legend,
title "Conceptual Plan," and scale.
(a)
The names of the record owner of the tract and the applicant,
and the names and stamps of the registered professional
engineer and licensed landscape architect who prepared the
plan.
(b)
The location and name of all streets in the immediate vicinity
of the proposed project with a notation as to whether the street
is a public or private right-of-way.
(c)
Zoning and historic district boundary lines within the plan
locus.
(d)
The location and dimensions of all existing lot lines, structures
and ways on site and on abutting properties in close proximity.
(e)
All information from Subsection C of this section to show the
general features and topography of the land and major types
(f)
(4)
D.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-3
1:733
and size of vegetation. This shall include existing and proposed
contour lines with a five-foot contour interval; or in flat areas,
of a two-foot contour interval. Elevations shall be National
Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88).
Possible locations for proposed structures and ways on the
tract.
(g)
All on-site local, state, and federal regulatory resource
boundaries and buffer zones.
(h)
Information on the location, size, and capacity of existing
utilities servicing the tract.
(i)
General information on proposed utilities, which will service
the tract (water, sewer, electric, etc.).
(j)
General information on the possible methods of surface and
subsurface drainage disposal.
(k)
Any additional data, which the Planning Board may deem
necessary to evaluate the proposal as it relates to surrounding
areas, anticipated traffic and public safety and the intent of the
Master Plan and the ordinance (Chapter 300, § 300-54).
(l)
No later than the time of submittal of the preferred plan (Subsection
F below), submit narrative of how applicant adhered to Chapter 300,
§ 300-54, Subsection E, General design process.
E.
Preferred plan. In accordance with Chapter 300, § 300-54, Subsection
C(2), the preferred plan is a concept plan that has been amended,
refined and conditioned during the initial review stage.
The preferred plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 40
feet unless the Planning Department shall approve another scale.
(1)
The preferred plan shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer and licensed landscape architect.
(2)
The preferred plan shall include all information required by
Subsection D(4) of this section and at least the following:
The location of existing landscape features, including all
primary conservation areas and additional conservation areas
as identified in Chapter 300, § 300-54, Subsection E(1).
Proposals for all site features to be preserved, demolished, or
moved shall be noted on the preferred plan.
(a)
(b) Configurations of the proposed lots, roadways and open space.
(3)
F.
Yield plan. In accordance with Chapter 300, § 300-54, Subsection C(3),
the yield plan shall be submitted prior to approval of the preferred plan
and shall include the following information:
G.
§ 350-3 BEVERLY CODE § 350-3
1:734
§ 350-4. Submission of plans and documents: OSRD site plan.
A narrative explanation detailing the results of the determination of
any proposed allocation of yield determined according to Chapter
300, § 300-54, Subsection D, Basic maximum number (of lots/
units).
(1)
Plan, designated as "Yield Plan," prepared by a registered
professional engineer and licensed landscape architect, drawn at a
scale of one inch equals 40 feet (unless the Planning Department
shall approve another scale), displaying the general features and
topography of the land shown on the preferred plan, major types
and size of vegetation, the dimensions, areas, and locations of
the lots, open space, roadways, wetlands, water bodies, and their
buffer zones.
(2)
Documentation that the applicant is the owner of, or in legal control
of, the entire tract depicted on the plan.
(3)
Documentation that wetlands resource areas, if any, pursuant to an
approved abbreviated notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD)
and other environmental and regulatory constraints upon
development have been adequately shown and dealt with.
(4)
Documentation of variances or waivers granted by other bodies
having regulatory authority over the development or any portion
thereof, if any.
(5)
Procedure. The OSRD site plan review shall follow the procedures of
Chapter 300, § 300-54, Subsection F(1) and (2). Applicants shall submit
to the Planning Board each of the following:
One original and three copies of the OSRD site plan application.
The applicant shall also file one copy of the OSRD site plan
application with the City Clerk.
(1)
Three copies of the plan sized at 24 inches by 36 inches and 10
copies sized at 11 inches by 17 inches.
(2)
A.
OSRD site plan.
Preferably, the OSRD site plan shall be dawn at a scale of one inch
equals 40 feet.
(1)
The OSRD site plan shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer, and licensed landscape architect and shall be designated
as "OSRD Site Plan."
(2)
The OSRD site plan shall include all information contained in the
requirements for a preferred plan in § 350-3F of this chapter and
the following:
(3)
B.
§ 350-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-4
1:735
Lines showing proposed private residential lots, as located
during Step Four, Chapter 300, § 300-54, Subsection E(4), with
areas and frontage dimensions, proposed building areas and
driveways within those lots, and proposed limits of
construction/disturbance within the tract as a whole.
(a)
All existing and proposed features and amenities, including
trails, recreation areas, pedestrian and bicycle paths,
community buildings and off-street parking areas, shall be
shown on the plan and described in a brief narrative
explanation where appropriate.
(b)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, common
driveways, easements and any parcel(s) of land intended to be
dedicated for public use or to be reserved by deed covenant for
use of all property owners in the tract/subdivision, or parcel(s)
of land or lots to be used for any purpose other than private
residential shall be so designated within the tract/subdivision
in a general manner.
(c)
A narrative explanation of the proposed quality, size, use and
ownership of the open space. Open space parcels shall be
clearly shown on the plan.
(d)
All proposed landscaped and buffer areas shall be noted on the
plan and generally explained in a narrative.
(e)
A list of all legal documents necessary for implementation
of the proposed development, including any conservation
restrictions, land transfers, and master deeds, with an
accompanying narrative explaining their general purpose and
content.
(f)
A narrative indicating all requested waivers, dimensional
relief, and/or modifications as permitted within the
requirements of the ordinance (Chapter 300, § 300-54).
(g)
Computations of tract area [§ 300-54B(3)], undisturbed areas
{§ 300-54F(3)(b)[7]}, buildable area and open space
[§ 300-54H(1)].
(h)
The OSRD site plan shall also include any other information as
required in the requirements for definitive plans, found in Chapter
375, Subdivision of Land, § 375-13B, as may be amended from time
to time, to the extent these requirements do not conflict with the
ordinance (Chapter 300, § 300-54) or OSRD site plan rules and
regulations.
(4)
Open space management plan providing guidance for the
maintenance and stewardship of the open space and any facilities
accessory thereto.
(5)
§ 350-4 BEVERLY CODE § 350-4
1:736
Chapter 375
SUBDIVISION OF LAND
§ 350-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 350-4
1:737

ARTICLE I
Purpose and Authority
§ 375-1. Purpose; waiver.
These subdivision regulations are adopted for the purpose of protecting the
safety, convenience, and welfare of the inhabitants of the City of Beverly by
regulating the laying out and construction of ways in subdivisions providing
access to the lots therein, but which have not become public ways, and
ensuring sanitary conditions in subdivisions and, in proper cases, parks
and open areas. The powers of the Beverly Planning Board and the Board
of Appeals, under the Subdivision Control Law, shall be exercised with
due regard for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a
subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for lessening
congestion in such ways and in the adjacent public ways; for reducing
danger of life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing
safety in case of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies; for ensuring
compliance with the applicable zoning ordinances; for securing adequate
provision for water, sewerage, drainage, underground utility services, fire,
police, and other similar municipal equipment, and streetlighting and other
requirements where necessary in a subdivision; and for coordinating the
ways in a subdivision with each other and with the public ways in the
City and with the ways in neighboring subdivisions. It is the intent of the
Subdivision Control Law (under which these regulations are adopted) that
any subdivision plan filed with the Beverly Planning Board shall receive the
approval of such Board if said plan conforms to the recommendations of the
Board of Health and to the reasonable rules and regulations of the Beverly
Planning Board pertaining to subdivisions of land; provided, however, that
such Board may, when appropriate, waive, as provided for in MGL c. 41,
§ 81R, such portions of the rules and regulations as is deemed advisable.
§ 375-2. Authority; effective date.
Under the authority vested in the Beverly Planning Board of the City of
Beverly by MGL c. 41, § 81Q, said Board hereby adopts these amended
Rules and Regulations Governing the Subdivision of Land in the City of
Beverly. These regulations shall be effective on and after January 23, 2003.
§ 375-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-2
1:739

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 375-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADEQUATE ACCESS — Satisfactory means of actual physical ingress and
egress within and without the development to any lot or development
by vehicular traffic and by pedestrian traffic. Adequacy of access will be
determined by the Planning Board after review of such factors as
topography, soil conditions, presence of wetlands, existence of easements,
construction methods and legal status of way providing access.
APPLICANT — A person (as hereinafter defined) who applies for the
approval of a plan of a subdivision or a person who applies under § 375-4.
"Applicant" shall include an owner or his agent or representative or his
assigns.
APPROVAL NOT REQUIRED PLANS (ANRs) — The division of a tract of
land into two or more lots in which, at the time when it is made, every lot
within the tract so divided has sufficient frontage on (a) a public way, or a
way which the City Clerk of the City of Beverly certifies is maintained and
used as a public way, or (b) a way shown on a plan theretofore approved
in accordance with the Subdivision Control Law, or (c) a way in existence
when the Subdivision Control Law became effective in the City, having,
in the opinion of the Planning Board, sufficient width, suitable grades,
and adequate construction to provide for the needs of vehicular traffic in
relation to the proposed use of the land abutting thereon or served thereby,
and for the installation of municipal services to serve such land and the
buildings erected or to be erected thereon. Such frontage shall be of at
least such distance as is then required by Chapter 300, Zoning, or other
ordinances.
BEVERLY PLANNING BOARD — A Planning Board established under MGL
c. 41, § 81A.
BEVERLY PLANNING BOARD AGENT — The City Engineer or consultant
authorized by the Beverly Planning Board to review subdivisions and
administer regulations.
BOARD or PLANNING BOARD — The Beverly Planning Board.
BUILDER — A person who constructs a building on a lot.
CERTIFIED BY — With respect to a plan or other instrument required or
authorized by the Subdivision Control Law to be recorded, certified, or
endorsed by the Planning Board, shall mean that the plan or instrument
bears the certification of a majority of Planning Board members, or of its
Chairman, or any other person authorized by it to certify or endorse its
approval or other action; a majority of Planning Board members shall sign
a written statement naming those persons authorized to certify or endorse
§ 375-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-3
1:741
the Board's action, and shall record that statement at the Registry of Deeds
and the Land Court.
CITY — The City of Beverly, unless otherwise specified.
DEVELOPER — A person (as hereinafter defined) who develops a
subdivision under a plan of a subdivision approved under Article III of these
rules and regulations.
FRONTAGE — The distance between either the points of intersection of
the side lot lines and the street right-of-way or the points of intersection
of the side lot lines and the rear line of the required front yard extended
to the street right-of-way, whichever is smaller (see diagram of frontage in
the Appendix). When a lot is bounded by more than one street, any one
of them, but only one, may be designated as the frontage street by the
owner, provided that that street provides sufficient frontage as required
by Chapter 300, Zoning, of the City Code; however, in the case of a lot
bounded by two streets forming an interior angle of more than 135°, their
combined frontage between lot lines may be used to satisfy the lot frontage
requirement.
GENERAL LAWS (abbreviated MGL) — The General Laws of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, as amended. In case of a rearrangement
of the General Laws, any citation of particular sections of the General Laws
shall be applicable to the corresponding sections in the new codification.
MUNICIPAL SERVICES — Sewers, water drains, water pipes, gas pipes,
electrical lines, telephone lines, communication lines, and their respective
appurtenances.
OWNER or OWNER OF RECORD — As applied to real estate, the person
holding the fee-simple title to a parcel, tract, or lot of land.
PERSON — An individual, or two or more individuals, or a group or
association of individuals, a trust, a partnership or corporation having
common or undivided interests in a tract of land.
PLAN or DEFINITIVE PLAN — The plan of a subdivision as submitted (with
appropriate application) to the Board for approval to be recorded in the
Registry of Deeds or filed with the Land Court when approved by the Board
and such plan when approved and recorded; all as distinguished from a
preliminary plan.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A plan of a proposed subdivision or resubdivision of
land prepared in accord with Article III to facilitate proper preparation of a
definitive plan.
RECORDED — Recorded in the Registry of Deeds of Essex South District in
which the land in question is situated, except that, as affecting unregistered
land, it shall mean filed with the recorder of the Land Court (MGL c. 41,
§ 81L).
REGISTRY OF DEEDS — The Registry of Deeds of Essex South District in
which the land in question is situated and, when appropriate, shall include
the Land Court (MGL c. 41, § 81-L).
§ 375-3 BEVERLY CODE § 375-3
1:742
ROADWAY — That portion of a way which is designed and constructed for
vehicular travel.
STREET, MINOR — A street which, in the opinion of the Board, is being
used or will be used primarily to provide access to abutting lots and may be
built to less exacting standards as described in § 375-15.
STREET, PRINCIPAL — A street which, in the opinion of the Board, is being
used or will be used as a thoroughfare within the City of Beverly, which
will connect communities or which will otherwise carry a heavy volume of
traffic.
STREET, SECONDARY — A street which may intersect one or more minor
streets and which, in the opinion of the Board, is used or will be used
to carry substantial traffic from such minor street(s) or abutting lots to
a principal street or community facility, and normally including streets
within a shopping center, industrial park, a large subdivision, a group of
subdivisions, and any primary circulation route within such developments,
or a street which will connect subdivisions.
SUBDIVISION — The division of a tract of land into two or more lots and
shall include a resubdivision and, when appropriate to the context, shall
relate to the process of subdivision or the land or territory subdivided.
(See definition of "approval not required plans" for definition of what does
not constitute a subdivision.) Conveyances or other instruments adding to,
taking away from, or changing the size and shape of lots in such a manner
as not to leave any lot so affected without sufficient frontage or the division
of a tract of land on which two or more buildings were standing when the
Subdivision Control Law went into effect in the City in which the land lies,
into separate lots on each of which one of such buildings remains standing,
shall not constitute a subdivision (MGL c. 41, § 81-L).
SUBDIVISION CONTROL — The power of regulating the subdivision of land
granted by the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K through 81GG,
inclusive, as hereinafter amended.
SUBMITTED PLAN — A plan shall be considered officially submitted to the
Beverly Planning Board as of the date said plan and forms necessary under
these rules and regulations are duly filed with the Clerk or Secretary of the
Board at a regularly scheduled business meeting of the Board and the fact
of such submission is entered in the minutes of the meeting. Such plan shall
nevertheless be considered duly submitted even though not entered in the
minutes of the meeting if otherwise properly submitted and such failure of
entry into the minutes is due to the inadvertance or unwarranted refusal of
the Clerk or Secretary to make such entry. Such plans and forms may also
be submitted by registered mail to the Beverly Planning Board, care of the
City Clerk. If so mailed, the postmarked date shall be the date of submission
of the plan.
§ 375-4. Approved plan required.
No person shall make a subdivision within the meaning of the Subdivision
Control Law of any land within the City or proceed with the improvement
§ 375-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-4
1:743
for sale of lots in a subdivision, or the construction of ways, or preparation
therefor or the installation of utilities and municipal services therein, unless
and until a definitive plan of such subdivision has been submitted and
approved by the Beverly Planning Board as hereinafter provided.
§ 375-5. Source of information required.
In those cases in which the land shown on the plan is abutted by land
of an owner not the owner of the land as shown, the Board may require
a statement from the person who prepared the plan as to the source or
sources of the information about the location of boundaries. A separate form
for such statement will be furnished by the Board. (See Form D, Designer's
Certificate, Appendix D.203)
§ 375-6. More than one building for dwelling purposes on lot.
Not more than one building designed or available for use for dwelling
purposes shall be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lots
in a subdivision, or elsewhere in the City, without the consent of the Beverly
Planning Board. Such consent may be conditional upon the providing of
adequate ways furnishing access to each site for such building in the same
manner as otherwise required for lots within a subdivision.
§ 375-7. Fees. [Amended 12-16-2003; 12-20-2005]
§ 375-8. Application by corporation.
In the case of applications by corporations, a vote from the clerk of the
corporation shall accompany submission of definitive subdivision plans
certifying authorization of an individual(s) to act for the corporation, along
with a copy of a recent title search supplied by the owner.
§ 375-9. Ownership of property.
A copy of the deed(s) of property shall accompany submission of definitive
subdivision plans.
§ 375-10. Disapproval of premature subdivision of land.
The Planning Board shall not approve scattered or premature subdivision
of land which would involve danger or injury to health, safety, or property
Fees for approval not required plans, preliminary subdivision plans,
and definitive subdivision plans are contained in the Planning Board
regulations governing fees and fee schedules, as may be amended from
time to time, which are incorporated herein by reference.
A.
All expenses for advertising, recording, and filing of documents shall be
borne by the applicant.
B.
203. Editor's Note: Form D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-4 BEVERLY CODE § 375-10
1:744
by reason of lack of fire protection, water supply, sewage disposal facilities,
drainage, transportation or other public services or which would
necessitate an excessive expenditure of public funds for the supply or
maintenance of such services. It shall attempt to provide for the harmonious
development of the community, allowing open spaces of adequate
proportion for the accommodation of existing and prospective traffic,
playgrounds, or other recreational purposes.
§ 375-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-10
1:745

ARTICLE III
Procedures for Submission and Approval of Plans
§ 375-11. Plan believed not to require approval.
Submission of plan. Any person who wishes to cause to be recorded
in the Registry of Deeds or to be filed with the Land Court a plan of
land and who believes that his plan does not require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law may submit his plan and three contact prints,
one reproducible Mylar copy, the original, and a properly executed
Form A (See Appendix A)204 to the Beverly Planning Board,
accompanied by the necessary evidence to show that the plan does
not require subdivision approval. Filing fees for a Form A, Subdivision
Approval Not Required Plan, are found in the Planning Board
regulations governing fees and fee schedules, as may be amended from
time to time, which are incorporated herein by reference. Said plan
shall contain the following information: [Amended 12-20-2005]
Identification of the plan by name of owner of record and location
of the land in question, cross-referenced to page and parcel
number of the Assessor's Maps.
(1)
The statement "Approval Under the Subdivision Control Law Not
Required," and sufficient space for the date and the signatures of
the majority of the Board.
(2)
(3) A locus plan at 800 feet to the inch shall be included on the plan.
Zoning classification and location of any zoning district boundaries
that may lie within the locus of the plan.
(4)
In the case of the creation of a new lot, the remaining land area
and frontage of the land in the ownership of the applicant shall be
shown.
(5)
Notice of any decision of the Zoning Board of Appeals, including,
but not limited to, variances and exceptions regarding the land or
any buildings thereon.
(6)
Abutters from the latest available Assessor's records unless the
applicant has knowledge of any changes subsequent to the latest
available Assessor's records. (See Form E, Certified List of
Abutters, Appendix E.205)
(7)
(8) Distance to the nearest road or other permanent monument(s).
Location of all existing buildings, including setback and side yard
and rear yard designations.
(9)
A.
204. Editor's Note: Form A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
205. Editor's Note: Form E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-11
1:747
§ 375-12. Preliminary plans.
The scale, date, and name of the engineer or surveyor who
prepared the plan.
(10)
(11)Location of nearest fire hydrant(s).
(12)Metes and bounds of all existing and proposed boundary lines.
Notation explaining purpose of ANR (details of transactions,
making an existing nonconforming lot conforming, etc.).
(13)
Notation stating that: "Endorsement of this plan as one not
requiring approval under the Subdivision Control Law is not a
determination as to conformance with zoning."
(14)
Endorsement of plan not requiring approval.
If the Beverly Planning Board determines that the plan does not
require approval, it shall, without a public hearing, endorse the
plan.
(1)
The Beverly Planning Board may add to such endorsement a
statement of the reason approval is not required. The plan shall be
returned to the applicant.
(2)
B.
Submission of recorded or registered plans. Upon recording or
registering the final endorsed plan with the Registry of Deeds or Land
Court, two copies of the registered or recorded plan shall be submitted
to the Planning Department. [Amended 12-20-2005]
C.
Electronic data submittal. Upon endorsement by the Beverly Planning
Board that the plan does not require approval under the Subdivision
Control Law and recording or registering the plan with the Registry of
Deeds or Land Court, the applicant or owner of record shall forthwith
file with the Beverly Engineering Department GIS Coordinator, at no
charge or cost to the City of Beverly, an electronic file of the final
endorsed plan. The files shall be in CAD or GIS format and may be
submitted on CD, DVD or by electronic mail. All files shall be submitted
to the City of Beverly Engineering Department in accordance with its
"Digital Data Submission Requirements" as may be amended from time
to time, which are incorporated herein by reference, for purposes of
incorporating the data into the City's Geographic Information System.
[Amended 12-20-2005]
D.
Determination that plan requires approval. If the Beverly Planning
Board determines that the plan does require approval under the
Subdivision Control Law, it shall so inform the applicant in writing and
return the plan. The Beverly Planning Board shall also notify the City
Clerk in writing of its action. [Amended 12-20-2005]
E.
A. General. [Amended 12-20-2005]
§ 375-11 BEVERLY CODE § 375-12
1:748
A preliminary plan of a subdivision must be submitted for
nonresidential subdivisions, and may be submitted for residential
subdivisions by the applicant; 12 prints size 24 inches by 36 inches
and 10 prints size 11 inches by 17 inches, which shall be filed with
the Beverly Planning Board, along with an original and a properly
executed Form B, Preliminary Plan (see Appendix B).206 Filing fees
for a Form B, Preliminary Plan, are found in the Planning Board
regulations governing fees and fee schedules, as may be amended
from time to time, which are incorporated herein by reference.
(1)
The applicant shall file, by delivery or registered or certified mail,
a notice with the City Clerk stating the date of formal submission
(submitted plan) for such approval of a preliminary plan,
accompanied by a copy of a properly executed application Form
B. The submission of such a preliminary plan will enable the
applicant, the Beverly Planning Board, the Board of Health, the
Public Works Department, the Police Department, the Fire
Department, the agent to the Beverly Planning Board, and other
City agencies and owners of property abutting the subdivision
to discuss and clarify the details of such subdivision before a
definitive plan is prepared. Therefore, it is strongly recommended
that a preliminary plan be filed in each case. A properly executed
application Form B (See Appendix B) shall be filed with the
preliminary plans submitted to the Beverly Planning Board. (See
Form O, Document Control Sheet, for the distribution of plans,
Appendix O.207)
(2)
The Beverly Planning Board may extend the forty-five-day period
permitted by statute between submission of a preliminary plan and
action thereon upon written request of the applicant. (See Form Q,
Extension of Time, Appendix Q.208)
(3)
Contents. The preliminary plan may be drawn on Mylar at a suitable
scale, preferably 40 feet to the inch. The plan shall be designated as
a "Preliminary Plan" and shall provide sufficient information to form
a clear basis for discussion of the details of the subdivision and for
preparation of the definitive plan. The plan shall contain the following:
The subdivision name, if any, boundaries, locus plan, North point,
date, scale, legend and title "Preliminary Plan."
(1)
The names and addresses of the record owner of the land and the
subdivider and the name and address and seal of the registered
architect, engineer and land surveyor who made the plan, which
shall appear in the lower right-hand corner.
(2)
B.
206. Editor's Note: Form B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
207. Editor's Note: Form O is included as an attachment to this chapter.
208. Editor's Note: Form Q is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-12
1:749
The names of all abutters, as determined from the last assessment,
unless the applicant shall have more recent knowledge of such
abutters. (See Form E, Certified List of Abutters, Appendix E.209)
(3)
The existing and proposed lines of streets, ways, easements, and
any public or common areas within the subdivision, in a general
manner.
(4)
Major features of the land such as existing walls, fences,
monuments, buildings, trees six inches in caliper measured four
feet above the ground, wooded areas, outcroppings, ditches,
swamps, water bodies and natural waterways.
(5)
The proposed system of sewage disposal, water installation
hydrants, and drainage, including adjacent existing natural
waterways.
(6)
The approximate boundary lines of proposed lots, with approximate
areas and dimensions.
(7)
The names and the approximate location and widths of adjacent
streets approaching or within reasonable proximity of the
subdivision.
(8)
The topography of the land with a five-foot contour interval; or, in
flat areas, of a two-foot contour interval. Water bodies and their
elevations shall be shown with the date of measurement.
(9)
The proposed names of the proposed streets and a number on each
lot on each proposed street.
(10)
The profiles of existing grades and approximate proposed finished
grades of the roadway and drain and other utilities and showing
soil conditions and approximate high groundwater levels.
(11)
Area of adjoining land and water of the applicant not presently
being subdivided.
(12)
(13)The zoning classification of land shown on the plan.
Necessary engineering calculations to provide information to the
Beverly Planning Board that fire protection, vehicular traffic flow,
turning radii, and all other safety precautions are being provided.
(14)
Shading or other methods to show the areas on all lots that are to
be excavated or filled, and wetlands.
(15)
Approval. During the discussion of the preliminary plan, the complete
information required for the definitive plan, and the financial
arrangements, will be developed. The Beverly Planning Board may
give such preliminary plan approval, with or without modifications or
C.
209. Editor's Note: Form E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-12 BEVERLY CODE § 375-12
1:750
§ 375-13. Definitive plans.
suggestions, after the Board's review of data and comments from the
Board of Health, Public Works Department, Police Department, Fire
Department, and the City Engineer. Such approval does not constitute
approval of the subdivision, but facilitates the preparation of the
definitive plan and securing final approval thereof. One copy of the
preliminary plan will be returned to the applicant. In the event of
disapproval, the Beverly Planning Board shall state the reasons for
its disapproval in accordance with MGL c. 41, § 81U. It shall be the
applicant's responsibility to submit or obtain enough data or material
to obtain meaningful comments from all parties reviewing said plan.
General. Any person who submits a definitive plan of a subdivision
(submitted plan) to the Beverly Planning Board for approval shall file
with the Board the following:
All items required in Subsections A(1)(a), (1)(b), B and C of this
section and the minimum filing fee (See § 375-7.) shall be
submitted for a definitive plan to be "duly submitted" in accord
with the General Laws of Massachusetts (See Form O, Document
Control Sheet, for the distribution of plan, Appendix O.210) by the
Board and the subdivider.
Twelve prints size 24 inches by 36 inches and 10 prints size 11
inches by 17 inches upon application; one original Mylar and
one reproducible Mylar copy of the final plans for signature
following final approval; and one print, size 24 inches by 36
inches, of the final approved signed plans. [Amended
12-20-2005]
(a)
A properly executed application Form C, Application for
Approval of a Definitive Plan (Appendix C); Form D, Designer's
Certificate (Appendix D); Form E, Certified List of Abutters
(Appendix E); and proof of submission of plan to the Board of
Health (see Subsection D of this section).211
(b)
(1)
Approval of all plans shall be upon the condition that all ways
shown thereon and public utilities required by the Board shall be
completed and installed within the time so specified. The Board
may decline to approve any plan unless the applicant agrees to
complete the ways shown thereon and install the public utilities
aforesaid within two years of the date of approval. If the ways
in any subdivision are not completed and the utilities aforesaid
are not installed within the time so agreed to by the applicant or
so required by the Board, no such way shall thereafter be laid
out, constructed, completed or opened for public use unless and
until a new application is filed with and approved by the Board.
(2)
A.
210. Editor's Note: Form O is included as an attachment to this chapter.
211. Editor's Note: The forms are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 375-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:751
Ways or portions thereof not completed within two years from the
date of approval by the Board shall thereafter be completed in
accordance with the then-in-force construction standards of the
Beverly Planning Board.
The applicant shall file, by delivery or registered or certified mail,
a notice with the City Clerk stating the date of submission for
such approval and accompanied by a copy of completed Form C,
Application for Approval of Definitive Plan (Appendix C).212
(3)
Contents. The definitive plan shall be prepared by a registered,
professional engineer and land surveyor and shall be clearly and legibly
drawn in black India ink upon Mylar or tracing cloth. There shall be a
locus plan at a scale of one inch equals 800 feet. The plan shall be at
a scale of one inch equals 40 feet or such other scale as the Beverly
Planning Board may accept to show details clearly and adequately, and
shall include plans and profiles of each individual street at a scale of
one inch equals 40 feet horizontal and one inch equals four feet vertical.
All elevations shall be the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1988
(NAVD88). Sheet sizes shall be 24 inches by 36 inches, including a oneinch
border. All plans shall be accompanied by an index sheet at a scale
of one inch equals 100 feet showing the entire subdivision and adjacent
streets and dimensions of the lots and streets and lot numbers. This
plan shall indicate the Assessor's Map and Parcel number of the land
in question. All engineers and surveyors shall certify that they either
personally performed or supervised the work shown on the drawings.
The definitive plan shall contain the following information: [Amended
12-20-2005]
A title block, appearing in the lower right-hand corner of the plan,
showing the name of the subdivision, if any, the date, scale, the
names and addresses of the applicant, and the names of the
designer, registered architect, engineer and surveyor who made
the plan, their seals and signatures.
(1)
(2) North arrow, benchmark, and boundaries of the subdivision.
Location and ownership of abutting property as it appears on Form
E, Certified List of Abutters (Appendix E),213 unless the applicant
shall have more recent knowledge of such abutters, including all
abutting land owned by the applicant not presently being
subdivided. A copy of the deed of the land in question shall also be
submitted.
(3)
Major features of the land, such as existing waterways, swamps,
and water bodies, natural drainage courses, walls, fences,
buildings, trees six inches in caliper measured four feet above the
(4)
B.
212. Editor's Note: Form C is included as an attachment to this chapter.
213. Editor's Note: Form E is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:752
ground, wooded areas, outcroppings and ditches which exist on or
near the site at the time of the survey.
Lines of existing and proposed streets, ways, lots, lot numbers or
other designation of each lot, easements, and public or common
areas within the subdivision. If the subdivision consists of more
than one section, all lot numbers shall be consecutive.
(5)
Sufficient data to determine the location, direction, and length
of every street and way line, lot line, and boundary line, and to
establish these lines on the ground. This shall include the lengths
and bearings of plan and boundary lines, of all subdivision lot lines,
including lot frontage on the streets, of the boundary lines of all
streets and easements, and the length, radii, tangents, and central
angles of all curves in lot lines and street lines. All angle points
or intersections of tangents along the street lines shall be shown.
Adjoining lands of the applicant not included in the subdivision will
be shown.
(6)
Location of all permanent monuments properly identified as
whether existing or proposed.
(7)
Location, names, and present widths of streets or private ways
bounding, approaching, or within reasonable proximity of the
subdivision, showing both roadway widths and right-of-way widths.
(8)
When existing roadways are improved upon or regraded in areas
which abut existing homeowners, topographical details at sufficient
distances from the roadway layout must be supplied to ensure
proper drainage of abutting properties. Proof of slope easements
shall be provided prior to plan approval.
(9)
Indication of all easements, covenants, or restrictions applying to
the land and their purposes, whether or not within the subdivision,
including any decision on an appeal or variance or exception made
by the Zoning Board of Appeals applicable to the subdivision of the
land or any buildings thereon.
(10)
If the property that comprises the subdivision or any part or
boundary thereof has been examined, approved, and confirmed by
the Massachusetts Land Court, such information shall be noted
on the plan with case numbers and other pertinent references to
Land Court procedure, and the same requirement shall apply to any
adjoining parcels of land of the applicant.
(11)
Suitable space to record the action of the Beverly Planning Board
and the signatures of the majority of the Board.
(12)
Street address numbers for each lot on a definitive subdivision
plan.
(13)
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:753
[Items (14) through (21) may be submitted on the same sheet as
the definitive plan, or on separate sheets.]
A notation that: "Should the rodent population be displaced (leave
its natural habitat) because of land development, then the
developer must bear the responsibility of retaining the services of a
professional exterminating company to abate the rodent migration
problem. This service must adequately solve the problem and must
be completed at the expense of the developer."
(14)
Existing profiles of the exterior lines drawn in fine black line,
dotted for left side and dashed for right side, and proposed profile
on the finished center line drawn in fine black solid line of proposed
streets at a horizontal scale of one inch equals 40 feet and vertical
scale of one inch equals four feet, or other such scale acceptable
to the Beverly Planning Board. At least two benchmarks are to
be shown on plans and profiles, and grade elevations at every
fifty-foot station except in vertical curves, which shall be at every
twenty-five-foot station. All existing and proposed intersections and
sidewalks shall be shown, with all proposed grade elevations
calculated. Sufficient subsoil information shall be indicated so as to
ascertain soil conditions at proposed subbase and highest known
high water table. Elevations shall be to the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1988 (NAVD88). Gradients shall be shown by
figures expressed in percent. Water bodies and their elevations
shall be shown with the date of measurement.
(15)
Existing and proposed topography at two-foot contour intervals
and, by symbols, the highest known high water mark. There shall
also be indicated, by differentiating symbols, the contour line four
feet above said high water mark.
(16)
Size and location of existing and proposed water supply mains
and their appurtenances, hydrants, sewer pipes and their
appurtenances and/or sewage disposal systems, storm drains and
their appurtenances, and easements pertinent thereto, and
dimensions of gutters, including data on borings and percolation
tests made, and method of carrying water to the nearest
watercourse or easements for drainage as needed, whether or not
within the subdivision. If surface water drains will discharge onto
adjacent existing streets or onto adjacent properties not owned by
the applicant, he shall clearly indicate what course the discharge
will take, and shall present evidence to the Board that the
discharge is satisfactory and permitted by public or private
ownership of adjacent street(s) or property and does not cause any
detrimental effects to public or private property.
(17)
Calculations prepared by a registered engineer to substantiate
proposed drain pipe sizes. The computations shall be based on the
current standard of design used by the City Engineer.
(18)
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:754
Location and species of proposed street trees and location of trees
to be retained with trunks over six inches in diameter, measured
four feet above the finished ground level, located outside of the
street right-of-way line of existing or proposed streets not closer
than five feet to or more than 10 feet from said right-of-way line.
(19)
Cross sections typical of each street, roadway and sidewalk to
be constructed, including existing soil conditions and high
groundwater level.
(20)
Location of proposed streetlights and sidewalks, underground
electric lines, and fire alarm systems.
(21)
Conceptual design of each utility pump station, and a site plan at
the scale of one inch equals 20 feet which shows the layout of the
proposed station.
(22)
Necessary engineering calculations to provide information to the
Beverly Planning Board that fire protection, vehicular traffic flow,
utilities and all other safety precautions are being provided. When
deemed necessary, the Planning Board will require that the
applicant commission a traffic study to assess the project's impact
on the roads and traffic both within and surrounding the
development. The City will approve the consulting firm selected
by the developer, and the cost of the traffic study will be borne
solely by the applicant. The Planning Board will also require, when
deemed necessary, the submission of fire flow tests to ensure
adequate protection from fire.
(23)
As a part of the definitive plans, there will be submitted an overall
drainage plan with topographic details for the subdivision and all
areas within the total drainage area plus the area of ultimate
disposal drawn with India ink on tracing cloth (or other method
suitable for reproduction). A separate plan, or a part of the above
plan, shall be included for the water system. The above
requirements may be on one plan or on two separate plans, with
complete details of the drainage and the water system.
(24)
Each sheet shall be consecutively numbered as Sheet 1, 2, etc. of
the total number of sheets.
(25)
Adequacy of ways providing access to subdivisions.
An analysis of ways providing access to subdivisions, hereinafter
referred to as the "street system," shall be prepared for subdivision
plans by an engineer or engineers registered in the Commonwealth
of Massachusetts having expertise in civil engineering and traffic
and transportation engineering.
(1)
The report(s) shall contain the following information: a narrative
including data to show characteristics of the street(s) providing
access to the development measured from the entrance of the
(2)
C.
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:755
development to the nearest cross street. If the distance from the
entrance of the development to the nearest cross street is more
than 1,000 feet, then the required data shall include the first 1,000
feet.
Applying the guidelines set forth in Article IV, Design
Standards, of these rules and regulations, the Planning Board
shall determine the adequacy of the street system.
(a)
If the Planning Board determines, based on the data submitted,
that the street does not meet these guidelines, the Planning
Board, in the interest of the public safety, shall identify those
improvements which must be made and shall give written
notice to the applicant. The applicant shall propose and
describe not less than two alternative designs for
improvements to the street system intended to address the
inadequacies identified by the Planning Board.
(b)
The engineering and cost of construction and implementation
of required improvements shall be the full responsibility of the
applicant.
(c)
The Planning Board may condition a subdivision approval on
these improvements being made or legally secured or
guaranteed in accordance with the following:
Prior to improvement of a street system involving a private
way(s), the applicant shall show evidence, satisfactory to
the Planning Board, of the applicant's right to perform
such work. In the event that the applicant does not have
the right and cannot obtain the right to make all required
improvements, then the applicant shall report these facts
to the Planning Board for a determination by the Planning
Board of what further action is to be taken. The Planning
Board may propose to the City Council that the street(s) be
accepted by the City with the undone improvements to be
completed by or paid for by the applicant.
[1]
Prior to any improvement of a street system involving a
public way(s), the applicant shall receive approval from
the City Engineer and other City boards and other
government agencies or commissions having jurisdiction
over the roadways as applicable. If the applicant does not
receive approval to undertake certain improvements, then
improvements shall be made to the extent of the approvals
obtained.
[2]
(d)
With respect to improvements which cannot be made by the
applicant due to inability to obtain the necessary approvals,
the Planning Board shall be the final arbiter in determining
those improvements which are conditions of the subdivision
approval.
(e)
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:756
Review by Board of Health as to suitability of the land. At the time
of the filing of the definitive plan with the Beverly Planning Board,
the applicant shall also file with the Board of Health one print of
the definitive plan, together with such information in the nature of
percolation tests and deep test holes as the Board of Health may
require. Proof of submittal of definitive plan to the Board of Health
shall accompany the definitive plan filing with the Beverly Planning
Board. The Board of Health shall, within 45 days after the filing of
the plan, report to the Beverly Planning Board, in writing, approval or
disapproval of said plan. If the Board of Health disapproves said plan, it
shall make specific findings as to which, if any, of the lots shown on such
plan cannot be used for building sites without detriment to the public
health, and include such specific findings and the reasons therefor in
such report, and, where possible, shall make recommendations for the
adjustment thereof. Every lot shall be provided with a sewerage system
or sewer connection satisfactory to the Board of Health.
D.
Review by other City officials.
The Clerk of the Beverly Planning Board may transmit copies of the
definitive plan to City officials other than the Board of Health as
follows: one copy each to the City Solicitor for review of easements
and agreements; the Department of Public Services; the Building
Inspector; the Conservation Commission; the Fire Department; the
Police Department; the Water Department; and the Salem/Beverly
Water Supply Board.214
(1)
Before the definitive plan is approved, the Beverly Planning Board
may request written statements from the above officials with
regard to the proposed improvements in the following respect:
City Solicitor as to the form of easements, covenants, and
performance guarantees.
(a)
Department of Public Services and/or the Beverly Planning
Board agent (City Engineer) as to the design of the street
system, location of easements, monuments, drainage system,
and, if applicable, the sewage system.215
(b)
The Fire Department as to location of hydrants and with regard
to safety requirements.
(c)
(d) The Police Department as to street safety.
The Water Department and the Beverly/Salem Water Supply
Board as to the water system.
(e)
(f) Conservation Commission.
(2)
E.
214. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
215. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:757
Soil survey and percolation tests. Where appropriate, the Beverly
Planning Board may require, at the expense of the applicant, soil
surveys and/or test borings performed under the supervision of a
competent geotechnical engineer to establish the suitability of the land
for the proposed sewerage disposal system, storm drainage system
and proposed street construction. A report prepared by a competent
geotechnical engineer and summarizing the results of such soil surveys
and tests must be filed with all plans for nonresidential subdivisions or
multifamily residences.
F.
Public hearing.
Before taking any action to approve, approve with modifications,
or disapprove a definitive plan, the Beverly Planning Board shall
hold a hearing at which parties in interest shall have an opportunity
to be heard, in person or by agent or attorney. Notice of the time
and place of such hearing and of the subject matter, sufficient
for identification, shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City once in each of two successive weeks, the
first publication to be not less than 14 days before the date of
the hearing, and by mailing a copy of such advertisement to the
applicant and to all owners of land abutting the land shown on the
plan and shown on the most recent tax list.
(1)
The procedure that the Beverly Planning Board will follow with
respect to approval, disapproval or modification of the final plan
submitted by the applicant will be that as set forth in MGL c. 41,
§ 81-U, as amended. In summary, the Board, after receiving the
final plan and profiles, will review the same to determine whether
they are in compliance with its adopted rules and regulations and
the Zoning Ordinance.216
(2)
Before final approval of the plan, the applicant shall comply with
all applicable regulations and rules of the Department of Public
Services and the Board of Health not otherwise covered by these
rules and regulations. Specific reference is made to the
specifications for sewerage systems, which shall conform with the
rules and regulations of the Board of Health.217
(3)
Before final approval of the plan, the applicant shall establish that
the lots in the definitive plan are in conformity with the City of
Beverly Zoning Ordinance, and failure of the lots to comply will be
adequate grounds for disapproval of the definitive plan (MGL c. 41,
§ 81Q, and amendments thereto). The Board may, as a condition
of granting a permit under MGL c. 41, § 81Y, impose reasonable
requirements designed to promote the health, convenience, safety,
and general welfare of the community and to benefit the City. In
such event, the Board shall endorse such conditions on the plan to
(4)
G.
216. Editor's Note: See Ch. 300, Zoning.
217. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:758
which they relate; or set forth in a separate instrument, attached
thereto, to which reference is made on such plan and which shall,
for the purpose of the Subdivision Control Law, be deemed to be a
part of the plan.
Notations shall be made on the plans of any revisions and the date
revisions were made. A letter shall also accompany the plans, fully
describing all revisions in detail.
(5)
Certificate of approval. [Amended 12-20-2005]
The action of the Beverly Planning Board with respect to such plan
shall be by vote, copies of which shall be certified and filed with the
City Clerk and sent by registered or certified mail, return receipt
requested, to the applicant.
(1)
If the Beverly Planning Board modifies or disapproves such plan,
it shall state in its vote the reasons for its action and shall rescind
such disapproval when the plan has been amended to conform
to the rules and regulations and recommendations of the Beverly
Planning Board.
(2)
Final approval, if granted, shall be subject to the design standards
contained herein and shall be endorsed on the original drawings
of the definitive plan by the signatures of a majority of the Beverly
Planning Board after the City Clerk has notified the Beverly
Planning Board that no notice of appeal has been filed with that
office.
(3)
After the definitive plan has been approved and endorsed, the
Board shall return the original Mylar to the applicant. The
applicant in turn shall provide the Board with one full set of the
final signed plans.
(4)
Refer to Appendix U for statutory review periods.218 The Beverly
Planning Board may extend the ninety-day or one-hundred-thirtyfive-
day period permitted by statute between submission of a
definitive plan and action thereon upon written request of the
applicant. (See Form Q, Extension of Time, Appendix Q.219)
(5)
Approval of the definitive plan does not constitute the laying out
or acceptance by the City of streets within a subdivision and does
not signify that the subdivision may be constructed before all safety
and health standards have been met.
(6)
The original copy of the recorded covenant shall be returned,
following recording by the Registry of Deeds, to the Beverly
Planning Board. Upon receipt thereof, the Board will mail a copy of
said covenant to the applicant.
(7)
H.
218. Editor's Note: Appendix U is included as an attachment to this chapter.
219. Editor's Note: Appendix Q is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:759
Performance guarantee. Before endorsement of its approval of a
definitive plan or subdivision, the Board shall require that the
construction of ways and the installation of municipal services be
secured by one, or in part by one and in part by the other, of the
methods described in Subsection I(1) or (2) below, which method may
be selected and from time to time varied by the applicant.
Approval with a certified check.
The applicant shall file a certified check or a three-way
agreement in an amount determined by the Beverly Planning
Board to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part
of the improvements specified in Article V not covered by a
covenant under Subsection I(2) hereof. Estimated amounts are
noted in Appendices S and T and are revised each year.220 Such
certified check, if filed or deposited, shall be accompanied by
an appropriate and properly executed agreement prepared in
the manner of Form F, G, or such other form as the Board may
require,221 and approved as to form and manner of execution
by the City Solicitor and shall be contingent on the completion
of such improvements within two years of the date of the
approval of the definitive plan, or within a reasonable period
of time beyond two years as may be approved by the Planning
Board. (See Appendices F and G.)
(a)
The money may be forfeited or the term may be extended
at the discretion of the Beverly Planning Board. If extended,
the Beverly Planning Board may, at its discretion, request an
increase or decrease in the amount deposited to insure
sufficient bonding to cover the costs to complete the
improvements.
(b)
(1)
Approval with covenant. The applicant shall file a Form G, Approval
with Covenant Contract (Appendix G), or such other form of
covenant as the Beverly Planning Board requires, approved as
to form and manner of execution by the City Solicitor, properly
executed and duly recorded in the Registry of Deeds by the owner
of record, running with the land, whereby such ways and services
as specified in Article V, not covered by bond or deposit under
Subsection I(1) hereof, shall be provided to any lot before such lot
may be built upon or conveyed, other than by mortgage deed.
(2)
Developer's disclosure agreement. Prior to final approval of a
Definitive subdivision plan, the applicant shall prepare and submit
a "developer's disclosure agreement" to be referenced on the plan
and recorded at the Registry of Deeds for all lots in the subdivision
prohibiting conveyance of said subdivision lots. The disclosure
(3)
I.
220. Editor's Note: Appendixes S and T are included as attachments to this chapter.
221. Editor's Note: Forms F and G are included as attachments to this chapter in Appendixes F
and G.
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:760
agreement may be released only when all individual lot purchasers,
with valid purchase and sales agreements, sign and have notarized
an "agreement and acknowledgement" form available at the
Planning Board's office. (See Appendix W for sample copies of the
developer's disclosure agreement and lot purchasers' agreement
and acknowledgement forms.222) The staff of the Planning Board
shall be responsible for administering the release of lots. The
"agreement and acknowledgement" form shall be prepared by the
applicant and approved by the Planning Board and shall, at a
minimum, stipulate the following:
That the City of Beverly and the Planning Board of the City
bear no responsibility for the speedy completion of utilities and
roadways necessary to obtain occupancy permits and that this
responsibility lies solely with the applicant (or his successor).
(a)
That the applicant has submitted and has received approval
of a performance guarantee according to Subsection I of this
section. Said guarantee insures the completion of construction
of ways and the installation of utilities for the subdivision
within two years after submittal of the performance guarantee
or within a reasonable period of time beyond two years as may
be approved by the Planning Board.
(b)
The buyer of a lot acknowledges that he understands that he
will not be able to obtain an occupancy permit for the house to
be constructed on his lot until the base course of the roadway
is constructed and the utilities are installed and are in working
order.
(c)
The buyer releases, indemnifies, and holds harmless the City
of Beverly from any loss, cost, claim, or damage resulting from
the buyer's inability to occupy the house to be constructed
or the failure of the applicant to complete the subdivision
roadways, utilities, and amenities.
(d)
Reduction of bond surety. The amount of any deposit held under
Subsection I(1) above may, from time to time, be reduced by the Beverly
Planning Board and the obligations of the parties thereto released by
said Board in whole or in part. If release is by reason of covenant, a new
plan of the portion to be subject to the covenant may be required by the
Board.
J.
Release of performance guarantee.
General requirements.
When all subdivision improvements are complete (and
approved drawings are submitted as mandated under Article
V), or when a covenant has been met with respect to any or
(a)
(1)
K.
222. Editor's Note: Appendix W is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:761
all lots, the applicant may send (by certified or registered mail)
a written statement detailing the completed improvements
(according to Article V) to the City Clerk and the Planning
Board. If the Planning Board, after consultation with the Public
Works Department, determines that all improvements are
complete, any certified check on deposit which has been
posted by the applicant as a performance guarantee (according
to the provisions of these Subdivision Rules and Regulations)
shall be returned to the applicant; in the case of a covenant,
the Planning Board will issue a written release of said covenant
on a release form. (See Form H, Release Form, Appendix H.223)
However, 20% of the value of the check shall be held by the
City to insure maintenance of streets, improvements, and
municipal services for 18 months after completion of
construction and installation (completed utility trenches must
go through at least one winter season in a condition
satisfactory to the Director of Engineering, Commissioner of
Public Services, Public Works) or until the streets are accepted
by the City, whichever comes first; after which date the City
shall return the remainder of the bond, if any, to the applicant.
(b)
Approximately 60 days before the expiration of the 18 months,
the Beverly Planning Board shall inspect said street or way
or portion thereof to determine whether or not defects have
developed therein, and determine whether or not it should
recommend the release of the final 20%.
(c)
Upon expiration of the period for which the applicant is
responsible for maintenance of said way, and if said developer
has complied with all the requirements of the Subdivision
Control Law and the Beverly Planning Board rules and
regulations as set forth in an inspection report of said way, any
monies held by said Board for the maintenance of said way
shall be returned forthwith to the applicant.
(d)
The owner of record of a subdivision shall be held responsible
for all omissions, infractions, and deviations from the approved
plans.
(e)
Prior to releasing the City's interest in a performance bond
or deposit or releasing the covenant, the Beverly Planning
Board shall receive from the applicant an as-built plan and an
acceptance plan. [See Subsections K(3) and M of this section.]
(f)
If the Beverly Planning Board determines that said
construction or installation has not been completed, it shall
specify to the applicant, in writing, by registered or certified
mail, return receipt requested, the details wherein said
(g)
223. Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:762
construction and installation shall have failed to comply with
requirements contained under Article V. Upon failure of the
Beverly Planning Board to act on such application within 45
days after the receipt of the application by the City Clerk and
the Beverly Planning Board, all obligations under the bond
shall cease and terminate by operation of law; and the deposit
shall be returned, and any such covenant shall become void.
In the event that said forty-five-day period expires without such
specification or without the release and return of the deposit or
release of the covenant as aforesaid, the City Clerk shall issue
a certificate to such effect, duly acknowledged, which may be
recorded.
(h)
Inspection for release of performance guarantee. Prior to
inspection for release of security for performance which was given
by bond, tripartite agreement, deposit or covenant, the applicant
shall submit, at the following construction stages, a statement
stamped and certified by either a registered professional engineer
or a registered land surveyor that the required improvements are
built in conformity with these rules and regulations, the approved
subdivision plan, the standards of the DPW, and the order of
conditions of the Conservation Commission. If the as-built
certification of Subsection J(2)(a) or (b) below is performed by
a registered land surveyor (RLS), and if any of the required
improvements are not in conformity with the approved subdivision
plan or the rules and regulations, then said RLS certification and
other appurtenant information shall be accompanied by a
statement stamped and certified by a registered professional
engineer describing the nonconforming construction and a
statement, if appropriate or applicable, that in his opinion the
described nonconforming construction and/or installation is equal
to or better than what is required by the rules and regulations, the
approved subdivision plan, the standards of the DPW, and the order
of conditions of the Conservation Commission.
Underground utilities and drainage. Prior to any backfilling,
the applicant's registered professional engineer or registered
land surveyor shall observe and certify that the as-built
location and elevation of all underground utilities, including,
but not limited to, drainage, water and sewer, conform to the
rules and regulations and the approved subdivision plan. In
addition, the registered professional engineer or registered
land surveyor shall observe and certify that the location,
elevation and grading of the entire drainage system, including
drainage easements, swales, retention/detention areas and all
visual drainage appurtenances are in conformity with the rules
and regulations, the approved subdivision plan and order of
conditions. In any instance where the as-built construction
is not in conformity, the registered professional engineer or
(a)
(2)
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:763
registered land surveyor shall list the exceptions and attach a
"red-lined, marked-up print" which shall consist of a print of
the approved subdivision plan identifying those areas marked
in red pencil, wherein the construction and/or installation is
inconsistent with either the rules and regulations or the
approved plan.
Binder application. Following the binder application and prior
to any further roadway construction, the applicant shall submit
an as-built certification signed and stamped by either a
registered land surveyor or a registered professional engineer.
Said certification shall certify the roadway location, width, and
elevation and that the center line of all roadways coincide
with the center line of the street right-of-way, and that the
preceding items conform to the rules and regulations and the
approved subdivision plan.
(b)
Upon completion of required improvements, the applicant shall
submit as-built plans.
(c)
As-built plan. The applicant shall submit as-built plans drawn with
india ink on linen or Mylar material certified by his registered
professional engineer to show actual locations and grades of all
utilities and improvements, and the roadway profile. As-built "onthe-
ground" conditions at time of inspection shall include, at a
minimum, the following items to be shown on the as-built plan:
Rims and inverts of all drainage structures as they would
appear on the profile section of the plan.
(a)
Location, size, and type of material for the water main; indicate
spot elevations every 200 feet on the water main to verify
vertical installation.
(b)
(c) Location of gas mains (and house services if installed).
(d) All underground electrical installations.
(e) Underground cable installation.
(f) Fire alarm wiring, if applicable.
(g) Underground telephone wiring.
Water and sewer services to each individual lot with linear ties
to a permanent structure or monument.
(h)
(i) Line water gates and ties.
(j) Telephone services to lots.
(k) Cable services to lots.
(l) Curbing - berms and indicate type.
(3)
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:764
(m) Granite curbs.
(n) Sidewalks and their width.
(o) Granite headers.
(p) Grass plots and their width.
(q) Any encroachments on private property.
(r) Driveway curb cuts.
(s) Hydrants and water gates.
(t) Utility (telephone/electric) poles and any guys.
(u) Streetlights.
(v) Electric transformers.
All drainage, drainage structures, drainage easements; off-site
drainage, appurtenances, pipe sizes and materials. All of this
information shall be shown both within the right-of-way and
any easement(s). If a drainage channel, swale or brook is part
of the drainage, then top and bottom of bank elevations shall
be given every 50 feet. If a retention basin is constructed, then
enough elevations shall be given to indicate that the retention
basin will have the proper staging called for in the approved
plan.
(w)
(x) Rims and inverts of all sewer structures.
(y) Any and all other utility appurtenances.
(z) Location of survey monuments.
Trees which, as specified on the approved plan, were to be
retained or planted.
(aa)
(bb)Landscaping and planting if required by approved plan.
(cc) Center-line profile (fifty-foot stations with high and low points).
(dd)Side slopes and lot grading certification.
Center-line stationing; indicate on plan portion of the as-built
plan.
(ee)
(ff) Benchmark.
(gg)Width of roadway layout.
(hh)Width of roadway pavement.
(ii) Location of street signs.
§ 375-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-13
1:765
(jj) Typical title block.
Footprint of all houses constructed on all lots in the
subdivision.
(kk)
Electronic data submittal. [Added 12-20-2005]
Upon recording or registering of the plan with the Registry of
Deeds or Land Court and acceptance of the final as-built and
acceptance plans by the Beverly Planning Board, the applicant or
owner of record shall forthwith file with the Beverly Engineering
Department GIS Coordinator at no charge or cost to the City of
Beverly:
(a) An electronic file of the final approved subdivision plan; and
(b) An electronic file of the final as-built and acceptance plans.
(1)
The files shall be in CAD or GIS format and may be submitted
on CD, DVD, or by electronic mail. All files shall be submitted to
the City of Beverly Engineering Department in accordance with
its "Digital Data Requirements" as may be amended from time to
time, which are incorporated herein by reference, for purposes
of incorporating the data into the City's Geographic Information
System.
(2)
L.
Acceptance by the City. The applicant or future owner of record shall
file with the Beverly Planning Board a final plan (acceptance plan)
drawn with India ink on tracing cloth (or another method suitable
for reproduction) of completed street or streets and any easements
together with proper legal descriptions for initiating the acceptance of
the ways by the City Council (See § 375-24H.) and upon acceptance by
the City shall grant a deed or easement to the City of the streets as
contained in the definitive plan; said deed or easement to be recorded
by the City Clerk upon acceptance of the streets by the City of Beverly.
M.
§ 375-13 BEVERLY CODE § 375-13
1:766
ARTICLE IV
Design Standards
§ 375-14. Streets.
Location.
All streets in the subdivision shall be designed so that, in the
opinion of the Beverly Planning Board, they will provide safe
vehicular travel; natural drainage with no drainage pockets; and
an attractive street layout in order to obtain the maximum safety
and amenity for future residents of the subdivision; and they shall
be in accord with the rules and regulations of the Beverly Planning
Board.
(1)
The proposed streets shall conform in location, so far as
practicable, to any existing plans of the Beverly Planning Board; to
the Comprehensive Plan or parts thereof adopted by the Beverly
Planning Board; and, where required by the Beverly Planning
Board, to the existing street system.
(2)
Provision satisfactory to the Beverly Planning Board shall be made
for the proper projection of streets or for access to adjoining
property, whether or not subdivided. To accomplish this, the Board
may require a roadway easement and the extension of utilities from
the end of a turnaround to adjacent property. If the Board requires
such an easement and/or utility extension, language conveying the
easement and/or utilities to the City of Beverly in perpetuity shall
be submitted to the Board prior to final action on the application.
(3)
Reserve strips prohibiting access to streets or adjoining property
shall not be permitted except where, in the opinion of the Beverly
Planning Board, such strips shall be in the public interest.
(4)
A.
Alignment.
Street jogs with center-line offsets of less than 125 feet shall be
avoided.
(1)
(2) The minimum center-line radii of curved streets shall be 300 feet.
A tangent at least 150 feet in length shall separate all reverse
curves on principal and secondary streets.
(3)
Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly as possible at
right angles. No street shall intersect any other street at less than
60°.
(4)
Property lines at street intersections shall be rounded or cut back
to provide for a radius of not less than 30 feet. However, when the
intersection of two streets varies more than 10° from a right angle,
the radius of the curve at the obtuse angle may be less than 30
(5)
B.
§ 375-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-14
1:767
feet and the acute angle may be greater than 30 feet to the extent
approved or required by the Beverly Planning Board.
Width. The minimum width of the right-of-way shall be 50 feet, and the
minimum pavement width shall be 32 feet, except for minor streets (see
§ 375-15.).
C.
Grade.
(1) The center-line grade for any street shall not be less than 1%.
The maximum center-line grade for streets shall be as follows:
(a) Secondary streets: 6%.
(b) Principal streets: 3%.
(2)
Where changes in grade exceed 1%, vertical curves as required by
the Board will be provided; and where a grade is 5% or greater
within 150 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines, there
shall be provided in a residential subdivision a leveling area of at
least 75 feet in length, with a maximum grade of 3%, and in all
other subdivisions, a leveling area of at least 200 feet in length,
with a maximum grade of 2%, and at all other intersections there
shall be a leveling area of at least 50 feet in length.
(3)
D.
Dead-end streets.
For the purpose of this section, any proposed street which
intersects solely with a dead-end street shall be deemed to be
an extension of the dead-end street. Dead-end streets and their
extensions, if any, shall not be longer than 500 feet (measured
between the sideline of the intersecting street and the center of the
turnaround) unless, in the opinion of the Board, a greater length is
necessitated by topography or other local conditions.
(1)
Dead-end streets shall be provided with a turnaround at the closed
end having an outside roadway diameter of at least 100 feet and
a property line diameter of at least 120 feet unless otherwise
specified by the Beverly Planning Board. The Beverly Planning
Board may, when potential volume warrants, require a minimum
outside roadway diameter of 140 feet, a property line diameter of
160 feet and the placement of a circular landscaped island with
minimum radius of 20 feet at the center of the turnaround, if the
dead-end street is not intended to connect with another street at
some future point in time. The maximum grade within any cul-desac
shall be 2%. The Board may require a roadway easement and
the extension of utilities from the end of the turnaround to adjacent
property. If the Board requires such an easement and/or utility
extension, language conveying the easement and/or utilities to the
City of Beverly in perpetuity shall be submitted to the Board prior
to final action on the application.
(2)
E.
§ 375-14 BEVERLY CODE § 375-15
1:768
§ 375-15. Minor subdivisions.
A minor subdivision is a private street which, in the opinion of the Beverly
Planning Board, may be built to a less exacting standard than otherwise
described in these rules and regulations, provided the following are met:
§ 375-16. Curb cuts.
Such minor street serves as legal frontage for, or actual access to, not
more than six lots.
A.
Such minor street shall be no longer than 250 feet. If there is a cul-desac,
the minor street may be up to 250 feet long from the intersection
of a street to the beginning of the cul-de-sac.
B.
There will be a covenant concerning the minor street which shall state
that such minor street shall remain a private way unless it is both
redesigned and improved in accordance with the minimum standards
for streets by the owner or owners. In the event water or sewer lines
are installed in a minor street, the covenant shall provide that the
owner or owners of the minor street shall be solely responsible for the
maintenance of the water and sewer installation. The owners of land
abutting on a minor street shall maintain and plow said private minor
street at their own expense. This covenant shall be referenced and
noted on individual plot plans.
C.
Such minor street shall have no connection with, or projection to any
street existing or proposed, other than that with which it originates.
D.
The design of the minor street shall be as follows:
Curbs, sidewalks, and street trees are only mandatory in
exceptional circumstances.
(1)
(2) Pavement will be a minimum of 24 feet wide.
For dead ends, there shall be culs-de-sac or other turning designs
acceptable to the Planning Board. Culs-de-sac shall be with a
minimum right-of-way diameter of 100 feet and may have a thirtysix-
foot diameter island; pavement shall be a minimum of 84 feet.
(3)
The minor street shall be posted as a private way at its entrance or
entrances.
(4)
Pavement design and geometrics shall be the same as for a street
except as noted in Subsection E(1) through (4) above.
(5)
Submission and plan requirements for minor subdivisions shall be
the same as for definitive subdivisions.
(6)
E.
Driveways shall be at least 10 feet wide and have a curb return at the
roadway of two feet in radius, and shall have an opening of at least 16
feet and no greater than 25 feet at the gutter line.
A.
§ 375-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-16
1:769
§ 375-17. Easements.
§ 375-18. Open space.
If driveways slope from the edge of the street right-of-way to the edge
of the pavement, there shall be a grade of not less than 1% but not more
than 8%, but the grade between the sidewalk and the right-of-way shall
be only as shown on the typical cross section. (See the typical street
cross-section diagram included as an attachment to this chapter.)
B.
Where utilities cross lots or are centered on rear or side lot lines,
easements shall be provided with a width of at least 20 feet.
A.
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway,
channel or stream, the Beverly Planning Board shall require a
stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way of adequate width (a
minimum of 30 feet) and proper side slope to conform substantially to
the lines of such watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream and to
provide for construction or other necessary purpose.
B.
Access easements to park and conservation land shall be provided, if
required by the Beverly Planning Board, and shall be at least 20 feet
wide.
C.
Before approval of a plan, the Beverly Planning Board may also, in
proper cases, require the plan to show a park or parks suitably located
for playground or recreation purposes or for providing light and air.
The park or parks shall not be unreasonable in area in relation to the
land being subdivided and to the prospective uses of such land. The
Beverly Planning Board may, by appropriate endorsement on the plan,
require that no building be erected upon such park or parks without
its approval for a period of three years. Pedestrian ways, bikeways,
or bridle paths of not less than 20 feet in width may be requested
where deemed desirable to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, parks, shops, transportation, open spaces and/or
community facilities. Each area reserved for such purpose shall be of
suitable area, dimensions, topography and natural character for the
purpose of a park and/or playground. The area or areas shall be so
located as to serve adequately all parts of the subdivision as approved
by the Beverly Planning Board.
A.
The Beverly Planning Board may require that the area or areas
reserved shall be located and laid out so as to be used in conjunction
with similar areas of adjoining subdivisions or of probable subdivisions.
Any land so reserved shall be graded to dispose properly of surface
water and shall be left in good condition for the purpose intended, as
required by the Beverly Planning Board. Land acquired in this manner
shall be compensated as provided in MGL c. 41, § 81Q.
B.
§ 375-16 BEVERLY CODE § 375-19
1:770
§ 375-19. Protection of natural and historic features.
Due regard shall be shown for all natural and historic features, such as
trees, wooded areas, watercourses, scenic points, historic spots, historic
buildings, and similar community assets, which, if preserved, will add
attractiveness and value to the subdivision.
§ 375-20. Lot drainage.
§ 375-21. Fire hydrants.
Hydrants shall be provided at intervals of at least every 500 running feet
on one side of each street. A hydrant may be required at the end of a deadend
street. They shall be of a style approved by the Water Department. All
hydrants shall be sited within three feet of the curb, and the four-and-onehalf-
inch outlet shall be 18 inches from the ground at finished grade.
§ 375-22. Sidewalks, grass plots and trees.
§ 375-23. Utilities.
All utilities shall be placed underground at the time of initial construction,
including electric and telephone.
Lots shall be prepared and graded in such a manner that development
of one shall not cause detrimental drainage on another; if provision is
necessary to carry drainage to or across a lot, an easement for drainage
of minimum width of 30 feet and proper slope shall be provided. Storm
drainage shall be designed in accord with the criteria of the
Department of Public Services and in accordance with the Beverly
Planning Board.224
A.
Where required by the Beverly Planning Board or the Board of Health,
the applicant shall furnish evidence as to any lot or lots that adequate
provision has been made for the proper drainage of surface water and
underground waters from such lot or lots.
B.
Drawings and engineering calculations shall be prepared by a
registered professional engineer showing existing and future drainage
patterns and soil and groundwater conditions.
C.
See the typical street cross-section diagram included as an attachment
to this chapter.
A.
At the discretion of the Beverly Planning Board, guard rails or fencing
shall be required to be installed where steep slopes, bodies of water,
rip rap, or other dangerous conditions border or exist close to proposed
sidewalks or streets.
B.
224. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 375-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-23
1:771

ARTICLE V
Required Improvements for Approved Subdivisions
§ 375-24. General.
It is the intent that no street or way through private property shall be
accepted by the City unless the same has been previously constructed
and completed in accordance with the typical cross section profile(s)
(see the typical street cross-section diagram included as an attachment
to this chapter) and the following specifications.
A.
Unless otherwise specified herein, or unless otherwise specified by the
Engineering Department, all the work and materials used in the work
to be done shall conform to the requirements in the most recent edition
of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, Department of Transportation,
Standard Specifications for Highways and Bridges, as amended or
revised, hereinafter referred to as the "Standard Specifications, as
amended," and the special provisions included hereinafter.225
B.
Supplementing the aforesaid Standard Specifications, certain
specifications or special provisions shall apply particularly to the work
to be done hereunder. References in the following specifications, unless
otherwise stated, are to the aforesaid Standard Specifications,
amendments or addenda. These specifications and special provisions
shall take precedence and shall govern when they are stricter.
C.
To facilitate reference, each paragraph in these specifications (where
appropriate) is noted with the paragraph number of the particular
section as contained in the Standard Specifications.
D.
Wherever in the Standard Specifications or other contractual
documents the following terms, or pronouns in place of them, are used,
the intent and meaning shall be interpreted by substitution as follows:
COMMONWEALTH — City of Beverly.
DEPARTMENT — Engineering Department.
ENGINEER — The Planning Board of the City of Beverly acting directly
or through an authorized representative; such representative acting
within the scope of the particular duties entrusted to him.
E.
The extent of work required is as shown upon approved plans, and is in
compliance with the typical cross section plans (the typical street crosssection
diagram included as an attachment to this chapter). Stakes
shall be set which will indicate the exact amount of cut or fill.
F.
As each construction operation is completed, it shall be approved by the
Beverly Planning Board.
G.
225. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 375-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-24
1:773
§ 375-25. Streets and roadways.
To facilitate acceptance by the City of Beverly, the applicant shall
have prepared and certified by a registered land surveyor a plan of
acceptance drawn with India ink on tracing cloth (or another suitable
method for reproduction), size 24 inches by 36 inches, showing widths,
lengths, bearing of all boundary lines of streets and easements, and
radii, tangents and central angles of all curves in street lines. It shall
show that all stone bounds are set. A blank space four inches by eight
inches shall be provided on the lower right-hand corner on the plan for
a title block to be filled in by the applicant. The surveyor shall place a
certification on the plan stating: "The street (or way or portion thereof)
is laid out and the bounds are set as shown on this plan," which shall be
dated, signed and the surveyor's stamp affixed thereon. The plan shall
be submitted to the Beverly Planning Board.
H.
The applicant shall submit as-built plans drawn on tracing cloth or
Mylar certified by his engineer to show the actual locations and grades
of all utilities (including underground electric, telephone and gas
installations) and roadway profile and any changes authorized by the
Beverly Planning Board.
I.
Prior to the final release of any surety, the applicant shall submit with
the plan of acceptance and as-built plans, certification from a registered
professional engineer and registered land surveyor that all construction
conforms to the respective plan. Any field work deviations from the
plans and the reasons therefor shall also be listed and certified by the
registered professional engineer and registered land surveyor.
J.
The roadway shall be graded and prepared for pavement as follows:
101: Clearing and grubbing of the entire area of such street or way
shall be performed to remove all stumps, brush, roots, boulders and
any like material which may exist upon the surface.
(1)
120: Roadway earth excavation shall remove all materials
encountered down to the true surface of the subgrade, or to
suitable material in areas where unsuitable material exists, in
preparation for foundations of roadway, sidewalks, driveways, and
berms. Approved materials obtained from the excavation may be
used in fills as required if, in the opinion of the Beverly Planning
Board, they are suitable.
(2)
150: When, in the opinion of the Beverly Planning Board, suitable
material is not available within the limits of the highway location
to form the subgrade or subbase, the contractor shall obtain such
additional material as may be approved by the Beverly Planning
Board from other sources in accordance with the section. (See also
Appendix V.226)
(3)
A.
226. Editor's Note: Appendix V is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-24 BEVERLY CODE § 375-25
1:774
170: The subgrade surface, 16 1/2 inches below the finished
surface grade, shall be prepared true to the lines, grades and cross
sections given and properly rolled. All soft and spongy material
below the subgrade surface shall be removed to a depth
determined by the Beverly Planning Board, and the space thus
made shall be filled with special gravel borrow, containing no
stones over six inches in their largest diameter.
(4)
401: Gravel subbase or foundation containing no stones having
any dimensions greater than three inches shall be spread on the
surface of the subgrade to a minimum depth of 12 inches in
conformity with the requirements of Section M1.03.0 Type b of
the Standard Specifications for furnishing gravel borrow. If
construction of streets cannot be completed prior to a winter
season, all streets in a subdivision shall be levelled prior to the
closing of concrete plants in the fall. Levelling shall be done in a
manner satisfactory to the Director of Engineering, Commissioner
of Public Services, Public Works.
(5)
401.60: Final grading, rolling and finishing, including the shaping,
trimming, rolling and finishing of the surface of the subbase prior
to application of gravel for surfacing of the roadway and base
courses for walks or loam for berms shall be in accordance with
this section and as directed by the Beverly Planning Board. At the
conclusion of this step, the roadway shall be staked in all locations
where permanent monuments are to be installed as provided in
§ 375-31, Monuments, of these rules and regulations.
(6)
Roadways shall be constructed for the full length of all streets within
the subdivision and shall have the same curb radius required in
§ 375-14B. The center line of all roadways shall coincide with the center
line of the street right-of-way unless a deviation is approved by the
Beverly Planning Board. The minimum width of roadway pavement
shall be 32 feet on a fifty-foot right-of-way.
B.
460: The wearing surfaces of roadways shall be of Class I bituminous
concrete pavement, Type I-1, paved in two equal courses with three
inches of binder and 1 1/2 inches of finish when completely rolled
and completed. This type of pavement shall be composed of mineral
aggregate, mineral filler and bituminous material, plant mixed and laid
hot. The pavement shall be constructed upon the prepared surface and
in conformity with lines, grades and typical cross section shown on
plans. Material and construction methods shall conform to all other
requirements of Section 460 of the Standard Specifications, except that
no such construction shall be undertaken unless the temperature is at
least 32° F. in the shade, and rising.
C.
685: Embankments outside the right-of-way shall be evenly graded
and pitched at a minimum slope of three feet horizontal to one foot
vertical in fill. When rights-of-way are placed within 50 horizontal feet
of abutting land outside the subdivision, the roadway embankments
D.
§ 375-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-25
1:775
§ 375-26. Utilities.
should be pitched at a minimum slope of five feet horizontal to one
foot vertical. Where cuts are made in ledge, other slopes may be
determined with the approval of the Beverly Planning Board. Where
terrain necessitates greater slopes, retaining walls, terracing, fencing,
or rip rap may be used either alone or in combination to provide safety
and freedom from maintenance, but must be done in accordance with
plans filed with and approved by the Beverly Planning Board. Whenever
embankments are built in such a way as to require approval by the
Beverly Planning Board, the applicant must furnish to the City duly
recorded access easements free of encumbrances for maintenance of
the slopes, terraces or retaining walls. All such slopes shall be grassed
in accordance with the specifications for the area between the roadway
and sidewalk or roadway and boundary of the right-of-way.
140: Excavation for structures, including foundations for drains, sewers
and water pipes, walls and other structures, shall be made to the depth
as indicated on the definitive plan or established by the City Engineer
or Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works as appropriate. Rock excavation shall be removed as directed.
All utilities shall be covered with a minimum of two feet of clean sand
or approved gravel. Blasted rock or boulders greater than one foot in
any one dimension shall not be permitted as backfill.
A.
200: All drain, sewer, gas and water pipes, underground utilities and
other structures shall be installed upon the completion of roadway
subgrade and before the placing of subbase, gravel base course,
sidewalks or pavement.
Water.
Public water mains shall be Class 150 cement-lined ductile iron
pipe of such size as approved by the Water Department and
shall not be less than eight inches in diameter. A hydrant shall
be located at each street intersection and not more than 500
feet apart. A hydrant may be required at the end of a dead-end
street. All hydrants shall be sited within three feet of the curb.
(a)
Each hydrant shall be served directly from the water main
through a six-inch lateral connection. It shall be gated with
a valve box with a six-inch valve and shall have two twoand-
one-half-inch hose outlets, and one four-and-one-half-inch
pump outlet. The four-and-one-half-inch hose outlet shall be 18
inches from the ground at finished grade. Water main valves
shall be located in such number and locations that lines by
individual blocks may be isolated for maintenance purposes.
(b)
The applicant shall provide adequately sized water pipes to
connect to the public water system in accordance with the
Beverly Planning Board.
(c)
(1)
B.
§ 375-25 BEVERLY CODE § 375-26
1:776
The fire flow for single-family residential projects shall be
1,000 gallons per minute at a residual of 20 pounds per square
inch. The Chief of the Beverly Fire Department may require
higher fire flow rates for certain projects, to be determined
by taking certain variables into consideration: (e.g., size of
structure, elevation of structure, impediments to fire-fighting
apparatus, construction methods used, and type of use).
(d)
(2) Gas mains may be installed if gas connection is available.
Telephone lines shall be installed in underground conduits in
conformity with Section 390 of the Standard Specifications.
(3)
Electric lines shall be installed underground in accord with the
regulations of the Inspector of Wires. The Beverly Planning Board
may permit transformers, switches and other such equipment to be
placed on the ground in approved locations.
(4)
Sewerage.
If a public sewerage system is located within 1000 feet of the
subdivision, the applicant shall connect all lots to the public
sewerage system in accordance with the Beverly Planning
Board at the applicant's expense.
(a)
If a public sewerage system is planned by the City but not
yet constructed, the applicant shall be required to design and
install, at his cost, in the street and to every lot, sewerage
laterals which can be connected later to the public sewerage
system. In order for the applicant to design and install properly
such laterals, the City shall be responsible for establishing
and providing the applicant, at the applicant's expense, with
the necessary plan, specifications and design standards of the
proposed public sewerage system.
(b)
If Subsections B(5)(a) and (b) above do not apply, the applicant
shall design an acceptable sewerage system but may install
private on-lot systems in conformance with Board of Health
regulations and the City of Beverly Zoning Ordinance.227
(c)
Where public sewers are required, the following design
standards shall apply:
Public sewers shall be designed according to professional
engineering practices.
[1]
Public sewers shall not be less than eight inches in
diameter, with five-inch house laterals.
[2]
Manholes shall be located at every change in grade or
horizontal alignment but not more than 250 feet apart.
[3]
(d)
(5)
227. Editor's Note: See Ch. 400, Board of Health Regulations; and Ch. 300, Zoning.
§ 375-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-26
1:777
Sewer ejector pumps may be permitted at the discretion of
the Board.
200, 220, 230: Adequate disposal of surface and subsurface water shall
be provided and pipes, manholes and catch basins shall be provided
according to the sizes and depths as indicated on the plans and in
conformity with the requirements of Sections 200, 220, 230 of the
Standard Specifications, and shall be built on both sides of the roadway
at intervals not to exceed 250 feet unless otherwise approved by the
Beverly Planning Board, and at such other places as deemed necessary
by the Beverly Planning Board to assure the unimpeded flow of all
natural watercourses, to assure adequate drainage of all low points
and to provide proper runoff of stormwater. In no instances shall catch
basins be located along a driveway cut. Catch basin and manhole
frames shall be two feet in diameter or square and be Mass. Standard.
There shall be two courses of brick and mortar placed under the frames
on all manholes and catch basins.
The standard depth of catch basins shall be two feet six inches
below the invert of the lowest drain. Manholes shall be constructed
to the required depth at each junction point and as shown on the
plan. Pipe culvert and pipe drains shall be in conformity with the
requirements of Section 230 for installation of pipes.
(1)
Reinforced concrete pipe (used on all cross drains under
pavements) shall be installed according to the size as shown on the
plans. No backfilling of pipes shall be done until the installation has
been inspected by the City Engineer. All drainage trenches shall
be filled with clean gravel borrow in accordance with specification
760.
(2)
C.
260: Where subdrains are required by the Beverly Planning Board, they
shall conform to Section 260 of the Standard Specifications.
D.
On-site sewerage disposal facilities shall be installed and constructed in
conformity with the rules, regulations, and requirements of the Board
of Health. On-site septic tanks and leaching fields shall be located
insofar as possible in the front or side yard of the building(s) served,
unless surface and subsurface soil conditions, drainage and topography
in the location of such on-site facilities require their placement in the
rear yard.
E.
Adjacent property.
Where adjacent property is not subdivided or where all the
property of the applicant is not being subdivided at the same time,
provisions shall be made for the extension of the utility system by
continuing the mains the full length of streets to the exterior limits
of the subdivision, at such grade and size which will, in the opinion
of the Beverly Planning Board, permit their proper extension at a
later date.
(1)
F.
§ 375-26 BEVERLY CODE § 375-26
1:778
§ 375-27. Sidewalks.
§ 375-28. Curbs and berms.
Investigation of subsurface soil and groundwater conditions and
hydrology shall be made sufficient to predict the probable
maximum rates of flow of groundwater and surface infiltration, and
the proposed drainage system should be capable of at least these
rates of flow.
(2)
If there is evidence that there will be high rates of groundwater
infiltration, such as in cuts or in wide, flat areas, consideration
should be given to installing underdrains to control the probable
maximum rate of water inflow.
(3)
Care should be taken to prevent placing gravel subbase material
in direct contact with erodible soil which could clog the gravel
subbase and prevent adequate drainage. When such erodible soils
(i.e., fine sand, silts, or clays) are at subgrade level, adequate soil
or cloth filter material shall be placed between the subgrade and
the subbase gravel.
(4)
Sidewalks shall be constructed within the subdivision separated from
the pavement area by a seeded strip, as provided in § 375-29.
A.
The sidewalk shall extend the full length of each side of the street and
shall be a minimum width of five feet.
B.
700: Bituminous concrete sidewalks having a minimum thickness of 2 1/
2 inches after compression shall be constructed on a twelve-inch gravel
foundation to the required lines and grades in accordance with these
specifications.
C.
700: If concrete sidewalks are desired, they shall be constructed as
directed by the City Engineer in conformity with this section of the
Standard Specifications.
D.
Where the Beverly Planning Board grants either a partial or full waiver
of the requirement for sidewalks, the developer shall contribute funds,
in an amount to be determined by the Beverly Public Works
Commissioner, which shall equal the cost of the waived portion of
sidewalk, into the City's sidewalk fund. These contributions for waived
sidewalks shall be used only for sidewalk improvements in the ward
in which the subdivision is being proposed. The Planning Board shall
not require an "in-lieu-of" payment for sidewalks if the project has been
submitted as a minor subdivision.
E.
Straight-face granite curbs of six inches in height shall be provided
along each side of the roadway.
A.
§ 375-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-28
1:779
Straight-face granite curbing shall be required on culs-de-sac,
intersection radii, and any other areas as determined by the
Beverly Planning Board.
(1)
(2) A six-foot granite curb inlet shall be installed at each catch basin.
All granite curbing and edging shall be basically light gray in color, free
from seams and other structural imperfections or flaws which would
impair its structural integrity, and of a smooth splitting appearance.
Natural color variation characteristic of the deposit from which the
curbing is obtained will be permitted. when curbing is sawed. All
surfaces that are to be exposed shall be thoroughly cleaned of any
iron rust or iron particles by sand blasting or other approved methods
satisfactory to the Engineer, and any saw mark in excess of 1/8 inch
shall be removed.
B.
Massachusetts Department of Transportation handbook specifications
for VA-4 and SA granite curbing shall be adopted for use on streets and
driveway openings. If, however, pursuant to appropriate regulations of
the Planning Board, SA curbing is allowed by special waiver (granted
by the Planning Board), then MassDOT specifications for such curbing
shall be adopted.
M9.04.1: Granite curb.
The stones for the several types of granite curb shall be cut to
the dimensions and curvature hereinafter stated:
Type
Minimum
Length
(feet)
Width at
Top
(inches)
Depth
(inches)
Minimum Width
at Bottom
(inches)
VA1 6 7 7 to 19 4 (for 2/3 length)
VA2 6 7 19 to 21 4 (for 2/3 length)
VA3 6 6 19 to 21 4 (for 2/3 length)
**VA4 6 6 17 to 19 4 (for 2/3 length)
VA5 6 6 See Plans 5 (for 2/3 length)
VB 3 5 15 to 17 3 1/2 (for 2/3
length)
(a)
Except for the two following special conditions, 10% of the
length of each type of VA curb installed on the project may
consist of stones no more than six inches shorter than the
length specified in either table.
Stones used in making closures may be as much as 1/3
shorter than specified in either table.
[1]
(b)
(1)
C.
§ 375-28 BEVERLY CODE § 375-28
1:780
On curves with radii greater than 100 feet but less than
500 feet, Type VA stones may be from four feet to not more
than six feet in length.
[2]
Type VA stones to be set on a radius of 100 feet or less shall be
cut unless otherwise directed and except for making closures
shall be of minimum lengths as follows:
Radius
(feet) Minimum Length
50 to 100 6 feet
25 to less than 50 4 feet 6 inches
Less than 25 3 feet
(c)
Type VA curb. This type of curbstone shall have a top surface free
from wind, shall be peen hammered or sawed to an approximately
true plane, and shall have no projections or depressions greater
than 1/8 inch. The front and back arris lines shall be pitched
straight and true and there shall be no projection on the back
surface for three inches down from the top which would exceed a
batter of four inches in one foot, except on VA5 the back surface
shall have no projection or depression greater than 1 1/2 inches.
The front face shall be at right angles to the planes of the
top and ends and shall be smooth quarry split, free from drill
holes and with no projection of more than one inch and no
depression of more than 1/2 inch measured from the vertical
plane of the face through the arris or pitch line for a distance
down from the top of eight inches for Types VA1 and VA4, 10
inches for VA2 and VA3, and the full depth of VA5. For the
remaining distance there shall be no projection or depression
greater than one inch measured in the same manner.
(a)
The ends of all stones shall be square with the planes of the
top and face so that when the stones are placed end to end as
closely as possible, no space shall show in the joint at the top
and face of more than 1/2 inch for the full width of the top and
for eight inches down on the face for Types VA1 and VA4, 10
inches for Types VA2 and VA3, and the full depth of Type VA5;
after which the end may break back not over eight inches from
the plane of the joint. The arris formed by the intersection of
the plane of the joint with the planes of the top and exposed
faces shall have no variation from the plane of the top and
exposed faces greater than 1/8 inch.
(b)
(2)
Type SA edging.
The exposed face shall be smooth quarry split to an
approximately true plane having no projections or depressions
which will cause over one inch to show between a two-foot
(a)
(3)
§ 375-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-28
1:781
§ 375-29. Grass plots.
§ 375-30. Trees.
straight-edge and the face when the straight-edge is placed as
closely as possible on any part of the face.
If projections on the face are more than that specified, they
shall be dressed off. The top and bottom lines of the face shall
be pitched off to a straight line and shall not show over 1/2 inch
between stone and straight-edge when straight-edge is placed
along the entire length of the top and bottom lines and when
viewed from a direction at right angles to the plane of the face,
and for the top line only not over 1/2 inch when viewed from
a direction in the plane of the face. The ends shall be square
to the length at the face and so cut that when placed end to
end as closely as possible, no space shall show in the joint at
the face of over 3/4 inch, except that where the edging is to
be used on a curve having a radius of 10 feet or less, the ends
of the stones shall be so cut as to provide a finished joint at
the face of not more than 1/2 inch. The arris formed by the
intersection of the plane of the face with the plane of the end
joint shall not vary from the plane of the face or the plane of the
joint more than 1/4 inch. Drill holes may show on the exposed
face but only along the bottom edge. The sides shall not be
broken under the square more than four inches and the side
adjacent to the grass shall not project over one inch.
(b)
A grass plot shall be provided on each side of each roadway between
the pavement and sidewalk areas, and shall occupy all the remaining
area.
A.
The slope of the grass plot shall be as shown on the profiles and typical
cross section (see the typical cross-section diagram included as an
attachment to this chapter).
B.
Streetlight stanchions and streetlights shall be located in the grass plot,
but shall not be nearer than 25 feet to the intersection of two streets,
measured from the intersection of the tangents of the intersecting
street curblines.
C.
Street trees of species approved by the Planning Board shall be planted
on each side of each street (at least two per lot) in a subdivision, except
where the definitive plan shows trees to be retained which are healthy
and adequate. Such trees shall be located outside of the right-of-way
as shown in the profile and typical cross section (see the typical crosssection
diagram included as an attachment to this chapter); they shall
be placed at approximately fifty-foot intervals and shall be at least
12 feet in height, two inches in caliper measured four feet above the
approved grade, and shall be planted in at least 1/2 cubic yard of
topsoil.
A.
§ 375-28 BEVERLY CODE § 375-30
1:782
§ 375-31. Monuments.
§ 375-32. Street signs and names.
§ 375-33. Streetlights.
All deciduous street trees shall be clear of any branches from the
approved grade level to a point seven feet above ground level.
B.
The developer will be liable for all trees so planted as to their erectness
and good health for 18 months after acceptance.
C.
All cut bankings must be planted with a low-growing shrub and wood
chipped to a minimum depth of six inches or seeded with a deep-rooted
perennial grass to prevent erosion.
D.
Granite monuments shall be installed on street lines at all points of
curvature and at all points of change in direction.
A.
Monuments shall be installed at all other points where, in the opinion
of the Beverly Planning Board, permanent monuments are necessary.
B.
Monuments shall be a standard permanent granite of not less than four
feet in length and not less than six inches in width and breadth and
shall have a one-half-inch by two-inch drill hole in the center of the
top surface. Said monuments shall be installed at the time of the final
grading with the top flush with the top final graded surface.
C.
The placement and accurate location of those markers shall be certified
by a registered land surveyor and properly located on the street
acceptance plan.
D.
Upon completion of the first house, reflective street signs shall be
installed at each intersection to conform to the standard established by
the Department of Public Services.228
A.
Street names shall be approved by the City Council with review by
the Police Department and Fire Department to prevent duplication and
confusion and to provide names in keeping with the character of the
City.
B.
From the time of final grading until such time as each street is accepted
by the City as a public way, the sign posts at the intersection of such
street with any other street shall have affixed thereto a sign designating
such street a private way.
C.
Streetlights shall be installed to conform to the type and style as
required by the Inspector of Wires.
A.
Streetlight stanchions shall be located at such intervals as required
by the Beverly Planning Board in the rear grass plot, as provided in
B.
228. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 375-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-33
1:783
§ 375-34. Fire alarm systems.
Fire alarm systems of design and construction approved by the Inspector
of Wires and Fire Prevention Bureau, shall be required along streets in
the subdivision in conformity with specifications, publication #73, of the
National Fire Protection Association. Specifications for the installation of
same may be obtained at the Inspector of Wire's office.
§ 375-35. Soil or solid fill.
Before the disposal of soil or solid fill is introduced on a site from locations
both within and without the City of Beverly, a valid site assignment from the
Beverly Board of Health must be obtained (see Appendix V229). A notation to
this effect must be added to the plan.
§ 375-36. Maintenance of improvements.
For the purpose of protecting the safety, convenience and welfare of the
City's inhabitants, for the provision of adequate access to all of the lots in a
subdivision by ways that will be safe and convenient for travel; for reducing
the danger to life and limb in the operation of motor vehicles; for securing
safety in the case of fire, flood, panic, and other emergencies; under the
authority of MGL c. 41, § 81M, as amended, the applicant or his successor
shall provide for the proper maintenance and repair of improvements under
this section of the rules and regulations during the construction of said
improvements or until the City votes to accept such improvements,
whichever comes first.
§ 375-29, and shall be installed in accord with the procedure required
by the Inspector of Wires.
229. Editor's Note: Appendix V is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-33 BEVERLY CODE § 375-36
1:784
ARTICLE VI
Administration
§ 375-37. Variations.
Strict compliance with the requirements of these rules and regulations may
be waived when, in the judgment of the Beverly Planning Board, such action
is in the public interest and not inconsistent with the Subdivision Control
Law. (See § 375-27, Sidewalks, Subsection E, for "in-lieu-of" payments for
waivers of the sidewalk requirement.)
§ 375-38. State law authority.
For matters not covered by these rules and regulations, reference is made
to the Subdivision Control Law, MGL c. 41, §§ 81K to 81GG, inclusive.
§ 375-39. Filing of plans.
Approval of any definitive subdivision plan is subject to the condition that,
unless an appeal has been taken from such approval as provided by MGL
c. 41, § 81BB, the subdivider will record the definitive plan in the Essex
South District Registry of Deeds or the Land Court within six months of the
date of its approval, or within 12 months of approval if accompanied by a
certificate of no amendment/rescission from the Planning Board (see MGL
c. 41, § 81X). Approval is also conditioned upon the subdivider certifying to
the Planning Board, in writing, within 30 days of recordation that the plan
has indeed been recorded with the Registry of Deeds or the Land Court,
giving the date it was recorded and the plan book and page number or
certificate number. Failure to file said plan shall render any approval null
and void.
§ 375-40. Building permits.
No building shall be erected within a subdivision without written
permission from the Beverly Planning Board by Release Form H, or
other approved form (Appendix H).230
A.
The Building Inspector shall not issue any permit for the erection of a
building until he is first satisfied that the lot on which the building is
to be erected is not within a subdivision or that a way furnishing the
access to such lot as required by the Subdivision Control Law is shown
on a plan recorded under MGL c. 41, § 81X, as amended, and that
any condition endorsed thereon limiting the right to erect or maintain
buildings on such lot had been satisfied or waived by the Board, and
in the event that more than one building for dwelling purposes will
be erected or placed or converted to use as such on any lot, that the
Building Inspector is satisfied that consent has been obtained from
the Beverly Planning Board in accord with § 375-6 of these rules and
regulations, MGL c. 41, § 81Q, and amendments thereto.
B.
230. Editor's Note: Appendix H is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-41
1:785
§ 375-41. Inspections.
Inspections shall be arranged by the applicant with the City Engineer
for that purpose prior to the construction of streets and the installation
of utilities and during construction as specified herein at each
significant construction stage.
A.
Inspection shall be requested in writing at least 48 hours in advance of
each inspection to the Beverly Planning Board.
B.
Inspections shall be made by the City agent, unless otherwise indicated,
for each of the following:
(1) Satisfactory excavation.
Satisfactory laying and testing of water and sewer mains, hydrants,
and related equipment.
(2)
Satisfactory location of gas mains and related equipment (by
National Grid Gas).
(3)
Satisfactory installation of surface and subsurface drainage
systems and related equipment.
(4)
(5) Satisfactory filling.
(6) Satisfactory compaction.
(7) Satisfactory installation of electric lines and related equipment.
(8) Satisfactory location of telephone lines and related equipment.
(9) Satisfactory completion of the pavement.
(10)Satisfactory placing of curbs and gutters.
(11)Satisfactory construction of sidewalks.
(12)Satisfactory finish grading of grass plots.
(13)Satisfactory installation of monuments.
(14)Satisfactory grading of lots.
(15)Satisfactory planting of street trees.
(16)Satisfactory final clean-up.
C.
The Beverly Planning Board may establish the order of the required
inspection and may require satisfactory completion of one step before
the applicant proceeds to the next. It may require tests to be done by
the applicant as a condition of approval, when, in the opinion of the
Beverly Planning Board, it is advisable.
D.
The proper City official shall indicate on Form N, Inspection Form
(Appendix N),231 provided by the Beverly Planning Board, the date of
E.
§ 375-41 BEVERLY CODE § 375-41
1:786
§ 375-42. Validity.
If, in any respect, any provision of these rules and regulations, in whole or in
part, shall prove to be invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall only affect
the part of such provision which shall be invalid and in all other respects
these rules and regulations shall stand as if such invalid provisions had not
been made, and they shall fail to the extent, and only to the extent, of such
invalid provision, and no other provision of these rules and regulations shall
be invalidated, impaired, or affected thereby.
§ 375-43. Modifications to approved plans.
No changes, alterations, or modifications shall be made to any aspect of
an approved definitive plan without resubmission to and approval from
the Planning Board in accordance with MGL c. 41, §§ 81O and 81W. The
applicant shall be held responsible for all omissions, infractions, and
deviations from the approved plans.
inspection and the approval and shall file such form with the Beverly
Planning Board.
Failure to comply with the inspection procedure may necessitate
removal of improvements at the expense of the applicant or rescission
of the approval of the plan in accord with MGL c. 41, § 81W.
F.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works or his duly authorized agent may stop the progress of the entire
work in the installation of utilities and streets within the subdivision,
until corrections are completed.
G.
The Director of Engineering, Commissioner of Public Services, Public
Works may require that an RPE (registered professional engineer) be
available at the applicant's expense during the construction.
H.
231. Editor's Note: Appendix N is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 375-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 375-43
1:787
Chapter 400
BOARD OF HEALTH REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alcoholic beverages — See Ch. 113.
Animals — See Ch. 117.
Cross-connection control — See Ch. 143.
Licenses and business regulations — See Ch.
192.
Noise — See Ch. 201.
Sewers — See Ch. 227.
Solid waste — See Ch. 244.
Water — See Ch. 287.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 375.
§ 375-43 BEVERLY CODE § 375-43
1:788
ARTICLE I
Control of Communicable Diseases
[Adopted 12-11-1942]
§ 400-1.1. Definitions.
The following words as used in these regulations shall have the following
meanings, unless a different meaning is required by context or is
specifically prescribed:
BOARD OF HEALTH — Includes the boards, department or officer having
like powers and duties in cities or towns.
CARRIER — A person who, without symptoms of a disease dangerous to the
public health, harbors and may disseminate the specific microorganisms of
that disease.
CONTACT — Any person known to have been sufficiently near an infected
person or animal to have been presumably exposed to transfer of infectious
material directly or by articles freshly soiled with such material.
IMMUNES — An "immune" person is one who has had the disease or has
been artificially immunized against it, and is presumably protected against
another attack.
INCUBATION PERIOD — The usual period of time which elapses between
the exposure of a person to infection and the development of the symptoms
of the disease to which he may have been exposed.
ISOLATION — The separation of persons suffering from any disease
dangerous to the public health, or carriers of the infecting microorganisms,
from other persons, in such places and under such conditions as will
prevent the direct or indirect conveyance of the infectious agent to
susceptible persons.
LAST EXPOSURE — The date of the removal to a hospital, or the recovery
or death of the patients or the date on which the nonimmune contact leaves
and remains out of the house where the patient is isolated.
PLACARD — An official notice, written or printed, posted as a warning of
the presence of disease dangerous to the public health on the premises or
in the apartment or room so placarded.
QUARANTINE — The restriction to the premises, house or apartment of
materials and persons that presumably have been exposed to a disease
dangerous to the public health. [Note: In view of the various ambiguous
and inaccurate uses to which the words "isolation" and "quarantine" are
frequently put, it has seemed best to adopt arbitrarily the word "isolation"
as describing the limitation put upon the movements of an individual (or
animal) known to be sick or to be a "carrier," and the word "quarantine"
as describing the limitation put upon individuals exposed (contacts) to
disease.]
§ 400-1.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1.1
1:789
SUSCEPTIBLES or NONIMMUNES — A "susceptible" or "nonimmune"
person is one who is not known to have acquired immunity to the particular
communicable disease in question.
§ 400-1.2. Diseases dangerous to public health.232
The diseases declared by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
to be dangerous to the public health are reportable under the provisions
of MGL c. 111, §§ 6, 7, 109, 111, and 112, as amended, and notice of the
occurrence of each case must be sent to the Board of Health in the manner
required by the statutes. (Note: Gonorrhea and syphilis should be reported
directly to the State Department of Public Health on special forms provided
and according to the rules and regulations of the Department made under
MGL c. 111, § 6, as amended.)
§ 400-1.3. Physicians to give notice.233
Chapter 111 of the General Laws, as amended.
If a physician knows or has cause to believe that a person he visits is
infected with a disease dangerous to the public health, or if either eye
of an infant whom or whose mother, a physician, or a hospital medical
officer registered under MGL c. 111, § 9, visits, becomes inflamed,
swollen and red, or shows an unnatural discharge within two weeks
after birth, he shall immediately give written notice thereof, signed by
him, to the Board of Health of the town where the patient is being
attended by him. If the Board of Health which receives such written
notice is the Board of Health of a town other than that wherein the
patient dwells, it shall, immediately upon receipt of such notice, send
a copy thereof to the Board of Health of the town wherein the patient
dwells; and, in addition thereto, the Board of Health which receives
such written notice, whether or not it is the Board of Health of the town
wherein the patient dwells, shall send a copy to the Board of Health of
the town in which the patient is known to have contracted such disease
and to the Board of Health of each town in which he is known to have
exposed any person to such a disease. If a physician or such a hospital
medical officer refuses or neglects to give the notice required by this
section, he shall be punished by a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $200.
A.
The foregoing provisions of this section and the provisions of MGL c.
111, § 109, shall not apply to gonorrhea and syphilis, except in the case
of eye infections in infants under two weeks of age. Any person having
either of said diseases shall be reported to local boards of health, either
directly or through the department in accordance with such special
rules and regulations as the department may make, having due regard
for the best interests of the public.
B.
232. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
233. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 400-1.1 BEVERLY CODE § 400-1.4
1:790
§ 400-1.4. Householders to give notice.234
When a householder knows that a person within his family or house is sick
with a disease dangerous to the public health, he shall immediately give
notice thereof to the Board of Health in the manner required by the statute
(MGL c. 111, § 109, as amended); provided, however, that in cases in which
a physician has been called in, his notification will be accepted in place of
the householder.
§ 400-1.5. Infectious eye diseases (ophthalmia neonatorum).
MGL c. 111, § 110, as amended.
If either eye of an infant becomes inflamed, swollen and red, or shows
an unnatural discharge within two weeks after birth, the nurse, relative
or other attendant having charge of such infant shall report in writing,
within six hours thereafter, to the Board of Health of the town where the
infant is, the fact that such inflammation, swelling and redness of the eyes
or unnatural discharge exists. On receipt of such report, or of notice of
the same symptoms given by a physician, or a hospital medical officer
registered under MGL c. 112, § 9, as provided by the following sections, the
Board of Health shall take such immediate action as it may deem necessary,
including, so far as may be possible, consultation with an oculist and the
employment of a trained nurse, in order that blindness may be prevented.
§ 400-1.6. Period of isolation.
A person who is sick with any of the diseases dangerous to the public
health shall be isolated in the manner and for the periods prescribed
in the rules and regulations of the Massachusetts Department of Public
Health.
A.
In addition, the following shall apply to school children:
Impetigo. Minimum period of isolation: until crusts have
disappeared and infected area is healed. Children may attend
school if small areas are protected with ointment or infected areas
easily protected with bandage.
(1)
Ivy poisoning. Minimum period of isolation: until the active stage
has subsided. If infected area can be protected with bandages, no
restrictions.
(2)
Pediculosis. Minimum period of isolation of patient: until all nits
have been removed from the hair.
(3)
Ringworm. Minimum period of isolation of patient: when infected
areas are on the exposed surfaces of the body, the child must be
excluded from school until entirely healed.
(4)
B.
234. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 400-1.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1.6
1:791
§ 400-1.7. Methods of isolation for certain diseases.
Whoever is sick with anterior poliomyelitis (infantile paralysis), diphtheria,
meningococcal meningitis, scarlet fever, small pox, typhoid fevers, or any
other of the diseases declared dangerous to the public health that the Board
of Health may designate, shall be immediately isolated in a place or room,
approved by the Board of Health, or its agents, or shall be moved to a
hospital set apart for the treatment of such diseases, and no person so
isolated shall leave such room or hospital until the period of isolation for
the disease with which he is sick shall have elapsed and until the Board of
Health or its agent shall permit him to do so.
§ 400-1.8. Placards.
§ 400-1.9. Authority to enter place of isolation.
No person except physicians, nurses, and those whose duty it is to minister
to the patient shall be allowed to enter the place of isolation during the
continuance of the disease, unless permitted to do so by the Board of Health
or its agent.
§ 400-1.10. Sanitary requirements for contact with isolated patient.
Nurses, and others caring for a person isolated as above, shall wash their
hands thoroughly with hot water, soap and a scrubbing brush immediately
after handling the patient, his discharges or any article soiled by his
discharges, before mingling with others. They shall change their outer
clothing before going out.
§ 400-1.11. Utensils and linen used by patient.
All eating utensils and linen used by the patient shall be boiled for at least
15 minutes immediately after being taken from the room. Upon release of
the patient, woolen articles shall be exposed to sunlight and air for at least
eight hours.
Scabies. Minimum period of isolation of patient: until the active
stage has subsided.
(5)
Houses or portions of houses in which there is a person sick shall be
placarded for those diseases dangerous to the public health, for which
placarding is required under the minimum isolation and quarantine
requirements of the State Department of Public Health. (Note: In the
case of tenement houses, apartment houses or like structures, as much
of the building shall be placarded as in the judgment of the Board of
Health is consistent with the best interests of the public.)
A.
The card shall not be removed except on the authority of the Board of
Health.
B.
§ 400-1.6 BEVERLY CODE § 400-1.12
1:792
§ 400-1.12. Patient discharges.
The discharges of a person sick with typhoid fever, paratyphoid fever,
or dysentery shall be mixed with chloride of lime or other disinfectant
approved by the Board of Health and shall be kept in contact therewith for
at least 30 minutes before being emptied into the hopper or privy vault.
§ 400-1.13. Quarantine of contacts; children exposed to
tuberculosis.
§ 400-1.14. Physicals for attendants at boardinghouses.
Attendants of boardinghouses for infants shall be required hereafter to have
a physical examination, including an X-ray of the chest, every two years. A
copy of the X-ray report or statement from the private physician should be
submitted to the Board of Health.
§ 400-1.15. School certificates.235
Children who have recovered from or have been exposed to any disease
declared dangerous to the public health (see § 400-1.2) may return to school
only after certification by the Board of Health or after examination by the
school physician as prescribed in MGL c. 71, § 55, as amended.
Contacts shall be under the restrictions prescribed in the rules and
regulations of the Massachusetts Department of Public Health, except
that Note 8 shall not apply in this City.
A.
In addition, children living in a family in which a case of tuberculosis
exists or has existed within two years shall be required to have an Xray
of the chest and must follow the recommendation of their physician
or clinic as to re-examination before being allowed to attend school. A
copy of the X-ray report or statement from the private physician should
be submitted to the Board of Health.
B.
235. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 400-1.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-1.15
1:793

ARTICLE II
Milk Regulations
[Adopted 12-11-1942]
§ 400-2.1. Regulations.
No person, firm or corporation shall sell, deliver or have in his custody
with intent so to do, milk from any cow unless said cow has, within
a period of six months, passed without reaction a tuberculin test as
established under the laws of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or
unless said cow is in a tuberculosis-free accredited herd tested under
the plan as adopted by the United States Bureau of Animal Industry.236
This regulation shall not apply to pasteurized milk or milk intended for
pasteurization.
A.
The sale or keeping or exposing for sale of natural cow's milk, skimmed
milk or creams, unless the same are certified or pasteurized as
hereinafter provided, is hereby prohibited in the City of Beverly.
B.
No person, firm or corporation or servant, agent or employee thereof
shall sell, offer or keep for sale or exchange or deliver, or have in
his custody or possession, with intent to sell, exchange or deliver, any
natural milk, skimmed milk or cream in the City of Beverly, unless said
natural milk, skimmed milk or cream has been drawn exclusively from
tuberculin-tested and accredited herds, and such milk, skimmed milk
or creams, as aforesaid, shall conform to the regulations prescribed
by a Medical Milk Commission in the manner required by MGL c.
180, §§ 20 to 25, inclusive, and amendments thereto, and such milk,
skimmed milk or cream, as aforesaid, shall be certified by a Medical
Milk Commission in a manner required by General Laws Chapter 180,
and amendments thereto, and shall, when sold, offered, kept or exposed
for sale, exchanged or delivered, contain not more than 5,000 bacteria
per cubic centimeter.
C.
All natural milk, skimmed milk or cream sold, offered, kept or exposed
for sale, exchange or delivery in the City of Beverly not meeting the
requirements contained within the provisions of Subsection C hereof,
before being sold or offered or exposed or kept for sale, exchange, or
delivery in the City of Beverly, shall be pasteurized and shall comply
with the following requirements:
It shall be natural cow's milk, pasteurized, but not more than 72
hours old when pasteurized.
(1)
It shall have a bacteria content of not more than 400,000 per cubic
centimeter before pasteurization.
(2)
D.
236. Editor's Note: The Bureau of Animal Industry was abolished in 1953 and replaced by the
Agricultural Research Service.
§ 400-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2.1
1:795
It shall be subjected, for a period of not less than 30 minutes, to a
temperature of not less than 142° F., or such higher temperatures,
for such time intervals as the State Department of Public Health
may from time to time determine, and shall immediately thereafter
be cooled to a temperature of 50° F. or lower.
(3)
All persons, firms, or corporations engaged in the sale, delivery or
distribution of milk, skimmed milk or cream shall provide adequate
facilities for the proper storage of said milk, skim milk or cream at a
temperature not above 50° F.
E.
No person shall sell, exchange, or deliver, or have in his custody or
possession with intent so to do, milk, skimmed milk or cream with a
bacterial content which exceeds the following figures as determined by
the standard plate methods of the American Public Health Association
in use at the time the examination is made:
Raw milk intended for pasteurization: not more than 400,000
colonies per cubic centimeter.
(1)
Pasteurized milk: not more than 40,000 colonies per cubic
centimeter.
(2)
Raw milk intended for pasteurization as Grade A milk: not more
than 100,000 colonies per cubic centimeter.
(3)
(4) Grade A milk: not more than 10,000 colonies per cubic centimeter.
(5) Cream: not more than 100,000 colonies per cubic centimeter.
F.
Every person in the production, storage, transportation, sale, delivery
or distribution of milk for sale shall notify the Board of Health on the
occurrence of any case or cases of communicable disease, either in
himself or his family, among his employees or associates, or within the
building or premises where milk is stored or handled, and shall at the
same time suspend the sale or distribution of milk until authorized to
resume the same by the Board of Health. No utensil which is used or
has been used on the premises where a communicable disease exists
shall be used to hold or convey milk until it has been sterilized in a
manner satisfactory to the Board of Health or its representative.
G.
All persons, firms, or corporations engaged in the sale, delivery or
distribution of milk shall furnish annually to the Board of Health a
list of names and locations of the dairy farms from which the milk so
distributed or sold is obtained and shall notify the Board of Health
before making any changes in their supply.
H.
All dealers, except licensed storekeepers, engaged in the sale,
processing, and distribution of milk and cream shall provide a separate
room or rooms, well lighted, ventilated and properly screened, in a
location approved by the Board of Health, in which the handling,
bottling and storing of milk shall be carried on. All such milk rooms
I.
§ 400-2.1 BEVERLY CODE § 400-2.1
1:796
§ 400-2.2. Milk and cream regulations.
or plants shall have a smooth, tight floor with sewer connections if
possible, and smooth, clean walls and ceiling. The entire room or rooms
and all appliances shall be kept clean at all times and be used for
the handling of milk only. All bottles, cans or other receptacles used
for holding milk shall be sterilized insofar as practicable and shall be
protected from contamination between the time of such sterilization
and the time when they are filled. All bottles shall be filled at the place
of production or processing of the milk and shall be capped with a
machine capper.
No persons shall serve or allow to be served any milk to be consumed
on the premises where served unless such milk is contained in
individual sealed receptacles, each receptacle to be filled at the place
of production or processing of the milk, and to contain only the quantity
of milk intended for the use of the person served.
J.
Milk or cream shall not be shipped from any dairy farm if there is a case
of contagious or infectious disease thereon, or among the employees or
families thereof, and the owner of such farm shall immediately report
any such case to this Board of Health and to the dealer, and shipment
not be resumed until authorized by the Board.
K.
The sale or keeping or exposing for sale of natural cow's milk or
goat's milk, skimmed milk or cream, unless the same is certified or
pasteurized, as hereinafter provided, is hereby prohibited in the City of
Beverly.
A.
All milk, skimmed milk or cream sold, offered, kept or exposed for sale,
exchange or delivery in the City of Beverly shall be pasteurized and
shall comply with the following requirements.
B.
It shall be natural cow's milk pasteurized but not more than 72 hours
old when pasteurized, it shall have a bacteria content of no more than
400,000 per cubic centimeter before pasteurization; shall be subjected
for a period of not less than 30 minutes to a temperature not less than
142° F., or such higher temperatures, for such time intervals, as the
State Department of Public Health may from time to time determine,
and shall immediately thereafter be cooled to a temperature of 50° F.
or lower. All goat's milk shall be pasteurized to the satisfaction of the
Board of Health.
C.
All persons, firms, or corporations, engaged in the sale, delivery or
distribution of milk, skimmed milk or cream shall provide adequate
facilities for the proper storage of said milk, skim milk or cream at a
temperature not above 50° F.
D.
No person shall sell, exchange, or deliver, or have in his custody or
possession, with intent so to do, milk, skimmed milk or cream with
bacterial content which exceeds the standards set up by the Milk
E.
§ 400-2.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2.2
1:797
Regulations Board and the Massachusetts Department of Public Health
as determined by the standard plate methods of the American Public
Health Association in use at the time the examination is made.
Sale restrictions.
All milk and milk products that have spilled, overflowed or leaked
shall not be sold for human consumption.
(1)
No milk offered for sale in the City of Beverly shall be pasteurized
more than once.
(2)
There shall not be sold, exchanged or delivered in the City of
Beverly any milk, skimmed milk or cream in a bottle whose pouring
lip is not protected from contamination by a covered cap or closure.
(3)
Dealers in milk are prohibited from allowing any person not in their
employ to loiter about the milk room or handle any vessel or utensil
used in the production, sale or distribution of milk in this City.
(4)
The use of tobacco is prohibited in any room where milk or cream
is processed.
(5)
No dogs or cats or other animals shall be permitted in or about the
room or place in which the processing of milk is carried on.
(6)
All vehicles used for the transportation of milk or milk products in
their final delivery containers shall be constructed of permanent
tops and sides.
(7)
(8) All such vehicles shall be kept clean.
F.
Every person engaged in the production, storage, transportation, sale,
delivery or distribution of milk for sale shall notify the Board of Health
on the occurrence of any case or cases of communicable disease, either
in himself or his family, or among his employees or associates, or within
the building or premises where milk is stored or handled and shall at
the same time suspend the sale or distribution of milk until authorized
to resume the same by the Board of Health. No utensil which is used
or has been used on the premises where a communicable disease exists
shall be used to hold or convey milk until it has been sterilized in a
manner satisfactory to the Board of Health or its representative.
G.
All persons, firms, or corporations engaged in the sale, delivery, or
distribution of milk shall furnish annually a list of names and locations
of the dairy farms from which the milk so distributed or sold is obtained
and shall notify the Board of Health before making any changes in their
supply.
H.
All dealers, except licensed storekeepers, engaged in the sale,
processing, and distribution of milk and cream shall provide a separate
room or room, well lighted, ventilated and properly screened, in a
location approved by the Board of Health, in which the handling,
I.
§ 400-2.2 BEVERLY CODE § 400-2.2
1:798
§ 400-2.3. Milk regulations. [Adopted 3-21-1936]
bottling and storing of milk shall be carried on. All such milk rooms
or plants shall have a smooth, tight floor with sewer connections if
possible, and smooth clean walls and ceilings. The entire room or rooms
and all appliances shall be kept clean at all times and be used for
the handling of milk only. All bottles, cans or other receptacles used
for holding milk shall be sterilized insofar as practicable and shall be
protected from contamination between the time of such sterilization
and the time when they are filled. All bottles shall be filled at the place
of production or processing of the milk and shall be capped with a
machine capper.
No persons shall serve or allow to be served any milk to be consumed
on the premises where served unless such milk is contained in
individual sealed receptacles, each receptacle to be filled at the place
of production or processing of the milk, and to contain only the quantity
of milk intended for the use of the person served.
J.
Milk or cream shall not be shipped from any dairy farm if there is a case
of contagious or infectious disease thereon, or among the employees or
families thereof, and the owner of such farm shall immediately report
any such case to this Board of Health and to the dealer, and shipment
shall not be resumed until authorized by the Board.
K.
Attention is called to provisions of MGL c. 94, §§ 12 to 48c, and to the
rules and regulations of the State Milk Regulation Board.
L.
Whoever violates any of the provisions of the foregoing regulations
shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100 or such other fine or
imprisonment, or both, as provided by the General Laws.
M.
The sale or keeping or exposing for sale natural cow's milk, unless
the same is certified or pasteurized, as hereinafter provided, is hereby
prohibited in the City of Beverly.
A.
No person, firm or corporation or servant, agent or employee thereof
shall sell, offer or keep for sale or exchange or deliver, or have in
his custody or possession with intent to sell, exchange or deliver, any
natural milk, skimmed milk or cream that has been drawn exclusively
from tuberculin-tested and accredited or tested herds on the way to
accreditation, and such milk, skim milk or cream, as aforesaid, shall
conform to the regulations prescribed by a Medical Milk Commission
in the manner required by General Laws Chapter 180 and amendments
thereto, and shall, when sold, offered or kept for sale, or exchange or
delivered, contain not more than 50,000 bacteria per cubic centimeter.
B.
All natural milk, skimmed milk or cream sold, offered, kept or exposed
for sale, exchange or delivery in the City of Beverly not meeting the
requirements contained within the provisions of Subsection B hereof,
before being sold or offered or exposed or kept for sale, exchange, or
C.
§ 400-2.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-2.3
1:799
§ 400-2.4. Frozen dessert and ice cream regulations. [Adopted
2-1-1954]
delivery in the City of Beverly, shall be pasteurized and shall comply
with the following requirements:
It shall be natural cow's milk, pasteurized, but not more than 72
hours old when pasteurized.
(1)
It shall have a bacteria content of not more than 5,000 per cubic
centimeters before pasteurization.
(2)
It shall be subjected, for a period of not less than 30 minutes, to a
temperature of not less than 142° F., or such higher temperatures,
for such time intervals, as the State Department of Public Health
may from time to time determine, and shall immediately thereafter
be cooled to a temperature of 50° F. or lower.
(3)
No person, firm or corporation, or servant, agent, employee of any
person, firm or corporation, shall sell, exchange, or deliver any natural
milk or skimmed milk which contains more than 40,000 bacteria per
cubic centimeter, or any natural milk, skimmed milk or cream which has
a temperature higher than 50° F.
D.
Ice cream scoops and spoons must be stored in receptacles through
which passes continuous running water. This fixture must conform to
the plumbing ordinances of the City of Beverly.
A.
No person shall sell frozen desserts on any street or public place in
the City of Beverly from any vehicle unless said product is properly
protected from contamination.
B.
Whoever violates any provisions of the regulations aforesaid shall be
punished by a fine of not less than $15, not more than $100, or
imprisonment for not more than six months as provided in MGL c. 94,
§ 65R.
C.
D. The foregoing regulations shall become effective on March 1, 1954.
§ 400-2.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-2.4
1:800
ARTICLE III
Food Regulations
[Adopted 12-11-1942]
§ 400-3.1. Maintenance of premises and receptacles used in sales.
Premises, vehicles, receptacles, utensils or refrigerators used for the
storage, sale, distribution or transportation of foodstuffs shall be
maintained in a manner satisfactory to, and shall be open at all times for
inspection by, the Board of Health and its agents. All floor display stands for
raw foods shall be elevated at least 18 inches above floor level.
§ 400-3.2. Protection from contamination.
Every person, firm, or corporation engaged in the storage, sale, distribution
or transportation of foodstuffs shall cause his wares, or those under his
charge, to be properly protected against all sources of contamination. No
person shall expose for sale candy, delicatessen products or other foodstuffs
which cannot be properly washed before consumption unless said foodstuffs
are protected by glass covers or dust-proof containers.
§ 400-3.3. Waste disposal.
All persons engaged in the storage, sale, distribution or transportation
of foodstuffs shall provide adequate, covered containers for the reception
of waste food products, and shall cause such containers to be emptied
frequently and to be cleaned at least once every week in a manner
satisfactory to the Board of Health. The vehicles of street peddlers or
vendors of foodstuffs shall be construed to be included in this regulation.
§ 400-3.4. Sanitary facilities.
All persons occupying premises used for the sale, dispensing or distribution
of foodstuffs shall cause premises to be equipped with adequate toilet
facilities and also adequate provisions for the cleaning of the hands; except
that the Board of Health may, in writing, waive this clause if in its judgment
adequate provision is made for cleanliness.
§ 400-3.5. Personal hygiene.
Every person employed in the handling of food for public consumption shall
maintain his or her person and clothes in a clean condition, and before
beginning work and after using toilets or water closets shall wash the hands
and arms thoroughly, and rinse the same in clean water.
§ 400-3.6. Use of living or sleeping rooms for storage prohibited.
No person shall keep or store any foodstuffs intended for sale in any room
used for living or sleeping purposes.
§ 400-3.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-3.7
1:801
§ 400-3.7. Serving utensils.
The owner, proprietor or manager of any establishment selling or
dispensing liquids, beverages, drinks, food or other refreshments for
consumption in or about the place of sale or dispensing shall cause all
glasses, cups, spoons, forks, and other utensils used in such consumption
to be thoroughly cleansed and scoured with soap and clean, hot water
before use by another person. Individual cups or containers made with
paper or similar material may be employed in lieu of dishes, and said cups
or containers shall be destroyed after a single usage.
§ 400-3.8. Bakeries, slaughterhouses, sausage and nonalcoholic
beverages.237
The operation of bakeries and slaughterhouses, and the manufacture of
sausages and nonalcoholic beverages are regulated under the General Laws
as follows:
Bakeries MGL c. 94, §§ 2 through 10
Slaughterhouses MGL c. 94, §§ 118 through 131
Sausages MGL c. 94, §§ 142, 143 and 143a
MGL c. 94, §§ 186 through 195
Nonalcoholic beverages MGL c. 94, §§ 10A and 10B
§ 400-3.9. Toilet facilities. [Added 7-13-1970]
The operator of each food service establishment shall provide adequate,
conveniently located toilet facilities for its employees. When toilet facilities
are provided for patrons, such facilities shall be installed separate and
apart from the facilities provided for employees. Doors to toilet rooms shall
not open directly into areas in which food is handled, served, stored or
prepared.
§ 400-3.10. Preparation of sandwiches. [Added 10-14-1976]
Effective November 29, 1976, all sandwiches offered for sale in Beverly
which are prepared in a location other than at the place so offered for
sale or consumption shall be labeled with the date of preparation and the
name and address of the person, firm or corporation responsible for their
preparation.
§ 400-3.11. Mobile fish vending vehicles. [Added 11-13-1980]
The following regulations apply to mobile fish vending vehicles:
A. On-site filleting of fish is prohibited.
237. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 400-3.7 BEVERLY CODE § 400-3.11
1:802
Fillets of fish sold shall bear the name and address of processor, packer,
and/or distributor.
B.
All shellfish shall bear an official tag giving the name and certificate
number of the original shell-stock shipper, including the kind, quantity,
and location.
C.
D. Open-air processing of all products is strictly prohibited.
The operator shall maintain a sufficient quantity of ice from an
approved source for display and reserve and maintain a safe
temperature as defined by the Massachusetts Department of Public
Health, Division of Food and Drugs.
E.
Pick-up trucks shall have a permanent overhead structure of such size
to protect from the direct rays of sun and other elements conducive to
spoilage.
F.
The truck body shall be clean and with no body rot; the bed of the body
shall not be aesthetically unsuitable.
G.
Plastic bags for initial wrapping and brown bags for final wrap shall be
provided.
H.
There shall be an approved and sealed scale by local Sealer of Weights
and Measures inspector.
I.
J. Wrapping boards shall be provided as needed.
Drainage of ice and fluids from barrels, containers, crates, and
receptacles shall not be discharged into a street drain nor onto the
surface of the ground or a street.
K.
A fresh supply of soap, water, and paper towels shall be provided;
common towels are prohibited.
L.
Any person who has any communicable disease, or is a carrier thereof,
or who has any open lesion of the exposed portion of the body shall not
be permitted on the vehicle.
M.
N. Smoking of tobacco while in service shall be strictly prohibited.
The vehicle shall be washed and sanitized as needed to prevent a
nuisance while at its principal place of storage.
O.
P. Sale of precooked fin or shellfish is excluded.
§ 400-3.11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-3.11
1:803

ARTICLE IV
Nuisances
[Adopted 12-11-1942; amended effective 2-1-1973; 3-3-1974]
§ 400-4.1. Maintenance of buildings and premises.
Any person or persons owning or having control of any building or premises
shall keep the same in a clean condition and any such person having control
of any building or premises, in or upon which there is any substance or
material, or any condition, which is or may become a source of danger to
the public health or a nuisance, shall, when ordered by the Board of Health
in writing, remove or abate the same within the time specified in said order.
§ 400-4.2. Maintenance of private ways.
Any person or persons owning or having control of any premises abutting
on a private way, and having the right to use such private way, shall, when
ordered by the Board of Health, in writing, remove or abate from that
part of said private way adjoining such premises any substance, material
or condition which is or may become a menace to the public health or a
nuisance, and such removal or abatement shall take place within the time
specified in said order.238
§ 400-4.3. Removal or transportation of solid waste.239
No person shall remove or transport garbage, offal or other offensive
material through any public street, court, lane or way without first obtaining
a permit from the Board of Health; and provided, further, that he shall
remove and transport the material herein mentioned in accordance with
such reasonable rules and regulations as may be established by the Board.
All such permits shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are
issued, but may be renewed annually. They may be revoked by the Board
at any time for cause. No person, firm or corporation shall obtain a permit
without first paying to the Clerk of said Board, for the use of the City, a
fee as set from time to time by the Board of Health. No permit shall be
transferred except with the approval of the Board. Carts or vehicles used
for transporting offensive material shall be watertight and shall be securely
covered with a wood, iron or canvas cover.
§ 400-4.4. Placement of solid waste on public ways prohibited.
No person or persons shall place or cause to be placed or left in or upon
any public or private street or way, enclosure of grounds, or in any body or
stream of water within the limits of this town the body of any dead animals,
fowl, or any substance or material that is or may become offensive or cause
a nuisance, or may tend to obstruct the flow of any stream.
238. Editor's Note: Original Ch. 4, Sec. 3, regarding solid waste disposal, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code.
239. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 400-4.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4.5
1:805
§ 400-4.5. Dumps.
The owner, agent or lessee of any land or enclosure, used as a dump,
either public or private, shall cause all offensive matter dumped thereon
to be immediately covered, and all other refuse matter dumped thereon to
be kept leveled, and the premises kept in such a manner as to cause no
nuisance during the process of filling. No person shall dump any offensive
material upon any dump unless permitted to do so by the Board of Health,
and all such offensive materials shall be properly disposed of to the approval
of the Board of Health. All possible care shall be used in preventing the
escape of dust and papers from the dump and from the vehicle used in
conveying waste materials to the dump.240
§ 400-4.6. Sewage and privy vault contents.
No owner, occupant or agent of any building or premises shall permit any
sewage, garbage, contents or drainage of a privy vault, cesspool or water
closet or sink drain or any other filth to empty on the surface of the ground
or enter into any ditch, brook, stream or body of water.
§ 400-4.7. Cesspools, privy vaults and public sewers.
The owner or other person or persons having control of any existing
building or buildings hereafter erected or converted into a dwelling to
be occupied by one or more families, and from which a public sewer is
accessible, shall, in a manner and within a period of time satisfactory to
the Board of Health, cause such a building to be connected with such
public sewer.
A.
The owner or other person or persons having control of any existing
building or buildings hereafter erected or converted into one or more
stores or other places of business, and in which one or more persons
are employed, shall provide sufficient toilet facilities, and wherever a
public sewer is accessible, shall, in a manner and within a period of
time satisfactory to the Board of Health, cause such stores or other
places of business to be connected with such public sewer.
B.
No cesspool, permanent privy vault, or other means of sewage disposal
shall hereafter be constructed or installed in this City until a permit has
first been obtained from the Board of Health.
C.
All cesspools hereafter constructed shall be of approved material and,
unless otherwise specified by the Board of Health, shall be located not
less than 20 feet from any dwelling, not less than five feet from line of
any street, court or passageway, and not less than five feet from line
of adjoining lot, all measurements being taken from the nearest outer
circumference, and shall be not less than six feet in depth, measuring
from the lower rim of the inlet pipe, not less than six feet in diameter
D.
240. Editor's Note: Original Ch. 4, Sec. 7, regarding combined collection of garbage and
rubbish, which immediately followed this section, was repealed at time of adoption of
Code.
§ 400-4.5 BEVERLY CODE § 400-4.7
1:806
§ 400-4.8. Cows, goats, swine, poultry and other animals.
(inside measurements to a point of drawing in), and shall be provided
with an iron cover and rim laid in cement. Overflow cesspools may be
entirely covered with earth.
No permanent privy vault shall be constructed, or maintained on
premises which are provided with a public water supply. All permanent
privy vaults, hereafter constructed, shall be of approved materials and
shall be flyproof, and, unless otherwise specified, shall be located not
less than 20 feet from any dwelling, not less than 20 feet from the line
of an adjoining lot, and not less than 20 feet from the line of any street,
court or passageway, all measurements being taken from the nearest
outer point of the vault.
E.
Temporary privy vaults for the convenience of contractors or their
employees may be erected or installed without a permit, but only under
the following conditions. The vault must be at least two feet in depth
and must be so located as to cause no annoyance to persons residing
in the vicinity. The owner, contractor or agent shall cause the contents
thereof to be treated in a sanitary manner, and immediately upon
completion of the contract the contractor shall remove the privy, shall
fill in the vault and leave the premises in a condition satisfactory to the
Board of Health.
F.
No indoor toilet or water closet, except that which is provided with
proper means of flushing with water at time of using, where water
is available, shall be hereafter installed on any premises in this City.
Where water is not available for flushing, indoor chemical toilets of
approved material and construction may be installed under special
permit of the Board of Health, if proper provision is made for the final
disposal of the contents thereof.
G.
Whenever a water closet, privy vault, cesspool or drain becomes
offensive or obstructed, the owner, agent or occupant of the premises
shall cause the same to be cleaned and made free or otherwise
corrected.
H.
Every owner, occupant, or agent of premises in which there is any
private sewer, drain, privy vault, or cesspool shall keep the same in
a sanitary condition and shall have every privy vault and cesspool
emptied and cleaned when necessary or at such times as ordered by
the Board of Health. No privy vault or cesspool shall be emptied except
by such parties and in such manner as shall be especially authorized
by the Board of Health. If the owner or occupant fails to comply with
such order, the Board may cause the nuisance, source of filth, or cause
of sickness to be removed, and all expenses incurred thereby shall be
paid by the person who caused or permitted same, if he has had actual
notice from the Board of Health of the existence thereof.
I.
§ 400-4.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4.8
1:807
§ 400-4.9. Offensive trades, occupations and practices.
No person shall keep within the limits of this City in any building,
or on any premises or tract of land of which he may be the owner,
lessee, tenant, or occupant, any cattle, swine, horses, birds, poultry,
fowl, reptiles or any other animals without a permit from the Board of
Health and then only in such places and manner as it shall direct. All
such permits expire annually on December 31 and may be revoked by
the Board at any time for cause.
A.
No person shall keep any bird, fowl, reptiles, swine, cattle, horses, or
any other animals when the Board of Health may deem such keeping
detrimental to the health, or to create a nuisance to the residents of the
neighborhood, or to those who may pass thereby; and said Board shall
have the power to remove or cause to be removed therefrom any such
cattle, swine, horses, birds, poultry, fowl, reptiles, or any other animals
so kept.
B.
No person or persons shall keep any birds, fowls, reptiles, swine, cattle,
horses, or any other animals in any part of a dwelling house or store,
nor in any coop or pen within 25 feet of a dwelling house. No person
hereafter shall erect or convert a building, coop, or pen for the keeping
of birds, fowl, or poultry of any kind unless said building, coop, or pen
shall be located not less than 50 feet from the line of any street, court,
or passageway, unless a permit in writing so specifying shall have been
granted by the Board of Health. All poultry, fowl, or birds shall be kept
within said building, coop, or pen.
C.
The owners or persons in control of any buildings or premises in which
any cattle, swine, horses, birds, poultry, fowl, reptiles, or any other
animal are kept shall keep the buildings and premises clean and free
from decaying food, filth, manure, dirt, or stagnant water. The buildings
and pens shall be whitewashed or disinfected and put in such condition
as may be ordered by the Board of Health.
D.
The owner or other person or persons having control of any existing
building or buildings hereafter erected or converted into a barn for the
stabling of horses or other domestic animals shall keep their barns,
stables, and yards clean, and shall provide suitable facilities for the
reception of manure and other refuse matter. Wherever a public sewer
is accessible, the Board of Health will decide as to the advisability of
connecting such building with such sewer.
E.
The Board of Health may prohibit the exercise of the following trades
or employments: those of slaughtering animals, of rendering animal
matter, of manufacturing fertilizers and soaps, of mixing or storing of
refuse, or vegetable substances, of smoking fish or meat, of refining
oils, of making egg dressing, varnish, glue, gas, gasoline or any burning
fluid, except at the place or places where such trade or employments
are now lawfully established or which may hereafter be assigned by the
Board, such trades or employments being either nuisances or hurtful
A.
§ 400-4.8 BEVERLY CODE § 400-4.9
1:808
§ 400-4.10. Ice.
No person, by himself or by his agent, or as the servant or agent of any
other person, firm or corporation, shall sell, exchange or deliver, or have in
his or their possession with intent to sell, exchange or deliver, any ice from
polluted sources or ice which upon chemical or bacteriological examination
shows evidence of sewage or other objectionable contamination, or which is
visibly polluted or soiled by dirt, or ice in or upon which there is any visible
foreign matter.
to the City, attended by noisome odors or otherwise injurious or
dangerous to the public health.
No old rags, old papers or other refuse material shall be brought into
or allowed to remain within any building used as a dwelling if gathered
from any source outside of such building.
B.
No person shall sell or offer for sale any secondhand wearing apparel,
bedding, household furniture or household utensils that have been
exposed to any communicable disease, or that is infected with vermin
until the same has been cleansed and disinfected in a manner
satisfactory to the Board of Health.
C.
§ 400-4.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4.10
1:809

ARTICLE V
Camps
[Adopted 12-11-1942]
§ 400-5.1. Registration and license.
The management of every organized camp covered by Chapter 416 of the
Acts of 1939241 shall annually apply for a license in writing to the Board
of Health. This application shall state the location and type of camp, the
approximate maximum number of persons by whom it is to be used, the
probable duration of occupancy, the proposed sources of water and milk
supply for the camp and the proposed method of sewage and garbage
disposal. If the camp is used the year around, such application shall be
made annually not later than January 1 or, if used during only a portion of
the year, at least 30 days in advance of the date when the requested license
is desired to take effect.
§ 400-5.2. Camp site.
§ 400-5.3. Plan of camp.
Every camp shall have available for inspection a plan or sketch indicating
the location of all local sources of water supply and other sanitary facilities,
including all toilets, cesspools and receptacles for garbage refuse, and signs
shall be posted indicating the location of such facilities.
§ 400-5.4. Water supply.
The camp site shall be such that it is practicable to provide and
maintain proper sanitary facilities. The location shall be on porous,
well-draining soil, and shall afford facilities for obtaining a good water
supply and a safe method of sewage disposal.
A.
It shall be of adequate size to prevent overcrowding. Each camping unit
shall contain not less than 400 square feet of usable space, and no unit
shall be permitted to accommodate more than one overnight cabin or
tent.
B.
No camp shall be established on the watershed of a public water supply
until proper sanitary facilities have been provided, and all sanitary
facilities shall be in accordance with rules and regulations for the
sanitary protection of public water supplies made by the State
Department of Public Health under the provisions of MGL c. 111, § 160.
C.
Every camp shall have a water supply of safe, sanitary quality and
sufficient in quantity for the maximum population using the camp at
any time. Such water supply shall be easily obtainable from its source
or from faucets or bubblers on a pipe distribution system. Dipping of
A.
241. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 140, § 32C.
§ 400-5.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5.4
1:811
§ 400-5.5. Sewage and wastewater disposal.
§ 400-5.6. Disposal of garbage and rubbish.
receptacles into the source of supply shall not be permitted. Common
drinking vessels shall not be provided or permitted.
B. Drinking fountains shall be of sanitary design and construction.
Any source of water supply, the water of which is found to be polluted
or of questionable quality shall be posted as unsafe.
C.
No camp shall be operated without facilities adequate for the proper
disposal of sewage and wastewater. There shall be separate
accommodations for each sex, so located as to be easily accessible to
all parts of the camp.
A.
Camps so located and equipped that water under suitable pressure and
public sewers are available shall be equipped with flush toilets and
connected with the public sewerage system. Camps not so located shall
be provided with equipment adequate for the disposal of the sewage
and wastewater in a sanitary manner.
B.
There shall be at least one toilet seat for each 15 campers when the
camp is operating to full capacity.
C.
No privy shall be located within 50 feet of any kitchen, dining room,
mess hall or other place where food is prepared or served.
D.
E. Toilet structures shall be flytight, well lighted and ventilated.
In cleaning septic tanks, cesspools, chemical toilets, privy vaults or pits,
the contents shall be removed and disposed of in a manner satisfactory
to the Board of Health so that they will not become a menace to the
public health, create a nuisance, or contaminate any water supply or
bathing place. Vault contents shall be treated frequently by sprinkling
with chloride of lime or a compound equally effective for preventing
nuisances.
F.
Every camp shall be provided with metal, tight-covered receptacles for
garbage, placed at a suitable point or points at the camp and sufficient
in number to contain all such garbage. All garbage shall be deposited
in them. The contents of these covered receptacles shall be removed
daily when the camp is in use and, under proper supervision, buried or
disposed of in a sanitary manner so as not to create a nuisance.
A.
Garbage shall not be thrown or deposited in any ravine, ditch or gutter,
on any street or highway, into any waters, or be permitted to remain
exposed upon the surface of the ground.
B.
C. Garbage receptacles shall be thoroughly washed at frequent intervals.
§ 400-5.4 BEVERLY CODE § 400-5.6
1:812
§ 400-5.7. Food.
The quality and handling of all food sold or offered for sale on the camp
premises shall conform to the regulations of the Board of Health and to the
Tercentenary Edition of the General Laws as amended or as may hereafter
be amended.
§ 400-5.8. Bathing places.
No bathing place shall be established or used which is subject to dangerous
contamination. Swimming and wading pools and bathing places shall be
operated and maintained in accordance with recommendations of the Joint
Committee on Bathing Places of the Conference of State Sanitary Engineers
and the American Public Health Association.
§ 400-5.9. Shower baths.
Camps provided with shower baths shall have separate compartments for
each sex. A minimum of one shower head for each sex shall be provided
for camps up to 20 persons, and one additional head for each additional
20 persons or fraction thereof. Concrete floors and suitable wastewater
disposal shall also be installed.
§ 400-5.10. Living quarters.
§ 400-5.11. Manager or caretaker; responsibility for maintenance of
sanitary conditions.
Every camp shall be provided with suitable receptacles with tight
covers for rubbish, and all wastepaper, bottles and tin cans shall be
placed in them. The contents shall be removed at least twice a week
when the camp is in use and burned or otherwise disposed of in a
sanitary manner under proper supervision.
D.
Living quarters, including dormitories, dining rooms, kitchens, bath
and toilet rooms, laundries, and other shelters shall be properly
screened, well ventilated and lighted, free from vermin and insects, and
the floors raised not less than 12 inches from the ground. Screen doors
shall be of the self-closing type. The floors of all kitchens, dining rooms,
bath, toilet and wash rooms and laundries shall be watertight.
A.
B. No windows shall open directly into any enclosed garage space.
All plumbing fixtures shall be properly trapped and vented and made
sanitary in every particular, and all piping conditions shall be in
accordance with the plumbing rules formulated by the State Examiners
of Plumbers as required by MGL c. 142, § 8.
C.
The camp shall be supervised by a capable manager or caretaker, who
shall reside at the camp or visit it every day when it is occupied. It
A.
§ 400-5.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-5.11
1:813
§ 400-5.12. Communicable diseases.
Whenever a case of disease dangerous to the public is discovered or any
unusual amount of illness occurs in any camp, the person in charge shall
at once notify the Board of Health. The patient shall be isolated and not
removed from the camp except by order of the Board of Health.
§ 400-5.13. Trailer camps.
The foregoing regulations shall apply to trailer camps or parks. The
following special regulations also shall apply.
§ 400-5.14. Violations and penalties.
Section 32E of Chapter 416 of the Acts of 1939 reads as follows:242
Whoever conducts, controls, manages or operates any camp or cabin
subject to Sections 32A to 32C, inclusive, which is not licensed under
Section 32B, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$100.
shall be the duty of the manager or caretaker to keep the camp and its
equipment in a clean and sanitary condition.
The owner or management of each camp shall assume responsibility
for maintaining the camp in proper sanitary condition in accordance
with these rules and regulations, copies of which shall be posted at a
conspicuous place in the camp.
B.
When closed for the season, the camp shall be left clean and in a
sanitary condition.
C.
Each trailer unit shall have an area of not less than 600 square feet,
with suitable markers set at each comer. No units shall be permitted
to accommodate more than one trailer. The minimum distance between
trailers, a trailer and a building or a trailer and a property line shall be
10 feet. The minimum distance from a street line to a trailer shall be 15
feet.
A.
No toilet installed in any trailer coach shall, except in a case of sickness,
be used while the trailer is parked in a trailer camp. Sink and other
wastes shall not be discharged onto the ground, but shall be discharged
into a suitable receptacle or through a connection with a pipe leading
to a sewer, cesspool or other subsurface disposal works.
B.
242. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 140, § 32E.
§ 400-5.11 BEVERLY CODE § 400-5.14
1:814
ARTICLE VI
Housing
[Adopted 12-11-1942; amended 6-8-1978]
§ 400-6.1. Change of occupancy permits.
Whenever a rented dwelling unit, apartment, or tenement other than a
hotel, motel or rooming house is vacated by the occupant or occupants
thereof, or within 10 days before the expiration date of the anticipated
vacancy, it must be certified by the Board of Health or its agents
prior to being reoccupied by a new occupant as meeting the standards
set forth in the Sanitary Code, Chapter II, Minimum Standards of
Fitness for Human Habitation, as promulgated and from time to time
amended by the Department of Public Health of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts under the authority of MGL c. 111, § 127A.
A.
After inspection of the vacant premises by the Board of Health or
its agents, all public utilities servicing said vacant premises may be
ordered turned off by the Board of Health or its agents until such
dwelling units, apartments, or tenement is certified as being fit for
human habitation. If within 72 hours, excluding Saturdays, Sundays,
and holidays, after receipt of written notification of a vacancy from the
owner, managing agent, or person in possession, the Board of Health
or its agents fail to make an inspection, then the rented dwelling unit,
apartment or tenement may be reoccupied without such certification.
B.
If after inspection of the premises by the Board of Health or its agents,
the Board of Health determines that the owner should be given time to
make repairs necessary to qualify for certification and the health and
safety of any occupant is not thereby endangered, the Board of Health
may issue a temporary occupancy permit in increments of 30 days, not
to exceed 90 days total. Before any public utilities are ordered shut off,
the Board of Health shall give notice in writing to the owner, managing
agent, or person in control of the vacant premises that such action is to
be taken.
C.
This regulation shall not apply to new construction which is in
compliance with the General Laws of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts and local ordinances pertaining thereto; nor shall it
apply to new construction which was completed less than three years
prior to the date on which the rented dwelling units, apartment, or
tenement becomes vacant.
D.
Any owner of such property used for dwelling purposes failing to
comply with this regulation shall pay a fine of $20 for each and every
day he allows any person or persons to live, occupy or inhabit the
premises without having received an occupancy permit from the Board
of Health.
E.
§ 400-6.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-6.1
1:815

ARTICLE VII
Massage, Sauna and Other Baths
[Adopted effective 1-1-1974; amended 9-20-1979]
§ 400-7.1. Massage establishments.
§ 400-7.2. Masseuse licenses; fee.
§ 400-7.3. Supervision.
A duly licensed physical therapist shall be present upon the licensed
premises for the general supervision of masseuses operating therein during
the regular business hours of the establishment.
§ 400-7.4. Applicability.
The above requirements shall apply to new business applications effective
this date; existing business must comply by January 1, 1980.
§ 400-7.5. Severability. [Added 10-11-1979]
If any paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of these proposed rules
and regulations shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, the
decision shall not affect any other portion of these rules and regulations,
Each massage establishment must be licensed by the Board of Health
at a fee of $100; such license shall expire annually an December 31 and
may be renewed upon written application to the Board of Health and
payment of a fee of $50. Changes since the original application must
be noted on the renewal application. An establishment license is not
transferable.
A.
Each establishment shall at all times meet proper health standards as
required by the Board of Health as amended from time to time. Said
standards are attached hereto and made a part hereof.
B.
Any license may be revoked by the Board of Health for cause after a
hearing. Revocation for cause shall be defined as any violation of state
or local health rules and regulations that come under the jurisdiction of
said Board.
C.
Each masseuse shall be licensed with the Board of Health at a fee of
$25 and shall supply such pertinent information as required by the
form attached hereto and made a part hereof. Such license shall expire
annually on December 31 and may be renewed upon written application
to the Board of Health and payment of a fee of $25.
A.
Each masseuse shall supply with the application form proof that said
applicant is free from communicable disease, attested to by a
satisfactory physical examination by a licensed physician.
B.
C. No license shall be granted to any person under 18 years of age.
§ 400-7.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7.5
1:817
which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
these rules and regulations are hereby declared severable.
§ 400-7.5 BEVERLY CODE § 400-7.5
1:818
ARTICLE VIII
Transitory Gatherings
[Adopted 11-6-1975]
§ 400-8.1. License required.
Effective November 21, 1975, all carnivals, bazaars, fairs, circuses, public
exhibitions where food or beverage is offered for consumption, other similar
types of amusement midways, or other transitory gatherings within the City
shall be licensed by the Beverly Board of Health prior to their being allowed
to operate. Said owners, operators, agents or representatives of sponsoring
agencies shall be subject to the Board of Health rules and regulations
governing the operation of the aforestated activities within the City.
§ 400-8.2. Midway food concessions.
§ 400-8.3. Refuse storage and disposal.
All food concessions shall be inspected prior to the actual date of
opening.
A.
Menu limitations. Limited food items are to be served, consisting of
those that are not deemed potentially hazardous. Said menu shall be
approved by the Board of Health prior to the issuance of a temporary
food service permit.
B.
Food protection. All sections of Chapter X of the Massachusetts State
Sanitary Code shall apply with the following local addendum: All stands
selling cotton candy shall display and wrap said product in a manner
approved by the Board of Health. All stands selling taffy apples shall
display and wrap said product in a manner approved by the Board of
Health. All other food products displayed for sale shall be wrapped
in a manner approved by the Board of Health. (Note: The reason for
the local addendum to Chapter X is contamination by dust and dirt
generated by the type of surface being walked on by the patrons.)
C.
Permit requirements.
(1) Fee of $5; check made payable to the City of Beverly.
Restriction clauses: "No Smoking or Sleeping Allowed in Midway
Food Service Concession"; "No Pets to be Kept within Food
Preparation and Serving Areas."
(2)
(3) Permit to include expiration date.
D.
The Board of Health shall require dumpster containers for refuse
storage.
A.
The Board of Health shall require daily cleaning of the midway to
eliminate wind-blown litter.
B.
§ 400-8.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8.3
1:819
§ 400-8.4. Potable water supply.
§ 400-8.5. Temporary sanitary facilities.
The Board of Health shall require dumpsters to be emptied as many
times as necessary to eliminate any potential nuisances.
C.
The Board of Health shall require a minimum of two dumpsters, to be
located at the opposite ends of the midway.
D.
The Board of Health will discuss with the sponsor, owner, manager, or
agent the mode of sanitary disposal of all refuse generated during the
operation. Said mode of disposal shall be approved prior to the issuance
of a permit.
E.
The water supply should be municipal. If not, then bacteriological
samples shall be taken prior to actual operation to ascertain water
quality.
A.
The United States Public Health Service's Guidelines for Water Quality
shall be used when analyzing samples.
B.
All water used by food service concessions and/or others shall be under
pressure.
C.
The Board of Health shall require hot water under pressure at all
concessions selling or offering food for sale.
D.
The Board of Health shall require all trailers used by employees to have
self-contained holding tanks for domestic wastes capable of chemical
treatment. Trailer wastes shall not be discharged directly onto the
surface of the ground, but shall be pumped by authorized persons and
disposed of in a sanitary manner approved of in advance by the Board
of Health.
A.
The Board of Health shall require a minimum of four portable toilet
facilities for the employees' use. Said toilet facilities shall consist of a
minimum of two men's and two women's facilities situated at opposite
ends of the area used by the employees.
B.
The Board of Health shall require additional portable toilet facilities in
units of two, i.e., one for each sex, when, in its opinion, said additional
temporary facilities are required because of the total number of on-site
employees.
C.
The Board of Health shall set the ratio of employees to the number of
temporary sanitary stations.
D.
The aforestated portable toilet facilities are intended for the use of
those employees living on the premises during the actual period of time
that said activity is in operation and should not be used by general
public except in dire emergencies.
E.
§ 400-8.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-8.5
1:820
§ 400-8.6. Expenses; rides and amusements; permit fee; application
deadline.
§ 400-8.7. Contingency plan for emergencies.
The Board of Health shall require the owner, operator, agents, and/or
representatives of sponsoring agencies to set aside an area to be designated
as an emergency aid station. There shall be a trained attendant on duty
during all hours that said activity is in actual operation. The Board of
Health may require a non-pay telephone to be installed in the emergency
aid station and first aid equipment that it deems necessary to ensure the
safety of the general public.
The Board of Health shall require portable toilet facilities in sufficient
quantity for public use when deemed necessary at public gatherings.
F.
All expenses incurred to meet these regulations shall be borne by the
carnival owners and/or sponsoring group and not the City of Beverly.
A.
All rides and other related amusements shall be approved by the
appropriate local inspecting agency(s) prior to the issuance of said
permits.
B.
A fee of $25 may be charged by the Board of Health for the issuance
of a permit to operate a carnival, bazaar, fair, circus, public exhibition,
other similar types of amusement midway, or other transitory gathering
within the City. This fee shall be in addition to the fee charged for the
midway food concessions.
C.
All owners, operators, agents, or representatives of sponsoring
agencies shall make application with the Board of Health 60 days prior
to the proposed opening date.
D.
§ 400-8.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-8.7
1:821

ARTICLE IX
Smoking in Workplaces and Public Places
[Adopted effective 4-1-1985; amended in its entirety 6-28-2017]
§ 400-9.1. Purpose.
The purpose of this regulation is to protect the health of the employees and
general public in the City of Beverly.
§ 400-9.2. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the Beverly
Board of Health pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31 that "[b]oards of health may
make reasonable health regulations." It is also promulgated pursuant to
MGL c. 270, § 22(j), which states in part that "[n]othing in this section
shall permit smoking in an area in which smoking is or may hereafter
be prohibited by law including, without limitation: any other law or . .
. health . . . regulation. Nothing in this section shall preempt further
limitation of smoking by the commonwealth . . . or political subdivision of
the commonwealth."
§ 400-9.3. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following words shall have the following
meanings, unless the context requires otherwise:
ADULT-ONLY RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment whose
primary purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers, but not for
resale, tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia, in which the sale
of other products is merely incidental, and in which the entry of persons
under the minimum legal sales age of 21 is prohibited at all times.
An adult-only retail tobacco store must maintain a valid permit for the
retail sale of tobacco products as required to be issued by the Beverly
Board of Health. For purposes of this definition, any establishment that
possesses or is required to possess a retail food permit shall not be
considered an adult-only retail tobacco store.
BAR — An establishment that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by guests on the premises and in which the
serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages.
Although a restaurant may contain a bar, the term "bar" shall not
include the restaurant dining room.
BAR AREA OF A MEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATION — An area of a
membership association that is devoted to the serving of alcoholic
beverages for consumption by members on the premises and in which
the serving of food is only incidental to the consumption of such
beverages.
COMPENSATION — Money, gratuity, privilege, or benefit received from
an employer in return for work performed or services rendered.
A.
§ 400-9.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9.3
1:823
E-CIGARETTE — Any electronic device, not approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration, composed of a mouthpiece,
heating element, battery and/or electronic circuits that provides a
vapor of liquid nicotine to the user, or relies on vaporization of any
liquid or solid nicotine, or marijuana product. This term shall include
such devices whether they are manufactured as e-cigarettes, e-cigars,
e-pipes, e-hookah or under any other product name.
EMPLOYEE — An individual or person who performs a service for
compensation, or volunteers, for an employer at the employer's
workplace, including a contract employee, temporary employee, and
independent contractor who performs a service in the employer's
workplace for more than a de minimus amount of time.
EMPLOYER — An individual, person, partnership, association,
corporation, trust, organization, school, college, university or other
educational institution or other legal entity, whether public, quasipublic,
private, or nonprofit, which uses the services of one or more
employees at one or more workplaces, at any one time, including the
City of Beverly.
ENCLOSED — A space bounded by walls, with or without windows or
fenestrations, continuous from floor to ceiling and enclosed by one or
more doors, including but not limited to an office, function room or
hallway.
MARIJUANA — All parts of any plant of the genus Cannabis, not
excepted below and whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; and
resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the plant, its
seeds or resin, including tetrahydrocannabinol as defined in MGL c.
94C, § 1; provided that "marijuana" shall not include:
MEMBERSHIP ASSOCIATION (also known as a "private club") — A notfor-
profit entity that has been established and operates for a charitable,
philanthropic, civic, social, benevolent, educational, religious, athletic,
recreation or similar purpose, and is comprised of members who
collectively belong to: (i) a society, organization or association of a
fraternal nature that operates under the lodge system, and having one
or more affiliated chapters or branches incorporated in any state; or
(ii) a corporation organized under MGL c. 180; or (iii) an established
The mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil,
or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound,
manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of the mature
stalks, fiber, oil, or cake made from the seeds of the plant or the
sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of germination;
(1)
(2) Hemp; or
The weight of any other ingredient combined with marijuana to
prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink or other
products.
(3)
§ 400-9.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9.3
1:824
religious place of worship or instruction in the commonwealth whose
real or personal property is exempt from taxation; or (iv) a veterans'
organization incorporated or chartered by the Congress of the United
States, or otherwise, having one or more affiliated chapters or branches
incorporated in any state. Except for a religious place of worship or
instruction, an entity shall not be a membership association for the
purpose of this definition, unless individual membership containing not
less than full membership costs and benefits is required for all members
of the association for a period of not less than 90 days.
MUNICIPAL BUILDING — Any building or facility owned, operated,
leased or occupied by the municipality.
OUTDOOR SPACE — An outdoor area, open to the air at all times and
which cannot be enclosed by a wall or side covering.
PUBLIC PLACE — An enclosed indoor area on public or private
property where the public is invited or permitted, including but not
limited to the following facilities: health-care facilities; malls; municipal
facilities; public transportation vehicles; retail food stores; retail stores;
restaurants; bars; educational facilities; libraries; museums; theaters;
banks; laundromats; indoor sports arenas; auditoriums; all enclosed
areas of inns/hotels/motels, including all guest rooms; rooms or halls
used for a public meeting; public areas of banks and automatic banking
(ATM) lobbies; common areas of residential buildings; public
restrooms, lobbies, staircases, waiting rooms, halls, exits,
entranceways and elevators accessible to the public; and licensed childcare
locations.
PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION — Buses, taxis, and other means of
transportation available to the general public while such means of
transportation is operating within the boundaries of the City, including
indoor platforms by which such means of transportation may be
accessed.
RESTAURANT — Any coffee shop, cafeteria, sandwich stand, private
and public school cafeteria and other eating establishment that gives
or offers food for sale to the public, guests, or employees, as well
as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving
elsewhere, including catering facilities.
SMOKING BAR — An establishment that primarily is engaged in the
retail sale of tobacco products for consumption by customers on the
premises and is required by MGL c. 270, § 22 to maintain a valid permit
to operate a smoking bar issued by the Massachusetts Department
of Revenue. "Smoking bar" shall include, but not be limited to, those
establishments that are commonly known as "cigar bars" and "hookah
bars."
SMOKING OR SMOKE — The lighting of a cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco product or possessing a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or other
tobacco or non-tobacco product designed to be combusted and inhaled,
including, but not limited to, marijuana.
§ 400-9.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9.3
1:825
§ 400-9.4. Smoking prohibited.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or
ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes,
cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; or electronic
cigarettes, electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, liquid
nicotine, "e-liquids" or other similar products, regardless of nicotine
content, that rely on vaporization or aerosolization. "Tobacco product"
includes any component or part of a tobacco product. "Tobacco
product" does not include any product that has been approved by the
United States Food and Drug Administration either as a tobacco use
cessation product or for other medical purposes and which is being
marketed and sold or prescribed solely for the approved purpose.
WORKPLACE — An enclosed indoor area, structure or facility or a
portion thereof, at which one or more volunteers or employees perform
a service for compensation for an employer; other enclosed spaces
rented to or otherwise used by the public; and where the employer has
the right or authority to exercise control over the space.
Terms not defined herein shall be defined as set forth in MGL c. 270,
§ 22 and/or 105 CMR 661. To the extent any of the definitions herein
conflict with MGL c. 270, § 22 or 105 CMR 661, the definition contained
in this regulation shall control.
B.
It shall be the responsibility of the employer to provide a smoke-free
environment for all employees working in an enclosed workplace as
well as those workplaces listed in Subsection C below.
A.
Smoking is hereby prohibited in Beverly in accordance with MGL c.
270, § 22 (commonly known as the "Smoke-Free Workplace Law").
B.
Pursuant to MGL c. 270, § 22(j), smoking is also hereby prohibited in:
(1) Public places.
(2) Smoking bars.
(3) Adult-only retail tobacco stores.
Municipally owned, leased, operated and/or maintained buildings
and property. This shall include but is not limited to athletic fields,
beaches, parks, playgrounds, school grounds, property held as
"open space," conservation areas, airport property, piers, wharves,
docks, Ellis Square, and Beverly Commons. This is not intended to
cover sidewalks and roadways.
(4)
(5) Beverly Golf and Tennis Club, except for the golf course.
(6) Nursing homes.
C.
§ 400-9.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9.4
1:826
§ 400-9.5. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(7) Hotel, motel and B&B (bed-and-breakfast) rooms.
The area within 25 feet of any municipal building entranceway
accessible to the public (e.g., sidewalk), except that this shall not
apply to a smoker transiting through such twenty-five-foot area.
(8)
All outdoor areas where food and/or beverages are served to the
public by employees of restaurants, bars and taverns.
(9)
Membership associations (private clubs), except for the bar area
of a private club with active locations in Beverly prior to August
1, 2003, provided that (a) the bar area is separated from the
nonsmoking area of the private club by location in a separate
room or by means of physical barriers that completely enclose
the bar area of the private club utilizing self-closing doors and is
(b) served by a Board-of-Health-approved key entry system that
prohibits entry by the general public into the bar area, and (c)
employees must be members of the club. Any bar area that permits
smoking cannot be used for bingo or beano. Any membership
association which initiates active membership locations in Beverly
on or after August 1, 2003, shall be smoke-free at all times.
(10)
The use of e-cigarettes is prohibited wherever smoking is prohibited
per Massachusetts law and § 400-9.4C of this regulation.
D.
No exceptions found in this regulation shall be construed to apply to
marijuana products.
E.
Every person having control of premises upon which smoking is
prohibited by and under the authority of this regulation shall
conspicuously display upon the premises "No Smoking" signs provided
by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and available from
the Beverly Board of Health or the international "No Smoking" symbol
(consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed
in a red circle with a red bar across it) and comparable in size to the
sign provided by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health and
available from the Beverly Board of Health.
F.
An owner, manager, or other person in control of a building, vehicle or
vessel who violates this article, in a manner other than by smoking in a
place where smoking is prohibited, shall be punished by a fine of:
(1) For the first violation: $100;
For a second violation occurring within 36 months of the date of
the first offense: $200; and
(2)
For a third or subsequent violation occurring within 36 months of
the second violation: $300.
(3)
A.
§ 400-9.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9.5
1:827
§ 400-9.6. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
§ 400-9.7. Conflict with other laws or regulations.
Notwithstanding the provisions of § 400-9.4 of this regulation, nothing in
this regulation shall be deemed to amend or repeal applicable fire, health
or other regulations so as to permit smoking in areas where it is prohibited
by such fire, health or other regulations.
§ 400-9.8. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective as of October 1, 2017.
Each calendar day on which a violation occurs shall be considered a
separate offense.
B.
This regulation shall be enforced by the Board of Health and its
designees.
C.
Violations of § 400-9.4B and F shall be disposed of by a civil penalty
using the noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in
MGL c. 40, § 21D without an enabling ordinance or bylaw. The
disposition of fines assessed shall be subject to MGL c. 111, § 188.
D.
Violations of § 400-9.4A, C and D may be disposed of by a civil penalty
using the noncriminal method of disposition procedures contained in
MGL c. 40, § 21D.
E.
An individual or person who violates § 400-9.4C by smoking or using
an e-cigarette in a place where smoking or the use of e-cigarettes is
prohibited shall be subject to a civil penalty of $100 for each violation.
F.
If an owner, manager or other person in control of a building, vehicle
or vessel violates this regulation repeatedly, demonstrating egregious
noncompliance as defined by regulation of the Department of Public
Health, the Board of Health may revoke or suspend any Board-of-
Health-issued permit to operate and shall send notice of the revocation
or suspension to the Department of Public Health.
G.
Any person may register a complaint to initiate an investigation and
enforcement with the Board of Health, the local inspection department
or the equivalent.
H.
§ 400-9.5 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9.8
1:828
ARTICLE IXA
Sale of Tobacco Products
[Adopted effective 6-15-1996; amended in its entirety 6-28-2017]
§ 400-9A.1. Statement of purpose.
Whereas there exists conclusive evidence that tobacco smoking causes
cancer, respiratory and cardiac diseases, negative birth outcomes,
irritations to the eyes, nose and throat. (Center for Disease Control and
Prevention, (CDC)(2012), Health Effects of Cigarettes Smoking Fact Sheet.
Retrieved from: http://cdc.gov/tobacco/data_statistice/fact_sheets/
health_effects/ effects_cig_smoking/index.htm.)
Whereas the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has concluded
that nicotine is as addictive as cocaine or heroin (CDC (2010), How Tobacco
Smoke Causes Disease: The Biology and Behavioral Basis for Smoking-
Attributable Disease. Retrieved from: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/
data_statistics/sgr/2010/.) and the Surgeon General found that nicotine
exposure during adolescence, a critical window for brain development, may
have lasting adverse consequences for brain development (U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services. 2014. The Health Consequences of Smoking
50 Years of Progress: A Reporter of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S.
National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
Office on Smoking and Health, p. 122. Retrieved from:
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/fulreport.
pdf.) and that it is addiction to nicotine that keeps youth smoking
past adolescence (Id. at Executive Summary p. 13. Retrieved from:
http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/50-years-of-progress/ execsummary.
pdf)
Whereas a Federal District Court found that Philip Morris, RJ Reynolds and
other leading cigarette manufacturers "spend billions of dollars every year
on their marketing activities in order to encourage young people to try
and then continue purchasing their cigarette products in order to provide
the replacement smokers they need to survive" and that these companies
were likely to continue targeting underage smokers (United States v Phillip
Morris, Inc., RJ Reynolds Tobacco Co., et al., 449 F.Supp.2d 1 (D.D.C 2006)
at Par. 3301 and Pp. 1605-07.).
Whereas more than 80% of all adult smokers begin smoking before the
age of 18, more than 90% do so before leaving their teens, and more than
3.5 million middle and high school students smoke (SAMHSA, Calculated
based on data in 2011 National Survey on Drug Use and Health and U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHA).
Whereas 18.1% of current smokers aged under 18 years reported that they
usually directly purchased their cigarettes from stores (i.e., convenience
store, supermarket, or discount store) or gas stations, and among 11th
grade males this rate was nearly 30% (CDC (2013) Youth Risk Behavior,
Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2014: 63 (No SS-04)). Retrieved from:
www.cdc.gov.).
§ 400-9A.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9A.1
1:829
Whereas the Institute of Medicine (IOM) concludes that raising the
minimum age of legal access to tobacco products to 21 will likely reduce
tobacco initiation, particularly among adolescents 15 to 17, which would
improve health across the lifespan and save lives (IOM (institute of
Medicine) 2015. Public Health Implications of Raising the Minimum Age of
Legal Access to Tobacco Products. Washington DC: The National Academies
Press, 2015.).
Whereas cigars and cigarillos, can be sold in a single "dose"; enjoy a
relatively low tax as compared to cigarettes; are available in fruit, candy
and alcohol flavors; and are popular among youth (CDC (2009), Youth Risk
Behavior, Surveillance Summaries (MMWR 2010: 59, 12, note 5). Retrieved
from: http:www.cdc.gov/mmwr/pdf/ss/ss5905.pdf.).
Whereas research shows that increased cigar prices significantly decreased
the probability of male adolescent cigar use and a ten-percent increase
in cigar prices would reduce use by 3.4% (Ringel, J., Wasserman, J., &
Andreyeva, T. (2005) Effects of Public Policy on Adolescents' Cigar Use:
Evidence from the National Youth Tobacco Survey. American Journal of
Public Health, 95(6), 995-998, doi: 10.2105/AJPH.2003.030411 and cited
in Cigar, Cigarillo and Little Cigar Use among Canadian Youth: Are We
Underestimating the Magnitude of this Problem?, J. Prim. P. 2011, Aug:
32(3-4):161-70 Retrieved from: www.nebi.nim.gov/pubmed/21809109.).
Whereas 59% of high school smokers in Massachusetts have tried flavor
cigarettes or flavored cigars and 25.6% of them are current flavored
tobacco product users; 95.1% of twelve to seventeen-year olds who smoked
cigars reported smoking cigar brands that were flavored (Massachusetts
Department of Public Health, 2015 Massachusetts Youth Health Survey
(MYHS); Delneve CD et al., Tob Control, March 2014: Preference for
flavored cigar brands among youth, young adults and adults in the USA.).
Whereas the Surgeon General found that exposure to tobacco marketing in
stores and price discounting increase youth smoking (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services. 2012 Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth
and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National
Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on
Smoking and Health, p. 508-530, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/
preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf.).
Whereas the Federal Family Smoking Prevention and Tobacco Control Act
(FSPTCA), enacted in 2009, prohibited candy- and fruit-flavored cigarettes
(21 U.S.C. § 387g.), largely because these flavored products were marketed
to youth and young adults (Carpenter CM, Wayne GF, Pauly JL, et al.
2005. "New Cigarette Brands with Flavors that Appeal to Youth: Tobacco
Marketing Strategies." Health Affairs. 24(6): 1601-1610; Lewis M and
Wackowski O. 2006. "Dealing with an Innovative Industry: A Look at
Flavored Cigarettes Promoted by Mainstream Brands." American Journal
of Public Health.96(2): 244-251; Connolly GN. 2004. "Sweet and Spicy
Flavours: New Brands for Minorities and Youth." Tobacco Control. 13(3):
211-212; U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2012. Preventing
§ 400-9A.1 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9A.1
1:830
Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon
General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health, p. 537,
www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobacco-use/fullreport.
pdf.) and younger smokers were more likely to have tried these
products than older smokers (U.S. Department of Health and Human
Services. 2012. Preventing Tobacco Use Among Youth and Young Adults: A
Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta: U.S. National Center for Chronic
Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Office on Smoking and Health,
p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/reports/preventing-youth-tobaccouse/
full-report.pdf.), neither federal nor Massachusetts laws restrict sale
of flavored noncigarette tobacco products, such as cigars, cigarillos,
smokeless tobacco, hookah tobacco, and electronic devices and the nicotine
solutions used in these devices.
Whereas the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the U.S. Surgeon
General have stated that flavored tobacco products are considered to be
"starter" products that help establish smoking habits that can lead to longterm
addiction (Food and Drug Administration. 2011. Fact Sheet: Flavored
Tobacco Products, www.fda.gov/downloads/TobaccoProducts/
ProtectingKidsfromTobacco/FlavoredTobacco/UCM183214.pdf, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services. 2012 Preventing Tobacco Use
Among Youth and Young Adults: A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta:
U.S. National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion,
Office on Smoking and Health, p. 539, www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/
reports/ preventing-youth-tobacco-use/full-report.pdf.).
Whereas the U.S. Surgeon General recognized in his 2014 report that a
complementary strategy to assist in eradicating tobacco-related death and
disease is for local governments to ban categories of products from retail
sale (See fn. 3 at p. 85.).
Whereas the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has
reported that the current use of electronic cigarettes, a product sold in
dozens of flavors that appeal to youth, among middle and high school
students tripled from 2013 to 2014 (Center for Disease Control &
Prevention. 2015. "Tobacco Use Among Middle and High School Students -
United States, 2011-2014," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report
(MMWR) 64(14): 381-385;).
Whereas 5.8% of Massachusetts youth currently use e-cigarettes and 15.9%
have tried them (Massachusetts Department of Public Health, 2015
Massachusetts Youth Health Survey (MYHS)).
Whereas the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection has
classified liquid nicotine in any amount as an "acutely hazardous waste"
(310 CMR 30.136).
Whereas in a lab analysis conducted by the FDA, electronic cigarette
cartridges that were labeled as containing no nicotine actually had low
levels of nicotine present in all cartridges tested, except for one (Food
§ 400-9A.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9A.1
1:831
and Drug Administration, Summary of Results: Laboratory Analysis of
Electronic Cigarettes Conducted by FDA, available at: http://www.fda.gov/
newsevents/publichealthfocus/ucm173146.htm.).
Whereas according to the CDC's youth risk behavior surveillance system,
the percentage of high school students in Massachusetts who reported the
use of cigars within the past 30 days is 10.8% in 2013 (See fn. 7.).
Whereas data from the National Youth Tobacco Survey indicate that more
than two-fifths of U.S. middle and high school smokers report using flavored
little cigars or flavored cigarettes (King BA, Tynan MA, Dube SR, et al.
2013. "Flavored-Little-Cigar and Flavored-Cigarette Use Among U.S. Middle
and High School Students." Journal of Adolescent Health. [Article in press],
www.jahonline.org/article/S1054-139X%2813%2900415-1/abstract.).
Whereas the sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission
of health-care institutions because these products are detrimental to the
public health and their presence in health-care institutions undermines
efforts to educate patients on the safe and effective use of medication,
including cessation and medication.
Whereas educational institutions sell tobacco products to a younger
population, which is particularly at risk for becoming smokers and such
sale of tobacco products is incompatible with the mission of educational
institutions that educate a younger population about social, environmental
and health risks and harms.
Whereas the Massachusetts Supreme Judicial Court has held that ". . .[t]he
right to engage in business must yield to the paramount right of government
to protect the public health by any rational means" (Druzik et al v. Board of
Health Haverhill, 324 Mass. 129(1949).).
Now, therefore it is the intention of the Beverly Board of Health to regulate
the sale of tobacco products.
§ 400-9A.2. Authority.
This regulation is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted to the
Beverly Board of Health by MGL c. 111, § 31, which states "Boards of Health
may make reasonable health regulations."
§ 400-9A.3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this regulation, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
ADULT-ONLY RETAIL TOBACCO STORE — An establishment whose primary
purpose is to sell or offer for sale to consumers, but not for resale, tobacco
products and tobacco paraphernalia, in which the sale of other products is
merely incidental, and in which the entry of persons under the minimum
legal sales age of 21 is prohibited at all times. An adult-only retail tobacco
store must maintain a valid permit for the retail sale of tobacco products
§ 400-9A.1 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9A.3
1:832
as required to be issued by the Beverly Board of Health. For purposes of
this definition, any establishment that possesses or is required to possess a
retail food permit shall not be considered an adult-only retail tobacco store.
BLUNT WRAP — Any tobacco product manufactured or packaged as a wrap
or as a hollow tube made wholly or in part from tobacco that is designed
or intended to be filled by the consumer with loose tobacco or other fillers
regardless of any content.
BUSINESS AGENT — An individual who has been designated by the owner
or operator of any establishment to be the manager or otherwise in charge
of said establishment.
CHARACTERIZING FLAVOR — A distinguishable taste or aroma, other than
the taste or aroma of tobacco, menthol, mint or wintergreen, imparted or
detectable either prior to or during consumption of a tobacco product or
component part thereof, including, but not limited to, tastes or aromas
relating to any fruit, chocolate, vanilla, honey, candy, cocoa, dessert,
alcoholic beverage, herb or spice; provided, however, that no tobacco
product shall be determined to have a characterizing flavor solely because
of the provision of ingredient information or the use of additives or
flavorings that do not contribute to the distinguishable taste or aroma of the
product.
CIGAR — Any roll of tobacco that is wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any
substance containing tobacco with or without a tip or mouthpiece not
otherwise defined as a cigarette under MGL c. 64C, § 1, Paragraph 1.
COMPONENT PART — Any element of a tobacco product, including, but not
limited to, the tobacco, filter and paper, but not including any constituent.
CONSTITUENT — Any ingredient, substance, chemical or compound, other
than tobacco, water or reconstituted tobacco sheet, that is added by the
manufacturer to a tobacco product during the processing, manufacturing
or packaging of the tobacco product. Such term shall include a smoke
constituent.
COUPON — Any card, paper, note, form, statement, ticket or other issue
distributed for commercial or promotional purposes to be later surrendered
by the bearer so as to receive an article, service or accommodation without
charge or at a discount price.
DISTINGUISHABLE — Perceivable by either the sense of smell or taste.
EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION — Any public or private college, school,
professional school, scientific or technical institution, university or other
institution furnishing a program of higher education.
EMPLOYEE — An individual or person who performs a service for
compensation, or volunteers, for an employer at the employer's workplace,
including a contract employee, temporary employee, and independent
contractor who performs a service in the employer's workplace for more
than a de minimus amount of time.
§ 400-9A.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9A.3
1:833
EMPLOYER — An individual, person, partnership, association, corporation,
trust, organization, school, college, university or other educational
institution or other legal entity, whether public, quasi-public, private or
nonprofit, which uses the services of one or more employees at one or more
workplaces, at any one time, including the City of Beverly.
FLAVORED TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any tobacco product or component
part thereof that contains a constituent that has or produces a
characterizing flavor. A public statement, claim or indicia made or
disseminated by the manufacturer of a tobacco product, or by any person
authorized or permitted by the manufacturer to make or disseminate public
statements concerning such tobacco product, that such tobacco product has
or produces a characterizing flavor shall constitute presumptive evidence
that the tobacco product is a flavored tobacco product.
HEALTH-CARE INSTITUTION — An individual, partnership, association,
corporation or trust or any person or group of persons that provides healthcare
services and employs health-care providers licensed, or subject to
licensing, by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under MGL
c. 112 or a retail establishment that provides pharmaceutical goods and
services and is subject to the provisions of 247 CMR 6.00. Health-care
institutions include, but are not limited to, hospitals, clinics, health centers,
pharmacies, drug stores, doctor offices, optician/optometrist offices and
dentist offices.
LIQUID NICOTINE CONTAINER — A bottle or other vessel which contains
nicotine in liquid or gel form, whether or not combined with another
substance or substances, for use in a tobacco product, as defined herein.
The term does not include a container containing nicotine in a cartridge
that is sold, marketed, or intended for use in a tobacco product, as defined
herein, if the cartridge is prefilled and sealed by the manufacturer and not
intended to be open by the consumer or retailer.
LISTED OR NONDISCOUNTED PRICE — The higher of the price listed
for a tobacco product on its package or the price listed on any related
shelving, posting, advertising or display at the place where the tobacco
product is sold or offered for sale plus all applicable taxes if such taxes are
not included in the state price, and before the application of any discounts
or coupons.
MINIMUM LEGAL SALES AGE (MLSA) — The age an individual must be
before that individual can be sold a tobacco product in the municipality.
NONRESIDENTIAL ROLL-YOUR-OWN (RYO) MACHINE — A mechanical
device made available for use (including to an individual who produces
cigars, cigarettes, smokeless tobacco, pipe tobacco, or roll-your-own
tobacco solely for the individual's own personal consumption or use) that
is capable of making cigarettes, cigars or other tobacco products. RYO
machines located in private homes used for solely personal consumption are
not nonresidential RYO machines.
PERMIT HOLDER — Any person engaged in the sale or distribution of
tobacco products who applies for and receives a tobacco product sales
§ 400-9A.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9A.3
1:834
permit or any person who is required to apply for a tobacco product sales
permit pursuant to these regulations, or his or her business agent.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind, including, but not limited to, an owner,
operator, manager, proprietor or person in charge of any establishment,
business or retail store.
SCHOOLS — Public or private elementary or secondary schools.
SELF-SERVICE DISPLAY — Any display from which customers may select a
tobacco product, as defined herein, without assistance from an employee or
store personnel.
SMOKE CONSTITUENT — Any chemical or chemical compound in
mainstream or sidestream tobacco smoke that either transfers from any
component of the tobacco product to the smoke or that is formed by the
combustion or heating of tobacco, additives or other component of the
tobacco product.
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Any product containing, made, or derived from
tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether
smoked, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested
by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little
cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; or electronic cigarettes,
electronic cigars, electronic pipes, electronic hookah, liquid nicotine, "eliquids"
or other similar products, regardless of nicotine content, that rely
on vaporization or aerosolization. "Tobacco product" includes any
component or part of a tobacco product. "Tobacco product" does not include
any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug
Administration either as a tobacco use cessation product or for other
medical purposes and which is being marketed and sold or prescribed solely
for the approved purpose.
VENDING MACHINE — Any automated or mechanical self-service device
which, upon insertion of money, tokens or any other form of payment,
dispenses or makes cigarettes or any other tobacco products, as defined
herein.
§ 400-9A.4. Tobacco sales to persons under minimum legal sales
age prohibited.
No person shall sell tobacco products or permit tobacco products, as
defined herein, to be sold to a person under the minimum legal sales
age; or not being the individual's parent or legal guardian, give tobacco
products, as defined herein, to a person under the minimum legal sales
age. The minimum legal sales age in Beverly is 21.
A.
Required signage.
In conformance with and in addition to MGL c. 270, § 7, a copy
of MGL c. 270, § 6 shall be posted conspicuously by the owner or
other person in charge thereof in the shop or other place used to
(1)
B.
§ 400-9A.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9A.4
1:835
§ 400-9A.5. Tobacco product sales permit.
sell tobacco products at retail. The notice shall be provided by the
Massachusetts Department of Public Health and made available
from the Beverly Board of Health. The notice shall be at least 48
square inches and shall be posted conspicuously by the permit
holder in the retail establishment or other place in such a manner
so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the
floor. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products at retail shall conspicuously post
any additional signs required by the Massachusetts Department of
Public Health. The owner or other person in charge of a shop or
other place used to sell hand-rolled cigars must display a warning
about cigar consumption in a sign at least 50 square inches
pursuant to 940 CMR 22.06(2)(e).
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place
used to sell tobacco products, as defined herein, at retail shall
conspicuously post signage provided by the Beverly Board of
Health that discloses current referral information about smoking
cessation.
(2)
The owner or other person in charge of a shop or other place used
to sell tobacco products that rely on vaporization or aerosolization,
as defined herein as "tobacco products," at retail shall
conspicuously post a sign stating that "The sale of tobacco
products, including e-cigarettes, to someone under the minimum
legal sales age of 21 years is prohibited." The notice shall be
no smaller than 8.5 inches by 11 inches and shall be posted
conspicuously in the retail establishment or other place in such a
manner so that it may be readily seen by a person standing at or
approaching the cash register. The notice shall directly face the
purchaser and shall not be obstructed from view or placed at a
height of less than four feet or greater than nine feet from the floor.
(3)
Identification. Each person selling or distributing tobacco products, as
defined herein, shall verify the age of the purchaser by means of a valid
government-issued photographic identification containing the bearer's
date of birth that the purchaser is 21 years old or older. Verification is
required for any person under the age of 27.
C.
All retail sales of tobacco products, as defined herein, must be faceto-
face between the seller and the buyer and occur at the permitted
location.
D.
No person shall sell or otherwise distribute tobacco products, as
defined herein, within the City of Beverly without first obtaining a
tobacco product sales permit issued annually by the Beverly Board of
A.
§ 400-9A.4 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9A.5
1:836
Health. Only owners of establishments with a permanent, nonmobile
location in Beverly are eligible to apply for a permit and sell tobacco
products, as defined herein, at the specified location in Beverly.
As part of the tobacco product sales permit application process, the
applicant will be provided with the Beverly regulation. Each applicant
is required to sign a statement declaring that the applicant has read
said regulation and that the applicant is responsible for instructing any
and all employees who will be responsible for tobacco product sales
regarding federal, state and local laws regarding the sale of tobacco
and this regulation.
B.
Each applicant who sells tobacco products is required to provide proof
of a current tobacco retailer license issued by the Massachusetts
Department of Revenue, when required by state law, before a tobacco
product sales permit can be issued.
C.
A separate permit, displayed conspicuously, is required for each retail
establishment selling tobacco products, as defined herein, the fee for
which shall be determined by the Beverly Board of Health annually.
D.
A tobacco product sales permit is nontransferable. A new owner of
an establishment that sells tobacco products, as defined herein, must
apply for a new permit. No new permit will be issued unless and until
all outstanding penalties incurred by the previous permit holder are
satisfied in full.
E.
Issuance of a tobacco product sales permit shall be conditioned on
an applicant's consent to unannounced, periodic inspections of his/her
retail establishment to ensure compliance with this regulation.
F.
A tobacco product sales permit will not be renewed if the permit holder
has failed to pay all fines issued and the time period to appeal the fines
has expired and/or the permit holder has not satisfied any outstanding
permit suspensions.
G.
Maximum number of tobacco product sales permits.
At any given time, there shall be no more than 44 tobacco product
sales permits issued in Beverly. No permit renewal will be denied
based on the requirements of this subsection, except any permit
holder who has failed to renew his or her permit within 60 days
of expiration will be treated as a first-time permit applicant. New
applicants for permits who are applying at a time when the
maximum number of permits has been issued will be placed on a
waiting list and will be eligible to apply for a permit on a "firstcome,
first-served" basis as issued permits are either not renewed,
revoked, or are returned to the Board of Health.
(1)
Applicants who purchase an existing business that holds a valid
tobacco product sales permit at the time of the sale of said business
must apply within 60 days of such sale for the permit held by
(2)
H.
§ 400-9A.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9A.5
1:837
§ 400-9A.6. Cigar sales.
§ 400-9A.7. Sale of flavored tobacco products prohibited.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
flavored tobacco product, except in adult-only retail tobacco stores.
§ 400-9A.8. Sale of blunt wraps prohibited.
No person or entity shall sell or distribute blunt wraps in Beverly.
§ 400-9A.9. Free distribution and coupon redemption.
the seller if the buyer intends to sell tobacco products, as defined
herein.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed a
single cigar.
A.
No person shall sell or distribute or cause to be sold or distributed any
original factory-wrapped package of two or more cigars, unless such
package is priced for retail sale at $5 or more.
B.
This section shall not apply to:
The sale or distribution of any single cigar having a retail price of
$2.50 or more.
(1)
A person or entity engaged in the business of selling or distributing
cigars for commercial purposes to another person or entity
engaged in the business of selling or distributing cigars for
commercial purposes with the intent to sell or distribute outside
the boundaries of Beverly.
(2)
C.
The Beverly Board of Health may adjust from time to time the amounts
specified in this section to reflect changes in the applicable Consumer
Price Index by amendment of this regulation.
D.
No person shall:
Distribute, or cause to be distributed, any free samples of tobacco
products, as defined herein;
(1)
Accept or redeem, offer to accept or redeem, or cause or hire
any person to accept or redeem or offer to accept or redeem
any coupon that provides any tobacco product, as defined herein,
without charge or for less than the listed or nondiscounted price;
or
(2)
Sell a tobacco product, as defined herein, to consumers through
any multi-pack discounts (e.g., "buy-two-get-one-free") or
otherwise provide or distribute to consumers any tobacco product,
as defined herein, without charge or for less than the listed or
(3)
A.
§ 400-9A.5 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9A.9
1:838
§ 400-9A.10. Out-of-package sales.
§ 400-9A.11. Self-service displays.
All self-service displays of tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited. All humidors, including, but not limited to, walk-in humidors,
must be locked.
§ 400-9A.12. Vending machines.
All vending machines containing tobacco products, as defined herein, are
prohibited.
§ 400-9A.13. Nonresidential roll-your-own machines.
All nonresidential roll-your-own machines are prohibited.
§ 400-9A.14. Sale of tobacco products by health-care institutions
prohibited.
No health-care institution located in Beverly shall sell or cause to be sold
tobacco products, as defined herein. No retail establishment that operates
or has a health-care institution within it, such as a pharmacy, optician/
optometrist or drug store, shall sell or cause to be sold tobacco products, as
defined herein.
nondiscounted price in exchange for the purchase of any other
tobacco product.
Subsection A(2) and (3) shall not apply to products, such as cigarettes,
for which there is a state law prohibiting them from being sold as loss
leaders and for which a minimum retail price is required by state law.
B.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, in any
form other than an original factory-wrapped package is prohibited,
including the repackaging or dispensing of any tobacco product, as
defined herein, for retail sale. No person may sell or cause to be sold
or distribute or cause to be distributed any cigarette package that
contains fewer than 20 cigarettes, including single cigarettes.
A.
A retailer of liquid nicotine containers must comply with the provisions
of 310 CMR 30.000.
B.
All retailers must comply with 940 CMR 21.05, which reads: "It shall be
an unfair or deceptive act or practice for any person to sell or distribute
nicotine in a liquid or gel substance in Massachusetts after March 15,
2016 unless the liquid or gel product is contained in a child-resistant
package that, at a minimum, meets the standard for special packaging
as set forth in 15 U.S.C. §§ 1471 through 1476 and 16 CFR 1700 et.
seq."
C.
§ 400-9A.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9A.15
1:839
§ 400-9A.15. Sale of tobacco products by educational institutions
prohibited.
No educational institution located in Beverly shall sell or cause to be
sold tobacco products, as defined herein. This includes all educational
institutions as well as any retail establishments that operate on the property
of an educational institution.
§ 400-9A.16. Compliance with state regulations.
The sale or distribution of tobacco products, as defined herein, must comply
with those provisions found at 940 CMR 21.00 ("Sale and Distribution of
Cigarettes, Smokeless Tobacco Products, and Electronic Smoking Devices
in Massachusetts").
§ 400-9A.17. Violations and penalties.
It shall be the responsibility of the establishment, permit holder and/or
his or her business agent to ensure compliance with all sections of this
regulation. The violator shall receive:
(1) In the case of a first violation, a fine of $100.
In the case of a second violation within 36 months of the date of
the current violation, a fine of $200 and the tobacco product sales
permit shall be suspended for seven consecutive business days.
(2)
In the case of three violations within a thirty-six-month period,
a fine of $300 and the tobacco product sales permit shall be
suspended for 30 consecutive business days.
(3)
In the case of four or more violations within a thirty-six-month
period, a fine of $300 and the tobacco product sales permit shall be
suspended for 60 consecutive business days.
(4)
A.
Failure to cooperate with inspections pursuant to this regulation shall
result in the suspension of the tobacco product sales permit for 30
consecutive business days.
B.
Failure to abide by the conditions of a tobacco product sales permit
suspension shall constitute a separate violation of this regulation.
Multiple tobacco product sales permit suspensions shall not be served
concurrently.
C.
In addition to the monetary fines set above, any permit holder who
engages in the sale or distribution of tobacco products while his or her
permit is suspended may be subject to the suspension of all Board-of-
Health-issued permits for 30 consecutive business days.
D.
The foregoing fines and penalties in no way limit the Board of Health's
ability to suspend or permanently revoke an establishment's tobacco
product sales permit if the seriousness of the circumstances or events
E.
§ 400-9A.15 BEVERLY CODE § 400-9A.17
1:840
§ 400-9A.18. Noncriminal disposition of violations.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by the
noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D or by
filing a criminal complaint at the appropriate venue.
§ 400-9A.19. Separate violations.
Each day any violation exists shall be deemed to be a separate offense.
§ 400-9A.20. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this regulation shall be by the Beverly Board of Health or
its designated agent(s). Any resident who desires to register a complaint
pursuant to the regulation may do so by contacting the Beverly Board of
Health or its designated agent(s) and the Board shall investigate.
§ 400-9A.21. Severability.
If any provision of this regulation is declared invalid or unenforceable, the
other provisions shall not be affected thereby but shall continue in full force
and effect.
§ 400-9A.22. Effective date.
This regulation shall take effect on October 1, 2017.
underlying any violation warrant such suspension or revocation in the
discretion of the Board.
The Beverly Board of Health shall provide notice of the intent to
suspend or revoke a tobacco product sales permit, which notice shall
contain the reasons therefor and establish a time and date for a
hearing, which date shall be no earlier than seven days after the date
of said notice. The permit holder or its business agent shall have
an opportunity to be heard at such hearing and shall be notified of
the Board of Health's decision and the reasons therefor in writing.
After a hearing, the Beverly Board of Health shall suspend or revoke
the tobacco product sales permit if the Board of Health finds that a
violation of this regulation occurred. For purposes of such suspensions
or revocations, the Board shall make the determination
notwithstanding any separate criminal or noncriminal proceedings
brought in court hereunder or under the Massachusetts General Laws
for the same offense. All tobacco products, as defined herein, shall be
removed from the retail establishment upon suspension or revocation
of the tobacco product sales permit. Failure to remove all tobacco
products, as defined herein, shall constitute a separate violation of this
regulation.
F.
§ 400-9A.17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9A.22
1:841

ARTICLE X
Sun-Tanning Establishments
[Adopted 5-8-1980]
§ 400-10.1. Required equipment.
Sun-tanning establishments shall provide:
§ 400-10.2. Warning signs.
Tanning booths shall have a prominently displayed, easily readable warning
that states:
"Danger-ultraviolet radiation. Follow instructions as with natural sunlight.
Overexposure can cause eye injury and sunburn; repeated exposure may
cause aging of the skin and skin cancer. Medications or cosmetics applied
to the skin may increase your sensitivity to ultraviolet light. Consult a
physician before using lamp if taking any medication or if you believe
yourself sensitive to sunlight. Pregnant women should consult with their
obstetrician."
§ 400-10.3. Goggles.
Each sun-tanning booth shall have, for the patrons' usage, goggles of
sufficient quantity to protect the user's eyes from the direct exposure to the
sunlamp.
§ 400-10.4. Contingency plans for emergencies.
The Board of Health may require the owner or operator of said
establishment to set aside an area to be designated as an emergency aid
station. There may be a trained attendant on duty during all hours that
said activity is in actual operation. The Board of Health may require a
non-pay telephone to be installed in the emergency aid station and first
aid equipment that it deems necessary to ensure the safety of the general
public.
Shields to prevent users from coming in contact with the lamps and
physical aids to keep the user at the proper exposure distance.
A.
More accurate timers to turn off the lamps after no more than 10
minutes.
B.
C. Protection against electrical shocks and fires.
D. Physical aids such as handrails to help prevent falls.
E. Maintenance of the temperature in booths below 100° F.
§ 400-10.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-10.4
1:843

ARTICLE XI
Noise Control
[Adopted 12-11-1986; amended in its entirety 6-20-2018]
§ 400-11.1. Purpose.
Chronic or repeated exposure to excessive noise is detrimental to public
health. The purpose of this regulation is to protect and preserve the health,
safety and welfare of the general public from excessive noise in the City of
Beverly.
§ 400-11.2. Legislative authority.
This regulation is promulgated under the authority granted to the Beverly
Board of Health pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 31, that "[b]oards of health may
make reasonable health regulations."
§ 400-11.3. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following words shall have the following
meanings, unless the context requires otherwise:
A-WEIGHTED SOUND LEVEL — The sound pressure level in decibels as
measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level
so read is designated dB(A).
AMBIENT NOISE LEVEL — The background A-weighted sound level that
is exceeded 90% of the time, measured at a time when comparison with
alleged offensive/excessive noise is to be made.
DECIBEL (dB) — A unit for measuring the volume of sound.
DOMESTIC EQUIPMENT — Electrical, battery or generator powered
equipment and nonpowered equipment and tools intended for use at a
residential property by a homeowner. (Examples include, but are not limited
to, chain saws, log splitters, power saws, drills, hammers, hand saws, and
other home, lawn and garden tools.)
EMERGENCY WORK — Any machinery, vehicle or equipment used, or work
done, employed or performed in an effort to protect, provide or restore safe
conditions related to an emergency.
EXCESSIVE NOISE — A type of air pollution that results from sounds
that cause a nuisance, are or could injure public health, or unreasonably
interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life, property, or the conduct of
business.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, or corporation, and
includes any officer, employee, department, agency or entity, public or
private.
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — Any parcel of real property which is developed
and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, excluding
transient uses such as hotels and motels.
§ 400-11.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11.3
1:845
SOUND LEVEL METER — An instrument for the measurement of sound
levels which meets or exceeds the requirements pertinent for Type SEA
meters in the American National Standards Institute specifications for
sound level meters, S1.4-1971, or the most recent revision thereof.
§ 400-11.4. Sound level limits.
§ 400-11.5. Exemptions.
This regulation shall not apply to sounds emitted during and associated
with:
A noise source will be considered to be violating this regulation if the
source:
Increases the broadband sound level by more than 10 dB(A) above
ambient; or
(1)
Produces a "pure tone" condition - when any octave band center
frequency sound pressure level exceeds the two adjacent center
frequency sound pressure levels by three decibels or more.
(2)
A.
These criteria are measured both at the property line and at the nearest
inhabited residence.
B.
Parades, public gatherings or sporting events which have been
sanctioned by the City of Beverly.
A.
Any sanctioned activities conducted on any park or playground from
sunrise to sunset.
B.
Customary activities conducted on the grounds of any public or private
nursery, elementary, intermediate or secondary school or college.
C.
D. Emergency police, fire and ambulance vehicles.
E. Police, fire, DPS, mosquito control, civil and national defense activity.
All mechanical devices, apparatus or equipment which are utilized to
give relief from inclement weather conditions, including but not limited
to, snow blowers and plows.
F.
Any mechanical device, apparatus or equipment used, related to, or
connected with emergency machinery, vehicle or work, including, but
not limited to, emergency generators.
G.
Servicing of commercial dumpsters, provided said activities take place
between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or a federal
holiday or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday or a
federal holiday. No contractor shall remove dumpster contents prior to
7:00 a.m. nor later than 8:00 p.m. (§ 244-2G).
H.
Domestic equipment, provided said activities take place between 7:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or a federal holiday, or
I.
§ 400-11.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-11.5
1:846
§ 400-11.6. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
§ 400-11.7. Severability.
If any paragraph or provision of this regulation is found to be illegal or
against public policy or unconstitutional, it shall not affect the legality of
any remaining paragraphs or provisions.
§ 400-11.8. Effective date.
This regulation shall be effective as of July 1, 2018.
between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday or a federal
holiday.
Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, grading
or maintenance of real property, provided such activities take place
between 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on any day except Sunday or a federal
holiday, nor at any time on Sunday or a federal holiday.
J.
Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant to, federal law
and federal air regulations.
K.
Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted by
state or federal law.
L.
The provisions of this regulation shall be enforced by the Board of
Health or its agents/staff and other authorized municipal
representatives, including, but not limited to, the police department
responding to complaints and observing the excessive noise.
A.
Whoever violates any provision of this regulation may be penalized by
the noncriminal method of disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D,
or by filing a criminal or civil complaint at the appropriate venue.
B.
§ 400-11.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11.8
1:847

ARTICLE XII
Regulation of Biological Safety
[Adopted effective 1-1-2014]
§ 400-12.1. Purpose.
§ 400-12.2. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BEVERLY BIOSAFETY COMMITTEE or BBC — A committee established by
the Board of Health for the purpose of assisting the Board of Health in
carrying out its responsibilities under this regulation.
BIOLOGICAL RISK GROUP — Equivalent to the risk group for any biological
pathogen as defined in Subsection II-A-1 (Risk Groups) of the latest
amendment of the NIH Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant
DNA Molecules and as specified in the latest edition of Biosafety in
Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories (BMBL). This designation
pertains to the natural risk to human health and the likelihood of
transmission associated with the unaltered form of that biological agent.
BIOSAFETY LEVEL or BSL — Physical containment as defined in Appendix
G-II (Physical Containment Levels) of the latest amendment of the NIH
Guidelines for Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules (published
by the National Institutes of Health, Recombinant DNA Advisory
Committee) and the latest edition of Biosafety in Microbiological and
Biomedical Laboratories (published by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention).
BMBL — The current edition of the Department of Health and Human
Services' Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Publication No. 21-1112,
entitled "Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories."
In order to safeguard the health and welfare of the citizens of the
City of Beverly (the "City"), the City of Beverly Board of Health (the
"Board of Health") hereby promulgates this regulation governing the
use of all regulated biological agents (as defined herein) in the City. The
use of regulated biological agents requiring Biosafety Level 4 (BSL-4)
containment (as defined herein) shall not be permitted in the City of
Beverly.
A.
Unless specifically exempted under this regulation, all research or
manufacturing involving regulated biological agents, as defined below,
in the City shall be undertaken only in strict conformity with the
National Institutes of Health Guidelines for Research ("NIH
Guidelines"), the current edition of the Department of Health and
Human Services' Centers for Disease Control (CDC) publication
entitled "Biosafety in Microbiological and Biomedical Laboratories"
(BMBL), and all other health regulations as the Board of Health may
from time to time promulgate.
B.
§ 400-12.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12.2
1:849
INSTITUTION — An individual person or a group of persons, and/or a
corporation, firm, partnership, association, executor, administrator,
guardian, trustee, agent, organization and any other group acting as a
unit responsible for compliance with the requirements set forth in this
regulation.
INSTITUTIONAL BIOSAFETY COMMITTEE or IBC — A committee
established in accordance with Subsection IV-B-2 (institutional biosafety
committee or IBC) of the NIH Guidelines and any applicable requirements
of this regulation. The IBC shall be the final arbiter within an institution
with regard to the implementation of this regulation, with oversight by the
Board of Health as described herein.
NIH GUIDELINES — The National Institutes of Health Guidelines for
Research Involving Recombinant DNA Molecules published in the Federal
Register of June 1, 1983, and any subsequent federal amendments thereto
adopted by the Recombinant DNA Advisory Committee (RAC) within the
National Institutes of Health (NIH).
REGULATED BIOLOGICAL AGENTS — Any microorganism (including, but
not limited to, bacteria, viruses, fungi, rickettsia or protozoa) or infectious
substance, or any naturally occurring, bioengineered or synthesized
component of any such microorganism or infectious substance that:
§ 400-12.3. Biosafety committee or professional advisory
assistance.
Is identified as a "Recombinant DNA Molecule" in Section I-B
(Definition of Recombinant DNA Molecules) of the most recent revision
of the NIH Guidelines (as defined herein); or
A.
Is classified as a Risk Group 3 or Risk Group 4 Agent in the NIH
Guidelines or the BMBL (as both are defined herein); or
B.
Is identified as a "select agent" by the United States Department of
Health and Human Services (USDHHS) or the United States
Department of Agriculture (USDA), which shall mean any microbial and
toxic agents listed at 42 CFR 73.3, 73.4, 73.5, 73.6, 7 CFR 331.3 and
9 CFR 121.4, and the rulings made by the CDC and the USDA relative
thereto, as such regulations and rulings may be amended from time to
time. However, "select agent" as herein defined shall not include any de
minimus amount of agents or toxins which are excluded from 42 CFR
73.00 et seq.
C.
The Board of Health retains all final responsibility for enforcement of
this regulation. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Board of Health,
whenever the facts and circumstances deem necessary, shall be
authorized to:
Convene a municipal biosafety committee (known as the "Beverly
Biosafety Committee" or "BBC") with three appointed members or
any number of members deemed appropriate by the Board.
(1)
A.
§ 400-12.2 BEVERLY CODE § 400-12.3
1:850
§ 400-12.4. Permit requirements.
Retain assistance from a professional consultant with appropriate
professional and academic experience and training to support
review of applications and required documentation.
(2)
Engage the services of the Beverly Health Department for site
inspection or review of compliance with documentation
requirements.
(3)
Costs incurred by the Board of Health in utilizing any one or
combination of the resources set forth in Subsection A may be assessed
to a BSL-3 permit holder/applicant according to the time required to
inspect facilities and to review documentation for said permit holder/
applicant. This cost assessment is in addition to any established permit
fee(s).
B.
The BBC, if established by the Board of Health as authorized in
Subsection A(1), will serve as an advisory committee to the Board of
Health on general biosafety matters that fall within the provisions of
this regulation. All appointees will be approved by the Board of Health
and will have no direct conflict of interest with companies holding or
requesting a permit under this regulation. All members will be subject
to all ethics requirements and documents required by the City or the
Board of Health. The Board of Health shall retain final authority on all
matters relative to research or manufacturing of regulated biological
agents performed within the City.
C.
Responsibilities of the BBC, if established by the Board of Health, shall
include:
Recommending policies, procedures and criteria to aid in the
implementation of this regulation, including recommendations
related to permit application requirements, reporting requirements
and inspection requirements;
(1)
Reviewing biosafety permit applications and indicating support for
or opposition to all such permit applications;
(2)
Reviewing reports and other required documentation submitted
by institutions subject to this regulation, and providing
recommendations to the Board of Health regarding approval,
where appropriate;
(3)
Carrying out site visits to permitted facilities or facilities
requesting a permit, where appropriate; and
(4)
Performing other functions as may be specified by the Board of
Health, to assist the Board in carrying out its duties under this
regulation.
(5)
D.
§ 400-12.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12.4
1:851
All institutions proposing to use or continue the use of regulated
biological agents at BSL-1, BSL-2 or BSL-3 containment levels must
obtain a permit from the Board of Health before commencing or
continuing said research, manufacturing, or other use of regulated
biological agents and annually thereafter. Institutions receiving such
a permit shall conduct research, manufacturing or other use only as
specifically set out in their permit applications, and supporting
documents filed with such application. The use of regulated biological
agents requiring BSL-4 containment shall not be permitted in the City.
A.
Permit holder's responsibilities.
Each institution seeking permit approval in the City shall certify
and attest to its understanding that it shall:
(a) Conform with the NIH Guidelines.
(b) Conform with the biosafety standards established in the BMBL.
(c) Conform with other conditions set forth in this regulation.
Conform with any special or specific requirements prescribed
by the City as a condition of permit approval.
(d)
Allow access for site inspection of facilities and pertinent
records by the Board of Health or its designees upon
reasonable notice, should it be deemed necessary by the Board
of Health.
(e)
Submit (with permit application and renewal) a copy of all
minutes from IBC meetings held during the previous year.
These minutes should provide sufficient detail to allow the
Board of Health and its staff, members of the BBC, or
professional consultants to understand the risk assessment or
risk assignment process by which the IBC determined that all
work approved by the committee would be conducted safely
at the assigned biosafety level using corresponding safety
practices and any additional special safety practices as
specified by the IBC.
(f)
Submit (with permit application and renewal) a detailed table
of all protocols reviewed and approved by the IBC within the
previous year, including, at a minimum, a listing of all
biological agents utilized (e.g., host cell lines, biological
vectors), any inserted gene sequences that would elevate risk
(e.g., oncogenes), the BSLs assigned after IBC review and the
rationale or guidance document upon which the selected BSL
was based, and the name(s) of the principal investigator(s) who
shall be responsible for each protocol.
(g)
Submit (with permit application and renewal) a protocol for
strain verification of all known human pathogens that are
(h)
(1)
B.
§ 400-12.4 BEVERLY CODE § 400-12.4
1:852
considered to be attenuated or noninfectious approved by the
IBC within the previous year for use within the permitted
facility, if any, or sufficient documentation to demonstrate that
such a screening process has been completed by another
laboratory, in order to ensure the proper characterization of
the virulence, replication competence, and extent of resistance
to therapeutic antibiotics.
Laboratories permitted to operate at BSL-3 containment will
additionally be required to submit a summary of protocols
approved for BSL-3 containment that identifies the specific
regulated biological agents and describes the nature of the
associated research, manufacturing and/or use to be conducted in
the City. This summary may conform to the NIH project registration
format or may follow any other format that provides sufficient
detail to understand the nature and extent of the biological risk
associated with that project. Any IBC approval of a protocol or
experiment that is deemed to require BSL-3 containment must be
reported to the Board of Health within 30 days of that decision.
(2)
Requirement for an institutional biosafety committee.
Institutions seeking such a permit from the Board of Health shall
establish an IBC. The IBC shall be composed as described in the
NIH Guidelines. In addition, in order to ensure that all facilities
engaged in research or manufacturing involving regulated
biological agents are conforming to the NIH Guidelines and the
BMBL, the Board of Health will appoint to each IBC one member,
who shall be the Chairman of the Board of Health or its designee.
In addition, each IBC will also be required to identify a second
noninstitutional member, as required by the NIH Guidelines. The
IBC is required to meet no less than once a year, and all minutes of
the institutional biosafety committee meetings must be forwarded
to the Board of Health or the BBC as instructed.
(1)
A complete roster of all IBC members, including names, home
addresses, phone numbers, e-mail addresses and resumes or
curriculum vitae (CVs), including institutional and community
members, shall be maintained and submitted upon initial
application or within 30 days after submission of a completed
application. An updated roster of IBC members, with resumes or
CVs of new members (community or institutional) appointed to the
IBC since the previous roster submission shall be provided with
IBC minutes and other required annual documentation.
(2)
C.
Permit application requirements. Institutions seeking a permit from the
Board of Health must submit a completed application form obtained
from the Board of Health, accompanied by a nonrefundable permit
application fee, that will include the following information:
(1) Company name and address.
D.
§ 400-12.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12.4
1:853
Name(s) of corporate officer(s) authorized to sign the application
and full contact information for those individuals signing on behalf
of the institution.
(2)
(3) State of incorporation.
Name of the institution's designated official responsible for
compliance with this regulation. This is most often the designated
biosafety officer, as defined in the NIH Guidelines.
(4)
Designation of the appropriate biosafety levels (as defined in this
regulation) for all laboratory areas, which are consistent with the
NIH Guidelines or BMBL for all IBC-approved protocols. This
designation should be reflected in the IBC minutes before work
commences in the permitted facility or, at latest, no more than 30
days after that work commences.
(5)
Copy of a completed biosafety manual. Copies of updated biosafety
manual(s) are to be submitted upon annual permit renewal.
(6)
Floor plans showing laboratory areas. All biosafety containment,
biosafety levels, and designated waste storage areas should be
indicated. Updated floor plans to reflect any changes in assigned
biosafety level or expansion of laboratory areas shall be submitted
upon annual permit renewal.
(7)
An emergency response plan for the purpose of orienting City
representatives, including, but not limited to, the Board of Health,
Fire and Police Departments, to the physical plant and to
procedures to be utilized in the event of an emergency. This
documentation must include a floor plan showing the internal
layout of the facility with specific biological containment and
nonbiological laboratory areas, biological waste storage areas, and
biological waste removal routes clearly indicated. Amendments to
this plan must be submitted as they are incorporated.
(8)
Medical surveillance agreement. This service may be provided
through the institution's internal clinical resources or through an
independent third-party provider. A letter indicating the completion
of a contractual agreement for provision of occupational medicine
and medical surveillance services shall be submitted upon
application and whenever the clinical provider of these services has
changed thereafter.
(9)
Reporting of releases or adverse events. In addition to the
aforementioned requirements, each institution shall provide a written
summary of any incidents or adverse event involving regulated
biological agents that may have resulted in an exposure to a human
pathogen within the facility or in the release of a human pathogen from
the facility through wastewater or direct airborne release or through
improper disposal of potentially contaminated solid waste. This report
shall be sent to the Board of Health as soon as it is feasible, but not
E.
§ 400-12.4 BEVERLY CODE § 400-12.4
1:854
§ 400-12.5. Exemptions.
§ 400-12.6. Violations and penalties.
§ 400-12.7. Procedure for requesting and holding hearing.
Any institution, person or entity aggrieved by the decision of the Board
of Health in connection with the Board of Health's enforcement of this
regulation may request a hearing by filing a written petition with the Board
more than seven days from the date of the incident. Animal bites will be
considered to represent potential human exposures, unless the animal
was known to be free of infection and this can be documented upon
request.
Annual renewal fee. Permits granted by the Board of Health shall be
renewed annually, subject to submission of the annual renewal fee and
required documentation as described in this section. The fee for a
permit granted by the Board of Health or annual renewal thereof shall
be determined by the Board of Health.
F.
For the purposes of this regulation, research or manufacturing will
not include clinical or health-care services or professional analytical
services that directly support clinical or health-care services.
A.
Educational institutions utilizing only commercially available molecular
biology teaching kits that have been designated by the manufacturer
for use at Biosafety Level 1 shall not be required to obtain a permit or
comply with any permit requirements stated herein.
B.
Violation of any provision of this regulation may subject the violator
to a fine of $200 per day. Each day of violation shall constitute a
separate and distinct offense. The Board of Health shall be empowered
to enforce this regulation in any court of competent jurisdiction as well
as the noncriminal method of disposition provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
In addition to a fine, an institution which violates any provisions of
this regulation or for which continued conduct or recombinant DNA
technology or other activity covered under this regulation poses an
immediate threat to the public health or environment may be closed by
the Board of Health.
A.
Any penalty assessed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to
the actual costs, losses, expenses, damages, fees or other assessments
incurred by the City as a result of a violation of this regulation.
B.
Revocation of permit. The Board of Health may revoke a permit if it
determines that the institution has materially failed to comply with
this regulation, or other applicable permit conditions. Unless there is
a threat to human health, safety or the environment, no revocation
shall take place until the institution has been afforded the procedural
requirements set forth in § 400-12.7 of this regulation.
C.
§ 400-12.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12.7
1:855
of Health within 10 days of such action. Upon receipt of such petition, the
Board of Health shall set a time and place for such hearing and not later
than 30 days upon written request, and shall so inform the petitioner, and
the institution if other than the petitioner, in writing. At the hearing, the
petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to show cause
why the Board of Health's decision was inconsistent with the requirements
set forth in this regulation. The Board of Health, upon presentation of all
evidence, shall issue a final decision in connection with the relief sought.
§ 400-12.8. Appeals.
Any institution or person aggrieved by the final decision of the Board of
Health shall seek relief from any court of competent jurisdiction located in
the County of Essex, Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
§ 400-12.9. Confidentiality of information.
§ 400-12.10. Variances.
Information submitted to the Board of Health may be subject to the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts' Public Records Law. Any institution
seeking to qualify any particular document or submission as
confidential shall:
(1) Submit said information as "Confidential Information"; and
Provide the applicable statutory citation warranting the exclusion
of such information from disclosure under the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts' Public Records Law (MGL Chapter 66).
(2)
A.
Notwithstanding this designation by the institution, any documents that
are referred to during a public meeting may be subject to public review.
The exchange of information pertaining to compliance with the permit
may take place in an executive session, if the information shared in a
public meeting would pose a security threat or compromise proprietary
information.
B.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of this
regulation with respect to any particular case when the Board of Health
finds the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and the
applicant has provided that the same degree of protection required
by this regulation can be achieved without strict application of the
particular provision.
A.
Every request for a variance shall be submitted in writing to the Board
of Health and shall set forth the specific variance sought and the
reasons therefor.
B.
The Board of Health may establish additional conditions in connection
with the granting of a variance where the interest of public health so
requires.
C.
§ 400-12.7 BEVERLY CODE § 400-12.10
1:856
No determination with respect to a variance shall be binding unless
issued in writing by the Board of Health. Copies of said determination
shall be available to the public at all reasonable hours in the office of
the Board of Health.
D.
The institution shall post any variance granted by the Board of Health
at the permitted facilities in a prominent location for the duration that
the variance is in effect.
E.
§ 400-12.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12.10
1:857

ARTICLE XIII
Fees
[Last amended effective 1-1-2014]
§ 400-13.1. Fee schedule. [Amended 5-2-2016 by Ord. No. 088]
Type of Permit Fee Notes
Food Service Establishment
By seating:
0 to 50 $125
51 to 150 $150
151 to 499 $175
500 and up $175 + $1/seat
By type:
Catering, per year $150
Catering, by function $25
Frozen dessert (each
location)
$50
Residential kitchen:
Initial $150
Renewal $100
Mobile food/pushcart $125
Temporary food:
1 day $75
2 to 3 days $150
4 to 7 days $175
Not to exceed 13 days $175 + $15/day
Milk, each location $10
By square foot:
0 to 1,000 limited retail $125
1,001 to 3,500 small retail $150
3,501 to 7,500
convenience
$200
7,501 to 9,999
supermarket
$350
10,000 and up warehouse $350 + $0.50/
square foot
Plan review $125
Title 5/Sewage Disposal
§ 400-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13.1
1:859
Type of Permit Fee Notes
Soil evaluation:
New construction $225
Upgrade $125
Additional day $50/hour
Sewage system plan review:
New construction $250
Repair $200
Permits/Licenses:
Disposal works installer's
permit
$100
Septic system construction
permit (new)
$175
Septic system construction
permit (repair)
$125
Septage haulers (per vehicle) $100
Recreational camps for children
Permit to operate $100
Public/Semi-public swimming pools
Permits:
Annual pool permit $150
Seasonal pool permit $150
Special purpose/wading pool $25
Plan review $200 See § 400-13.2A,
Consultant fee.
Funeral
Funeral directors $75
Burial permits $25 Issued by City Clerk
Permits to move bodies $25
Biological Safety
Annual permit $250 See § 400-13.2A,
Consultant fee.
Massage
Establishment:
Initial $250 Transferred to state;
potential for some
types
§ 400-13.1 BEVERLY CODE § 400-13.1
1:860
Type of Permit Fee Notes
Renewal $150 Transferred to state;
potential for some
types
Individual:
Initial $100 Transferred to state;
potential for some
types
Tanning facilities
Establishment:
Initial $200
Renewal $125
Keeping of livestock
Permit:
Initial $150
Renewal $50
Commercial stable $100 + $25/stall
Change of occupancy
Occupancy permit $50
Second reinspection $25 - $100 See § 400-13.2E,
Reinspection fee.
Body art
Establishment:
Initial $400
Renewal $300
Individual:
Initial $125
Renewal $100
Tobacco control
Tobacco sales permit $75
Beaches
Permit $100
§ 400-13.2. Administration.
Consultant fee. As provided by MGL c. 44, § 53G, the Beverly Board
of Health may impose reasonable fees for the employment of outside
consultants, engaged by the Board of Health, for review of any
application submitted to the Board of Health pursuant to the
requirements of the Subdivision Control Law, the State Environmental
A.
§ 400-13.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13.2
1:861
Code, or any other state or municipal statute, bylaw or regulation, as
they may be amended or enacted from time to time.
Operation without permit. Any activity found to be in operation without
the appropriate permit/license for said activity may be charged double
the listed amount for said permit/license.
B.
Late fee. Fees outstanding over 30 days will result in the suspension of
operation and/or legal action. When and if the permit is reinstated, a
late fee of 100% of the full year's fee will be assessed in addition to the
yearly fee as established.
C.
Pro-rated fee. Applicants granted a permit after June 30 and before
November 1 of a calendar year will have their permit fee reduced
by 50%. Applicants granted a permit after November 1 and prior to
December 31 will be charged full price, but the permit will be valid until
December 31 of the following year.
D.
Reinspection fee.
Where applicable, the Board may assess reinspection fees for the
second and subsequent reinspections at the following rates:
(a) Second reinspection: $25.
(b) Third reinspection: $50.
(c) Fourth and subsequent reinspections: $100.
(1)
These reinspection fees are additional to other administrative and/
or legal action within the Board's authority.
(2)
This provision may be implemented by the noncriminal method of
disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D.
(3)
E.
§ 400-13.2 BEVERLY CODE § 400-13.2
1:862
ARTICLE XIV
(Reserved)
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-13.2
1:863

ARTICLE XV
Soil/Solid Fill Regulation
[Adopted 3-9-1989]
§ 400-15.1. Site assignment required.
Nothing contained in these regulations shall relieve any requirements
pursuant to MGL c. 111, § 150A 1/2, that a valid site assignment be obtained
from the Beverly Board of Health prior to the introduction of soil/solid fill
upon any tract, parcel or lot.
§ 400-15.2. Declaration of policy.
§ 400-15.3. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOARD OF HEALTH — The appropriate and legally designated health
authority of the City of Beverly having the usual powers and duties of the
Board of Health of a city or town, or its authorized agent or representative.
CONTAMINANT — Any substance which by its presence creates or has the
potential to create hazardous material.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Material including, but not limited to, any
materials, in whatever form, which, because of its quantity, concentration,
chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive
characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance
or substances, constitutes a present or potential threat to human health,
safety, welfare, or to the environment, when improperly stored, treated,
transported, disposed of, used, or otherwise managed.
The purpose of this regulation is to control the disposal of soil/solid fill
introduced from locations both within and without the City of Beverly
and require, when necessary, the analysis of the soil/solid fill for
chemical contamination. The disposal of cured blacktops, cement, and
other similar materials in nondesignated sites will be included within
the scope of this regulation.
A.
Past determinations of whether or not soil/solid fill was environmentally
suitable were based on a visual and olfactory judgment by the inspector.
However, as a result of these rules and regulations analytical testing
can be required. The purpose of analytical testing is bifold. First and
foremost, by initial testing of soil/solid fill for chemical contaminants,
any soil/solid fill which is contaminated will be screened out from use.
This screening avoids the filling and then the removal of such soil/
solid fill once in place. Secondly, the party responsible for supplying the
contaminated soil/solid fill will be advised of its statutory requirements
in accordance with Chapter 21E of the Massachusetts General Laws.
B.
§ 400-15.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-15.3
1:865
RESPONSIBLE PERSON(S) — Any person(s) having management control
over the entity or employer. In the case of a corporation, the responsible
person(s) shall be executive officers of the corporation and any other
managing agent of such corporation. In the case of sole proprietorships or a
partnerships, the responsible person(s) shall be the owners or partners and
any other managing agent of such sole proprietorship or partnership.
SAMPLING — The collection of data or measurements to obtain
representative samples of a tract, parcel or lot of interest in order to make
an inference about said tracts, parcel or lot.
SOIL — The unconsolidated mineral material or the immediate surface of
the earth that serves as a natural medium for the growth of land plants.
SOLID FILL — Mortar, bricks, gravel, stone, cured blacktop, cement,
dredge material, products of excavation, or any other material not capable
of decomposition and shall specifically exclude rubbish, garbage, bulky
waste, special wastes, or waste as defined in the regulation of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts (regulations for the disposal of solid
waste by sanitary landfill).
§ 400-15.4. Analysis required.
Effective March 15, 1989, the Board of Health may require that any
material used within the City of Beverly as fill or introduced into
the soil be subject to analysis to verify that no hazardous material is
included within the soil/solid fill. Such analysis shall be conducted by
a Massachusetts certified laboratory approved by the Board of Health,
using state-of-the-art analytical techniques, and provide a written
report of the results of the sample tested to the Board of Health.
However, if an out-of-state laboratory is used, said laboratory must be
certified through that state's certification agency.
A.
To implement this regulation, the Board of Health will review all
applications for building permits as potential location for soil/solid fill
delivered from an off-site source. The determination of whether an
on-site visit will be necessary will be based on this application and
any other further information the Board of Health may request of
the applicant. All building permit holders will be given a letter from
the Board of Health notifying the responsible party of the soil testing
guidelines and any further requirements made by the Board of Health.
Any applicant for a building permit shall notify the Board of Health as
to whether the work will or has the potential for the introduction of
soil/solid fill to the work site, and if soil/solid fill is to be introduced,
and if the applicant is not the owner of the site, such owner, agent, or
responsible party and the Board of Health shall be notified in writing
by the applicant. Such notification to the Board of Health and owner,
agent, or responsible party shall contain information as the Board of
Health may require until completion of the project. Any modification to
the building permit shall require a notification to be sent to the Board of
Health so the Board may determine if such modifications are applicable
to Article XV of the Board of Health rules and regulations. The Board
B.
§ 400-15.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-15.4
1:866
§ 400-15.5. Fees.
The Board of Health may charge a fee for services rendered, not to exceed
any actual costs incurred by the City of Beverly. However, the minimum
fees, if assessed, will be $50 and the maximum fee will be $500. This fee
schedule will be binding upon all parties concerned.
§ 400-15.6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail to comply with an order issued pursuant to this
regulation, himself, or by his servant or agent, or as a servant or agent of
any other person or any firm or corporation, which violates provisions of the
soil/solid fill regulation, made under authority of MGL c. 111 § 31, shall be
punished by fine of not more than $500. Each day's failure to comply with
an order shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 400-15.7. Appeals.
Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision by the Board of Health
may appeal said ruling in any court of competent jurisdiction within the
commonwealth.
§ 400-15.8. Severability.
If any portion of this regulation shall be declared invalid for any reason
whatsoever, such invalidity shall not affect any other portion of this
regulation, all of which shall remain in full force and effect, and to this
end the provisions of this regulation are hereby declared severable,
notwithstanding any provisions that may be in conflict with Massachusetts
General Laws, the revised ordinances of the City of Beverly, and the Charter
of the City of Beverly.
§ 400-15.9. Liability.
Neither the City of Beverly nor the Board of Health, by adoption of these
regulations, assumes any responsibility for the compliance at the site of
applicable hazardous waste laws or other Massachusetts environmental
of Health may recommend the revocation of such building permit in the
event of noncompliance with any provision of this regulation.
The Board of Health may require quality assurance sampling, soil
boring, and/or additional analytical sampling and testing at any site.
The expense of these additional samples shall be incurred by the
building permit applicant. In addition, a written chain of custody of
any samples taken shall be submitted by the certified laboratory to the
Board of Health.
C.
The cost of the laboratory analysis is to be incurred by the property
owner, agent, or other responsible party. However, the City of Beverly
will not be responsible for payment of any analytical costs.
D.
§ 400-15.4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-15.9
1:867
protection regulations. Such interpretation of compliance is no longer
defendable and legally sound since the enactment of Chapter 21E of the
Massachusetts General Laws.
§ 400-15.9 BEVERLY CODE § 400-15.9
1:868
ARTICLE XVI
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 6-11-1981]
§ 400-16.1. Materials; location; construction.
§ 400-16.2. Specifications.
Individual sewage disposal systems must conform with the following
specifications:
All sewage disposal works hereafter constructed, altered, installed or
repaired shall be of approved material and design. No part of the actual
leaching works shall be located less than:
(1) Twenty feet from any dwelling.
(2) Ten feet from the line of any street, court or passageway.
(3) Ten feet from an adjoining lot line.
One hundred feet from a private water supply or suction line
therefrom.
(4)
One hundred feet from any known source of water supply or
tributory thereto.
(5)
Fifty feet for a single dwelling or 100 feet for a multiple dwelling
from an open stream or watercourse, not tributary to a public
water supply.
(6)
Ten feet from and 18 inches below any drinking water supply line
under pressure.
(7)
A.
Wherever possible, the leaching works should not be located under
paved areas or ledge which has fissures and from which a water supply
is obtained. No part of the actual leaching works should extend into
groundwater during any season of the year.
B.
Construction, alteration, installing and repair of such works shall be
permitted at a time when the ground is frozen, provided such ground is
frozen less than 12 inches in depth and all frozen material is removed
and replaced with unfrozen, clean material. Work in the leaching area
shall be complete and inspected in one day. A permit for such work shall
be obtained from the Board of Health.
C.
The site of the works should permit gravity flow from the dwelling
and one from which surface drainage is away from all sources of
water supply. All portions of the system shall be constructed of durable
material and with watertight joints, if located within 100 feet of a well
or suction line from a well; 100 feet from any water supply or its
tributaries; 10 feet from any drinking water supply line under pressure.
D.
§ 400-16.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-16.2
1:869
House sewer. The house sewer must be at least four inches in diameter,
cast-iron pipe with properly caulked lead joints, laid with a minimum
grade of 1% (1/8 inch per foot) but preferably 2% (1/4 inch per foot is
desirable).
A.
Septic tank. All septic tanks hereafter installed shall have an effective
capacity of at least 1,000 gallons and shall be constructed of concrete;
the inlet and outlet shall be provided with a sanitary tee or equivalent
baffle, extending 10 inches below the flow line on the inlet and 15
inches on the outlet. Access openings (manholes or cleanouts) shall be
provided over each inlet and outlet, and each tank shall be provided
with at least one manhole (with a minimum diameter of 16 inches
to permit maintenance and cleaning out of the tank). The top of the
manholes and cleanouts shall be made watertight and be extended
where necessary to between 12 inches to 18 inches below the ground
surface.
B.
Distribution box. A distribution box of approved material and design,
with an access cover, must be provided for each installation and shall
be installed in a manner satisfactory to the Board of Health. The inverts
of all outlets shall be level and shall be at least two inches below the
invert of the inlet.
C.
Absorption field. The size of the absorption field required shall be
determined on the basis of the number of bedrooms and facilities
provided in the dwelling and the results of percolation tests conducted.
Disposal fields for residential construction shall have a minimum area
of 800 square feet.
Absorption field design for leaching trenches.
(a) Minimum number of lines: two.
(b) Maximum length of individual lines: 100 feet.
(c) Uniform trench width throughout field: 18 inches to 36 inches.
(d) Minimum depth of pipe cover: 18 inches.
(e) Grade of pipe lines: two inches to four inches per 100 feet.
(f) Minimum stone fill under pipe: 12 inches.
The large stone in the trench from the top to 12 inches below
the pipe shall be washed gravel, crushed stone or clean bankrun
gravel, between 3/4 inch and 2 1/2 inches in size, and shall
be free of fines, dust or clay.
(g)
The two-inch layer of stone on top of the large stone, to support
the backfill, shall be clean gravel or crushed stone 1/8 inch to
1/4 inch in size.
(h)
(i) The ends of all leaching pipes should be sealed with concrete.
(1)
D.
§ 400-16.2 BEVERLY CODE § 400-16.2
1:870
§ 400-16.3. Percolation tests and groundwater elevation
determination.
The absorption area for trenches shall not be less than 800 square
feet.
(2)
Modification of absorption field design for seepage beds. The size
of the absorption field shall be determined in the same manner as
that for leaching trenches, but no less than 800 square feet.
The bottom of the bed and distribution tile shall have a
relatively level grade.
(a)
Lines shall be spaced not less than six feet on center and
greater than three feet from the bed sidewall.
(b)
Where more than one bed is used, there shall be a minimum of
six feet of undisturbed earth between adjacent beds.
(c)
(3)
Percolation tests and maximum groundwater elevation determinations
shall be restricted to the period from December 1 of a given year
through April 30 of the following year; and said tests and
determinations shall not be allowed during said period if the total
precipitation for the 30 days preceding the day of the test is less
than 75% of the average precipitation for that period. The data used
in determining the current precipitation and the total average
precipitation period shall be obtained from the ten-year averages of a
given month as compiled by the National Weather Service in Boston,
Massachusetts.
A.
Soil with a percolation rate of over 20 minutes per inch shall be
considered unsuitable for the subsurface disposal of sewage.
B.
At least three percolation tests shall be performed at the site of each
disposal area; two in the primary disposal field area and one in the area
proposed for possible expansion of the system.
C.
An initial percolation test over 10 minutes per inch shall require a
minimum four-hour soaking period and overnight swelling of the test
hole as detailed in Title 5 of the State Environmental Code. In cases
where colloidal material is suspected within the subsoil, a soak-andswell
period shall be required by the Board of Health regardless of the
initial percolation rate.
D.
Construction in fill. In the location of an individual sewage disposal
system in an area requiring fill, such filling shall be done as required in
Title 5 of the State Environmental Code before a permit shall be issued.
E.
§ 400-16.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-16.4
1:871
§ 400-16.4. Location.
Wherever possible, all individual sewage disposal works shall be located
in the front of lots to facilitate connection to the public sewage collection
system.
§ 400-16.5. Submission of plans and test results.
Detailed engineering plans and test results shall be submitted in duplicate
with the application provided by the Board of Health to construct or alter
during initial construction of an individual disposal system.
A plot plan with a scale of one inch equals 20 feet shall be submitted
and shall include a locus plan in sufficient detail to permit later location
of the property with reference to town streets, adjacent lots by address,
and any waterways within 200 feet from the lot line.
A.
The plot plan shall indicate the location and size of the structure,
boundary lines, perimeter and subsurface drains, retaining walls,
driveways, existing topography of the land before excavation or
preparation of the site, proposed final grading contours in the
immediate area of the leaching system and accurate ties from the
property bounds or other fixed references for the later location of
the components of the system. The plot plan shall also indicate the
permanent benchmark used for establishment of topography and shall
show the location of two prominent, temporary, local benchmarks for
use during construction and inspection. Locations of percolation test
pits, leaching field, septic tank, and proposed water supply lines shall
be given relative to these benchmarks. This benchmark or system of
benchmarks shall be used at the time of groundwater testing and
percolation tests. Under no circumstances should groundwater or
percolation test data be referenced to existing ground grade at the time
of testing. Final plans must include triangulation fix from corners of the
house to the distribution box and septic tank.
B.
Elevations at all significant parts of the system shall be shown on
the plot plan, beginning with the elevation of the sewer pipe leaving
the building and continuing through the system and designating the
elevation of the bottom of the bed, stone, distribution pipes and
distribution box. No deviation from the planned elevations of the system
shall be permitted, and the use of the sill of a building not yet
constructed as a reference point shall not be permitted.
C.
The primary disposal area constitutes that area constructed therein
for immediate use. The plot plan shall designate an area equal in
size to the primary absorption field and which meets all the distance
requirements required of the primary field, This area must be free of
prohibitive features, including, but not limited to, ledge, driveways,
and outbuildings. An interceptor drain may be required for efficient
operation of this expansion field.
D.
§ 400-16.4 BEVERLY CODE § 400-16.5
1:872
§ 400-16.6. Licensing of cleaners; fee.
All persons engaged in the practice of pumping out individual sewage
disposal installations shall be licensed annually by the Board of Health. The
license fee is $10, and the license shall expire in December of the same year
issued, but may be renewed annually by the Board of Health.
§ 400-16.7. Maintenance.
Every owner, occupant or agent of premises in which there is any private
sewer, drain, privy vault, septic tank, or cesspool shall keep the same in
Percolation tests and groundwater elevation determinations shall be
observed by an authorized agent or member of the Board of Health.
Results of these tests must be filed with the Board within 60 days
either as part of an application for a disposal field construction permit
or as a separate report, certified by a sanitary engineer or registered
sanitarian, and including test date and signatures of the performing
parties. Test results will be considered invalid two years after the date
of performance, but the Board may require further tests if the water
table or drainage patterns in the area may have been influenced by
local drainage, other changes, or building activities.
E.
No deviation from the approved plot plan shall be enacted without prior
notice to and approval of the Board of Health. Any deviation enacted
without approval of the Board shall be subject to revocation of permit.
Any licensed installer who deviates from the approved plan may be
subject to revocation of his/her installer's permit.
F.
Drainage. An individual disposal system shall be located in such a
manner that no surface water will accumulate, and interceptors or
other provisions shall be required to minimize the flow of water over
the disposal field and also from the disposal field into any area of
the neighboring land. In any instance where interceptor drains are
required to remove surface water and/or lower the water table, such
drain shall be installed and the area then retested for water level and
percolation rates.
G.
The person responsible for the construction, repair or alteration of
an individual sewage disposal system shall have such construction
inspected by the Board of Health before such construction is covered,
and such covering shall thereafter be applied in a manner approved by
the Board of Health. This final inspection shall include determination of
proper grades and elevations within the system in accordance with the
approved plan.
H.
All trees and stumps must be removed within a distance of 10 feet from
the perimeter of the primary bed.
I.
The issuance of the certificate of compliance shall not be construed as
a guarantee that the system will function satisfactorily.
J.
§ 400-16.5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-16.7
1:873
a sanitary condition and shall have every privy vault, septic and cesspool
emptied and cleaned when necessary or at such times as ordered by the
Board of Health. No privy vault, septic tank or cesspool shall be emptied
except by such parties licensed by the Board of Health. If the owner, or
occupant fails to comply with such order, the Board of Health may cause the
nuisance source of filth or cause of sickness to be removed, and all expenses
incurred thereby shall be paid by the person who caused or permitted the
same if he has had actual notice from the Board of Health of the existence
thereof.
§ 400-16.8. Nuisances.
Whenever a water closet, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or drain becomes
offensive or obstructed, the owner, agent or occupant of the premises shall
cause same to be cleaned or otherwise corrected.
§ 400-16.9. Inspection and approval of removal equipment.
No person shall use equipment to remove or transport the contents of
privies, cesspools, or septic tanks or other offensive substances unless such
equipment has first been inspected and approved by the Board of Health.
§ 400-16.10. Variances.
Inspection. Equipment shall be inspected annually and shall carry a
certificate of approval issued by the Board of Health.
A.
Hydrostatic test. A certificate of a hydrostatic test made within three
years shall be presented at the time of inspection of equipment.
B.
Mobile tank. Mobile tanks shall be securely mounted on trucks. They
shall be watertight and provided with a leakproof cover and tight
discharge valves.
C.
Venting of mobile tanks. Mobile tanks shall be provided with a vent
constructed in a manner that will permit the escape of gas, but not the
liquid contents of the tank.
D.
Hose. Suction or pressure hose shall be in good repair. A minimum of
50 feet of hose shall be provided.
E.
Pumps. Pumps shall be maintained in a condition that will prevent the
leakage of sewage. A portable pump shall be provided for transporting
sewage more than 50 feet. An automatic pump or an internal alarm
shut-off shall be provided to prevent overfilling.
F.
Vehicles. Vehicles shall be painted a light color and shall be maintained
in a clean condition.
G.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provisions of
these regulations (except where expressly forbidden by Title 5 of the
A.
§ 400-16.7 BEVERLY CODE § 400-16.10
1:874
§ 400-16.11. Severability.
If any paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this regulation shall
be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, the decision shall not affect
any other portion of these rules and regulations, which shall remain in
full force and effect; and to this end the provisions of these rules and
regulations are hereby declared severable.
Environmental Code) with respect to any particular case when, in its
opinion:
(1) The enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice; and
The applicant has proved that the same degree of environmental
protection required under the regulation can be achieved without
strict application of the particular provision.
(2)
Any variance granted by the Board of Health shall be in writing and
conform to the various regulations in Chapters 20 and 21 of Title 5 of
the Environmental Code of the commonwealth.
B.
§ 400-16.10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-16.11
1:875

ARTICLE XVII
Child-Care Centers
[Adopted 7-20-1951]
§ 400-17.1. Definition.
In these rules and regulations, "child-care center" shall mean and include
any agency giving day care to children, as defined in MGL c. 111, § 58, as
amended.
§ 400-17.2. Authority.
These rules and regulations are made, and may be revised or changed, in
accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 111, § 60, as amended.
§ 400-17.3. License required.
No person shall conduct a child-care center without obtaining a license from
the Board of Health. An application therefor shall be in a form prescribed
by the Board, and it and any statement attached to it shall contain such
information as may be required by the Board.
§ 400-17.4. Housing and equipment.
Building. Any building used for a child-care center shall comply with all
the local licensing, fire, safety and health regulations.
A.
Room. No room located above the second floor and no basement rooms,
the floor of which is more than three feet below the surface levels,
shall be used for or as a part of a child-care center. All room used for
that purpose shall be dry, well ventilated, and warm; any wooden floors
shall be free from splinters, and the construction shall be such that
they may be easily cleaned. Every room shall have a window area for
natural lighting equal to not less than 20% of the floor area. Adequate
protection from accident hazards due to stairways, windows, doors,
radiators and pipes shall be provided.
B.
Toilets. Not less than one toilet, of suitable height for the age of the
children cared for, shall be provided for each 15 children or fraction
thereof. Toilets shall be provided with "split seats" and shall be
maintained in a sanitary condition at all times.
C.
Washbowls. Not less than one washbowl of suitable height furnished
with hot and cold running water shall be provided for each 15 children
or fraction thereof. Individual or single-use toilet articles, such as
towels, wash cloths or combs, shall be provided.
D.
Furniture. Tables and chairs, free from splinters and sharp edges,
sturdy and of suitable height, shall be provided in sufficient number.
Sufficient cots and blankets shall be available for each child remaining
E.
§ 400-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-17.4
1:877
§ 400-17.5. Health requirements.
§ 400-17.6. Personnel qualifications; records.
over four hours in the center. A telephone shall be available in the
center.
Indoor and outdoor space. There shall be at least 35 square feet of floor
space for each child, exclusive of halls, washrooms and kitchens. Ample
outdoor playground space shall be provided.
F.
Chest examination. All personnel, except students doing temporary
practice teaching, serving a child-care center shall have a chest X-ray
before employment and on alternate years thereafter. A record of each
such chest examination, signed by a registered physician, shall be on
file at the Board of Health at all times.
A.
Physical examination of children. Within six months prior to admission
to the child-care center, each child shall have a physical examination
by a registered physician, a written report of which shall be filed at the
center.
B.
Immunization. Each child admitted to a child-care center should have
been vaccinated against smallpox and immunized against diphtheria,
whooping cough and tetanus.
C.
Daily inspection and examination. A daily inspection of each child to
detect any communicable disease shall be made by a competent trained
adult. The Board of Health nurse shall make an inspection of each childcare
center from time to time as directed by the Board of Health. Upon
detection of a child who is ill, or suspected of having a communicable
disease, such child shall be immediately isolated in a suitable manner
and place until he may be removed to his home. Provision for
emergency first aid shall be available in each child center.
D.
Transportation. Vehicles used to transport children to and from school
shall not be overcrowded.
E.
Service of liquids. Water, milk, fruit juices or any other liquid served to
children at the center shall be dispensed in the original container with
straws, or in individual single-use containers.
F.
The person in charge of a child-care center shall have had training or
experience in the care and education of children of pre-school age that
is satisfactory to the Board of Health. Each such center shall provide
properly trained persons to children cared for in the following ratio: one
to 15 or fraction thereof.
A.
Records should be kept to meet administrative requirements and to
ensure knowledge of the needs of children. These should include: full
names, home addresses, work addresses and telephones of parents;
full name and date of birth of child; date when child entered and left
B.
§ 400-17.4 BEVERLY CODE § 400-17.6
1:878
center; attendance records with reasons for absence; records of all
physical examinations and other matters relating to the child's health;
and records of progress of the child.
§ 400-17.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-17.6
1:879

ARTICLE XVIII
Control of Atmospheric Pollution
[Adopted 4-12-1965]
§ 400-18.1. Definitions.
When used in these regulations or in communications, notices or orders
relative thereto, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them below:
AEROSOL — A system of solid or liquid particles dispersed in gas.
AIR CONTAMINATION — Includes but is not limited to dust, fly ash, gas,
fumes, mist, odor, smoke, vapor, pollen, microorganisms, radioactive
materials, ionizing radiation, any combination thereof, or any decay or
reaction product thereof.
AIR CONTAMINATION SOURCE — Any source at, from, or by reason of
which any air contaminant is emitted directly or indirectly into the ambient
air space.
AMBIENT AIR SPACE — The unconfined space occupied by the atmosphere
above the geographical area of Beverly.
ATMOSPHERIC POLLUTION — The presence in the ambient air space of
one or more air contaminants or combinations thereof in such quantities
and of such duration as to:
CHART — The Ringelmann's scale for grading the density of smoke, as
published by the United States Bureau of Mines, and as referred to in the
Bureau of Mines Information Circular No. 6888 or superseding publication
or any smoke inspection guide complying with the design and test
specifications of and used in accordance with, the provisions of Title 42,
Chapter 1, Subchapter F, Part 75, of the Federal Register, or the
"Smokescope" manufactured by the Mine Safety Appliances Company,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.
DUST — Finely divided solid matter formed, usually, from larger masses by
mechanical attrition or other applied energy.
EMISSION — A discharge or release to the ambient air space of any air
contaminant.
FLY ASH — The aerosolized solid component of burned or partially burned
fuels. "Soot" and "cinders" are included within the meaning of the term "fly
ash," and "fuels" means all materials which can undergo combustion.
A. Cause a nuisance;
Be injurious or be, on the basis of current information, potentially
injurious to human or animal life, to vegetation, or to property; or
B.
Unreasonably interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life and
property or the conduct of business.
C.
§ 400-18.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-18.1
1:881
FUME — A solid or liquid aerosol resulting from chemical reaction or from
the condensation of vapors produced during combustion, distillation, or
sublimation.
GAS — That state of matter having neither independent shape nor
independent volume but tending to expand and diffuse infinitely.
HAND-FIRED FURNACE — Any furnace in which fresh fuel is manually
thrown or placed directly in the hot fuel bed, but does not mean stoves or
other equipment used for the cooking of food, or fireplaces.
INCINERATOR — Any article, machine, equipment, contrivance, structure
or part of a structure used primarily to dispose of combustible wastes by
burning.
IONIZING RADIATION — Any electromagnetic or particulate radiation
capable of producing ions, directly or indirectly, in its passage through
matter.
MIST — A liquid aerosol formed by the condensation of liquid vapor or
formed by the atomization of liquids.
ODOR — That property of gaseous, liquid, or solid materials that elicits a
physiologic response by the human sense of smell.
OPEN BURNING — Burning under such conditions that the products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air space, and are not
conducted thereto through a stack, chimney, duct or pipe. Open burning
includes underground mid smoldering (underground) fires.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency, political
subdivision, or any other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
POLLEN — The fertilizing element of vegetation.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Any material (solid, liquid, or gaseous) which
spontaneously emits ionizing radiation.
REFUSE — Includes all of the types of solid waste material of a municipality.
It is made up of rubbish, garbage, ashes, street sweepings, demolition
wastes, abandoned vehicles and any other useless, unwanted or discarded
solid material. Domestic refuse is rubbish and garbage. The term "rubbish"
refers to paper, cartons, boxes, barrels, wood, excelsior, tree branches,
yard trimmings, furniture, bedding, dunnage, tin cans, crockery, dirt, glass
and minerals originating in households, restaurants, institutions, stores and
markets. "Garbage" is the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
preparation, cooking, and serving of food.
SMOKE — A visible aerosol, usually carbonaceous, resulting from
incomplete combustion.
VAPOR — The gaseous state of certain substances that can exist in
equilibrium with the solid or liquid state under standard conditions.
§ 400-18.1 BEVERLY CODE § 400-18.2
1:882
§ 400-18.2. Emissions prohibited.
No person or persons owning, leasing, or controlling the operation of any
air contamination source or sources shall willfully, negligently, or through
failure to provide necessary equipment or facilities or to take necessary
precautions permit the emission from said air contamination source or
sources of such quantities of air contaminants which will cause, by
themselves or in conjunction with other air contaminants, a condition of
atmospheric pollution.
§ 400-18.3. Open burning.
§ 400-18.4. Incinerators.
No person shall dispose of refuse by burning in any incinerator not
approved for such purpose by the Board of Health.
§ 400-18.5. Fuels.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow or permit open burning, except as
provided in this regulation.
A.
Subsection A shall not apply to open burning for cooking purposes; to
the operation of devices using an open flame, such as tar kettles, blow
torches, welding torches, portable heaters, and other flame-making
devices; nor to the setting and maintenance, by contractors and
tradesmen, of miscellaneous small fires necessary in such activities as
street paving work installation or repair of sewer, water, telephone,
electric, or gas mains and services.
B.
Trees, stumps, brush, logs, leaves, or waste lumber may be burned
in the open by any person, provided, such person has obtained from
the forest warden, pursuant to Section 13, Chapter 48, General Laws,
a properly executed permit therefore, and provided further that such
permit has been approved by the Board of Health.
C.
On and after July 1, 1965, the only solid fuels to be used or consumed in
any hand-fired furnace, by any person, except as provided below, shall
be coke, anthracite coal, or bituminous coal having a volatile matter
content of not greater than 23% by weight on a dry basis.
The use of wood and/or paper during the building of a new fire shall
be permitted.
(1)
Other solid fuels may be used or consumed in hand-fired furnaces,
provided the prior written approval of the Board of Health is
obtained and provided that the use thereof does not result in
violation of any other provision of these regulations.
(2)
A.
On and after July 1, 1965, any person selling bituminous coal, as
defined by the U.S. Bureau of Mines, for use or consumption in Beverly
B.
§ 400-18.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-18.5
1:883
§ 400-18.6. Emission of smoke.
No person shall cause, suffer, allow, or permit the emission from any air
contamination source of smoke the shade, density, or appearance of which
is:
shall certify in writing to the buyer the volatile matter content of said
coal.
The sampling and analysis of fuels shall be in accordance with the
most recent, applicable method or methods published by the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
C.
A. Equal to or greater than No. 3 on the Chart; or
Equal to or greater than No. 2 on the Chart for a period or aggregate
periods of time greater than six minutes in any one hour.
B.
§ 400-18.5 BEVERLY CODE § 400-18.6
1:884
ARTICLE XIX
Body Art Establishments and Practitioners
[Adopted as amended April 2008]
§ 400-19.1. Findings and purpose.
Body art is becoming prevalent and popular throughout the commonwealth.
Knowledge and practice of universal precautions, sanitation, personal
hygiene, sterilization and aftercare requirements on the part of the
practitioner should be demonstrated to prevent the transmission of disease
or injury to the client and/or practitioner. Therefore, the Board of Health
of the City of Beverly passes these rules and regulations for the practice of
body art in the City of Beverly as part of its mission to protect the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
§ 400-19.2. Authority.
These regulations are promulgated under the authority granted to the
Board of Health under MGL c. 111, § 31.
§ 400-19.3. Definitions.
As used in this regulation, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AFTERCARE — Written instructions given to the client, specific to the body
art procedure(s) rendered, about caring for the body art and surrounding
area, including information about when to seek medical treatment, if
necessary.
APPLICANT — Any person who applies to the Board of Health for either a
body art establishment permit or practitioner permit.
AUTOCLAVE — An apparatus for sterilization utilizing steam pressure at a
specific temperature over a period of time.
AUTOCLAVING — A process which results in the destruction of all forms of
microbial life, including highly resistant spores, by the use of an autoclave
for a minimum of 30 minutes at 20 pounds of pressure (PSI) at a
temperature of 270° F.
BLOODBORNE PATHOGENS STANDARD — OSHA guidelines contained
in 29 CFR 1910.1030, entitled "Occupational Exposure to Bloodborne
Pathogens."
BOARD OF HEALTH or BOARD — The Board of Health that has jurisdiction
in the community in which a body art establishment is located, including the
board or officer having like powers and duties in towns where there is no
Board of Health.
BODY ART — The practice of physical body adornment by permitted
establishments and practitioners using, but not limited to, the following
techniques: body piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, branding, and
scarification. This definition does not include practices that are considered
§ 400-19.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.3
1:885
medical procedures by the Board of Registration in Medicine, such as
implants under the skin, which procedures are prohibited.
BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT or ESTABLISHMENT — A location, place, or
business that has been granted a permit by the Board, whether public or
private, where the practices of body art are performed, whether or not for
profit.
BODY ART PRACTITIONER or PRACTITIONER — A specifically identified
individual who has been granted a permit by the Board to perform body art
in an establishment that has been granted a permit by the Board.
BODY PIERCING — Puncturing or penetrating the skin of a client with
presterilized single-use needles and the insertion of presterilized jewelry or
other adornment into the opening. This definition excludes piercing of the
earlobe with a presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp system manufactured
exclusively for ear piercing.
BRAIDING — The cutting of strips of skin of a person, which strips are then
to be intertwined with one another and placed onto such person so as to
cause or allow the incised and interwoven strips of skin to heal in such
intertwined condition.
BRANDING — Inducing a pattern of scar tissue by use of a heated material
(usually metal) to the skin, making a serious burn, which eventually
becomes a scar.
CLEANING AREA — The area in a body art establishment used in the
sterilization, sanitation or other cleaning of instruments or other equipment
used for the practice of body art.
CLIENT — A member of the public who requests a body art procedure at a
body art establishment.
CONTAMINATED WASTE — Waste as defined in 105 CMR 480.000, Storage
and Disposal of Infectious or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological
Waste, State Sanitary Code Chapter VIII and/or 29 CFR Part 1910.1030.
This includes any liquid or semi-liquid blood or other potentially infectious
material; contaminated items that would release blood or other potentially
infectious material in a liquid or semi-liquid state if compressed; items on
which there is dried blood or other potentially infectious material and which
are capable of releasing these materials during handling; sharps and any
wastes containing blood or other potentially infectious materials.
COSMETIC TATTOOING — Also known as "permanent cosmetics,"
"micropigment implantation" or "dermal pigmentation," the implantation of
permanent pigment around the eyes, lips and cheeks of the face and hair
imitation.
DISINFECTANT — A product registered as a disinfectant by the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
DISINFECTION — The destruction of disease-causing microorganisms on
inanimate objects or surfaces, thereby rendering these objects safe for use
or handling.
§ 400-19.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.3
1:886
EAR PIERCING — The puncturing of the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system following the manufacturer's
instructions.
EQUIPMENT — All machinery, including fixtures, containers, vessels, tools,
devices, implements, furniture, display and storage areas, sinks, and all
other apparatus and appurtenances used in connection with the operation
of a body art establishment.
EXPOSURE — An event whereby there is an eye, mouth or other mucus
membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with the blood or bodily
fluids of another person or contact of an eye, mouth or other mucous
membrane, nonintact skin or parenteral contact with other potentially
infectious matter.
HAND SINK — A lavatory equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure, used solely for washing hands, arms, or other portions of the body.
HOT WATER — Water that attains and maintains a temperature of 110° F.
to 130° F.
INSTRUMENTS USED FOR BODY ART — Hand pieces, needles, needle
bars, and other instruments that may come in contact with a client's body
or may be exposed to bodily fluids during any body art procedure.
INVASIVE — Entry into the client's body, either by incision or insertion of
any instruments into or through the skin or mucosa, or by any other means
intended to puncture, break, or otherwise compromise the skin or mucosa.
JEWELRY — Any ornament inserted into a newly pierced area, which must
be made of surgical-implant-grade stainless steel; solid 14k or 18k white
or yellow gold, niobium, titanium, or platinum; or a dense, low-porosity
plastic, which is free of nicks, scratches, or irregular surfaces and has been
properly sterilized prior to use.
LIGHT-COLORED — A light reflectance value of 70% or greater.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
MOBILE BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — Any trailer, truck, car, van,
camper or other motorized or nonmotorized vehicle, a shed, tent, movable
structure, bar, home or other facility wherein, or concert, fair, party or other
event whereat, one desires to or actually does conduct body art procedures.
OPERATOR — Any person who individually, or jointly or severally with
others, owns or controls an establishment, but is not a body art practitioner.
PERMIT — Board approval in writing to either 1) operate a body art
establishment or 2) operate as a body art practitioner within a body art
establishment. Board approval shall be granted solely for the practice of
body art pursuant to these regulations. Said permit is exclusive of the
establishment's compliance with other licensing or permitting requirements
that may exist within the Board's jurisdiction.
PERSON — An individual, any form of business or social organization
or any other nongovernmental legal entity, including but not limited to
§ 400-19.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.3
1:887
corporations, partnerships, limited-liability companies, associations, trusts
or unincorporated organizations.
PHYSICIAN — An individual licensed as a qualified physician by the Board
of Registration in Medicine pursuant to MGL c. 112, § 2.
PROCEDURE SURFACE — Any surface of an inanimate object that contacts
the client's unclothed body during a body art procedure, skin preparation of
the area adjacent to and including the body art procedure, or any associated
work area which may require sanitizing.
SANITARY — Clean and free of agents of infection or disease.
SANITIZE — The application of a USEPA-registered sanitizer on a cleaned
surface in accordance with the label instructions.
SCARIFICATION — Altering skin texture by cutting the skin and controlling
the body's healing process in order to produce wounds, which result in
permanently raised wheals or bumps known as "keloids."
SHARPS — Any object, sterile or contaminated, that may intentionally or
accidentally cut or penetrate the skin or mucosa, including, but not limited
to, needle devices, lancets, scalpel blades, razor blades, and broken glass.
SHARPS CONTAINER — A puncture-resistant, leakproof container that can
be closed for handling, storage, transportation, and disposal and that is
labeled with the International Biohazard Symbol.
SINGLE-USE ITEMS — Products or items that are intended for one-time,
one-person use and are disposed of after use on each client, including, but
not limited to, cotton swabs or balls, tissues or paper products, paper or
plastic cups, gauze and sanitary coverings, razors, piercing needles, scalpel
blades, stencils, ink cups, and protective gloves.
STERILIZE — The use of a physical or chemical procedure to destroy all
microbial life, including highly resistant bacterial endospores.
TATTOO — The indelible mark, figure or decorative design introduced by
insertion of dyes or pigments into or under the subcutaneous portion of the
skin.
TATTOOING — Any method of placing ink or other pigment into or under
the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or any other instrument used to
puncture the skin, resulting in permanent coloration of the skin or mucosa.
This term includes all forms of cosmetic tattooing.
TEMPORARY BODY ART ESTABLISHMENT — The same as "mobile body
art establishment.'
THREE-DIMENSIONAL (3D) BODY ART OR BEADING OR IMPLANTATION
— The form of body art consisting of or requiring the placement, injection
or insertion of an object, device or other thing made of matter such as steel,
titanium, rubber, latex, plastic, glass or other inert materials, beneath the
surface of the skin of a person. This term does not include body piercing.
ULTRASONIC CLEANING UNIT — A unit approved by the Board, physically
large enough to fully submerge instruments in liquid, which removes all
§ 400-19.3 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.3
1:888
foreign matter from the instruments by means of high-frequency oscillations
transmitted through the contained liquid.
UNIVERSAL PRECAUTIONS — A set of guidelines and controls, published
by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), as "Guidelines
for Prevention of Transmission of Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV)
and Hepatitis B Virus (HBV) to Health-Care and Public-Safety Workers"
in Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report (MMWR), June 23, 1989, Vol.
38, No. S-6, and as "Recommendations for Preventing Transmission of
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Hepatitis B Virus to Patients During
Exposure-Prone Invasive Procedures" in MMWR, July 12, 1991, Vol. 40,
No. RR-8. This method of infection control requires the employer and the
employee to assume that all human blood and specified human body fluids
are infectious for HIV, HBV, and other blood pathogens. Precautions include
hand washing; gloving; personal protective equipment; injury prevention;
and proper handling and disposal of needles, other sharp instruments, and
blood- and body-fluid-contaminated products.
§ 400-19.4. Exemptions.
§ 400-19.5. Restrictions.
Physicians licensed in accordance with MGL c. 112, § 2, who perform
body art procedures as part of patient treatment are exempt from these
regulations.
A.
Individuals who pierce only the lobe of the ear with a presterilized
single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system are exempt from these
regulations.
B.
No tattooing, piercing of genitalia, branding or scarification shall be
performed on a person under the age of 18.
A.
Body piercing, other than piercing the genitalia, may be performed on
a person under the age of 18, provided that the person is accompanied
by a properly identified parent, legal custodial parent or legal guardian
who has signed a form consenting to such procedure. "Properly
identified" shall mean a valid photo identification of the adult and a
birth certificate of the minor.
B.
C. No body art shall be performed upon an animal.
The following body piercings are hereby prohibited: piercing of the
uvula; piercing of the tracheal area; piercing of the neck; piercing of
the ankle; piercing between the ribs or vertebrae; piercing of the web
area of the hand or foot; piercing of the lingual frenulum (tongue web);
piercing of the clitoris; any form of chest or deep muscle piercings,
excluding the nipple; piercing of the anus; piercing of an eyelid,
whether top or bottom; piercing of the gums; piercing or skewering
of a testicle; so called "deep" piercing of the penis, meaning piercing
through the shaft of the penis, or "transpenis" piercing in any area
from the corona glandis to the pubic bone; so called "deep" piercing
D.
§ 400-19.3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.5
1:889
§ 400-19.6. Operation of body art establishments.
Unless otherwise ordered or approved by the Board, each body art
establishment shall be constructed, operated and maintained to meet the
following minimum requirements:
of the scrotum, meaning piercing through the scrotum, or "transcrotal"
piercing; so called "deep" piercing of the vagina.
The following practices hereby prohibited unless performed by a
medical doctor licensed by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts:
tongue splitting; braiding; three-dimensional/beading/implementation;
tooth filing/fracturing/removal/tattooing; cartilage modification;
amputation; genital modification; introduction of saline or other liquids.
E.
Physical plant.
Walls, floors, ceilings, and procedure surfaces shall be smooth,
durable, free of open holes or cracks, light-colored, washable, and
in good repair. Walls, floors, and ceilings shall be maintained in
a clean condition. All procedure surfaces, including client chairs/
benches, shall be of such construction as to be easily cleaned and
sanitized after each client.
(1)
Solid partitions or walls extending from floor to ceiling shall
separate the establishment's space from any other room used for
human habitation, any food establishment or room where food is
prepared, any hair salon, any retail sales, or any other such activity
that may cause potential contamination of work surfaces.
(2)
The establishment shall take all measures necessary to protect
against the presence or breeding of insects, vermin, and rodents
within the establishment.
(3)
Each operator area shall have a minimum of 45 square feet of
floor space for each practitioner. Each establishment shall have an
area that may be screened from public view for clients requesting
privacy. Multiple body art stations shall be separated by a divider
or partition at a minimum.
(4)
The establishment shall be well-ventilated and provided with an
artificial light source equivalent to at least 20 footcandles three
feet off the floor, except that at least 100 footcandles shall be
provided at the level where the body art procedure is being
performed, where instruments and sharps are assembled and all
cleaning areas.
(5)
All electrical outlets in operator areas and cleaning areas shall be
equipped with approved ground fault (GFCI) protected receptacles.
(6)
A separate, readily accessible hand sink with hot and cold running
water under pressure, preferably equipped with wrist- or foot-
(7)
A.
§ 400-19.5 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.6
1:890
operated controls and supplied with liquid soap, and disposable
paper towels stored in fixed dispensers shall be readily accessible
within the establishment. Each operator area shall have a hand
sink.
There shall be a sharps container in each operator area and each
cleaning area.
(8)
There shall be a minimum of one toilet room containing a toilet
and sink. The toilet room shall be provided with toilet paper, liquid
hand soap and paper towels stored in a fixed dispenser. A body art
establishment permanently located within a retail shopping center,
or similar setting housing multiple operations within one enclosed
structure having shared entrance and exit points, shall not be
required to provide a separate toilet room within such body art
establishment if Board-approved toilet facilities are located in the
retail shopping center within 300 feet of the body art establishment
so as to be readily accessible to any client or practitioner.
(9)
The public water supply entering a body art establishment shall
be protected by a testable, reduced pressure backflow preventer
installed in accordance with 142 CMR 248, as amended from time
to time.
(10)
At least one covered, foot-operated waste receptacle shall be
provided in each operator area and each toilet room. Receptacles
in the operator area shall be emptied daily. Solid waste shall be
stored in covered, leakproof, rodent-resistant containers and shall
be removed from the premises at least weekly.
(11)
At least one janitorial sink shall be provided in each body art
establishment for use in cleaning the establishment and proper
disposal of noncontaminated liquid wastes in accordance with all
applicable federal, state and local laws. Said sink shall be of
adequate size equipped with hot and cold running water under
pressure and permit the cleaning of the establishment and any
equipment used for cleaning.
(12)
All instruments and supplies shall be stored in clean, dry, and
covered containers. Containers shall be kept in a secure area
specifically dedicated to the storage of all instruments and
supplies.
(13)
The establishment shall have a cleaning area. Every cleaning area
shall have an area for the placement of an autoclave or other
sterilization unit located or positioned a minimum of 36 inches from
the required ultrasonic cleaning unit.
(14)
The establishment shall have a customer waiting area, exclusive
and separate from any workstation, instrument storage area,
cleaning area or any other area in the body art establishment used
for body art activity.
(15)
§ 400-19.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.6
1:891
No animals of any kind shall be allowed in a body art establishment,
except service animals used by persons with disabilities (e.g.,
Seeing Eye dogs). Fish aquariums shall be allowed in waiting
rooms and nonprocedural areas.
(16)
Smoking, eating, or drinking is prohibited in the area where body
art is performed, with the exception of nonalcoholic fluids being
offered to a client during or after a body art procedure.
(17)
Requirements for single-use items, including inks, dyes and pigments.
Single-use items shall not be used on more than one client for
any reason. After use, all single-use sharps shall be immediately
disposed of in approved sharps containers pursuant to 105 CMR
480.000.
(1)
All products applied to the skin, such as but not limited to body
art stencils, applicators, gauze and razors, shall be single-use and
disposable.
(2)
(3) Hollow-bore needles or needles with cannula shall not be reused.
All inks, dyes, pigments, solid-core needles, and equipment shall be
specifically manufactured for performing body art procedures and
shall be used according to manufacturer's instructions.
(4)
Inks, dyes or pigments may be mixed and may only be diluted
with water from an approved potable source. Immediately before
a tattoo is applied, the quantity of the dye to be used shall be
transferred from the dye bottle and placed into single-use paper
cups or plastic cups. Upon completion of the tattoo, these singleuse
cups or caps and their contents shall be discarded.
(5)
B.
Sanitation and sterilization measures and procedures.
All nondisposable instruments used for body art, including all
reusable solid-core needles, pins and stylets, shall be cleaned
thoroughly after each use by scrubbing with an appropriate soap
or disinfectant solution and hot water (to remove blood and tissue
residue), and shall be placed in an ultrasonic unit sold for cleaning
purposes under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
and operated in accordance with manufacturer's instructions.
(1)
After being cleaned, all nondisposable instruments used for body
art shall be packed individually in sterilizer packs and subsequently
sterilized in a steam autoclave sold for medical sterilization
purposes under approval of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.
All sterilizer packs shall contain either a sterilizer indicator or
internal temperature indicator. Sterilizer packs must be dated with
an expiration date not to exceed six months.
(2)
The autoclave shall be used, cleaned, and maintained according
to manufacturer's instruction. A copy of the manufacturer's
(3)
C.
§ 400-19.6 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.6
1:892
recommended procedures for the operation of the autoclave must
be available for inspection by the Board. Autoclaves shall be
located away from workstations or areas frequented by the public.
Each holder of a permit to operate a body art establishment shall
demonstrate that the autoclave used is capable of attaining
sterilization by monthly spore destruction tests. These tests shall
be verified through an independent laboratory. The permit shall not
be issued or renewed until documentation of the autoclave's ability
to destroy spores is received by the Board. These test records shall
be retained by the operator for a period of three years and made
available to the Board upon request.
(4)
All instruments used for body art procedures shall remain stored
in sterile packages until just prior to the performance of a body
art procedure. After sterilization, the instruments used in body art
procedures shall be stored in a dry, clean cabinet or other tightly
covered container reserved for the storage of such instruments.
(5)
Sterile instruments may not be used if the package has been
breached or after the expiration date without first repackaging and
resterilizing.
(6)
If the body art establishment uses only single-use, disposable
instruments and products, and uses sterile supplies, an autoclave
shall not be required.
(7)
When assembling instruments used for body art procedures, the
operator shall wear disposable medical gloves and use medically
recognized sterile techniques to ensure that the instruments and
gloves are not contaminated.
(8)
Reusable cloth items shall be mechanically washed with detergent
and mechanically dried after each use. The cloth items shall be
stored in a dry, clean environment until used. Should such items
become contaminated directly or indirectly with bodily fluids, the
items shall be washed in accordance with standards applicable to
hospitals and medical care facilities, at a temperature of 160° F. or
a temperature of 120° F. with the use of chlorine disinfectant.
(9)
Posting requirements. The following shall be prominently displayed:
A disclosure statement, a model of which shall be available from
the Board. A disclosure statement shall also be given to each client,
advising him/her of the risks and possible consequences of body art
procedures.
(1)
The name, address and phone number of the Beverly Board of
Health.
(2)
(3) An emergency plan, including:
D.
§ 400-19.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.6
1:893
A plan for the purpose of contacting police, fire or emergency
medical services in the event of an emergency;
(a)
A telephone in good working order shall be easily available
and accessible to all employees and clients during all hours of
operation; and
(b)
A sign at or adjacent to the telephone indicating the correct
emergency telephone numbers.
(c)
An occupancy and use permit as issued by the local building
official.
(4)
(5) A current establishment permit.
(6) Each practitioner's permit.
Establishment recordkeeping.
The establishment shall maintain the following records in a secure
place for a minimum of three years, and such records shall be made
available to the Board upon request:
Establishment information, which shall include:
[1] Establishment name.
[2] Hours of operation.
[3] Owner's name and address.
A complete description of all body art procedures
performed.
[4]
An inventory of all instruments and body jewelry, all
sharps, and all inks used for any and all body art
procedures, including names of manufacturers and serial
or lot numbers, if applicable. Invoices or packing slips
shall satisfy this requirement.
[5]
A material safety data sheet, when available, for each ink
and dye used by the establishment.
[6]
[7] Copies of waste hauler manifests.
[8] Copies of commercial biological monitoring tests.
[9] Exposure Incident report (kept permanently).
[10]A copy of these regulations.
(a)
Employee information, which shall include:
[1] Full legal names and exact duties;
[2] Date of birth;
(b)
(1)
E.
§ 400-19.6 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.6
1:894
§ 400-19.7. Standards of practice.
Practitioners are required to comply with the following minimum health
standards:
[3] Home address;
[4] Home and work phone numbers;
[5] Identification photograph;
[6] Dates of employment;
Hepatitis B vaccination status or declination notification;
and
[7]
[8] Training records.
Client information, which shall include the following. Client
information shall be kept confidential at all times.
[1] Name;
[2] Age and valid photo identification;
[3] Address of the client;
[4] Date of the procedure;
[5] Name of the practitioner who performed the procedure(s);
Description of procedure(s) performed and the location on
the body;
[6]
[7] A signed consent form as specified by § 400-19.7D(2); and
If the client is a person under the age of 18, proof of
parental or guardian identification, presence and consent,
including a copy of the photographic identification of the
parent or guardian.
[8]
(c)
(d) Exposure control plan.
Each establishment shall create, update, and comply with an
exposure control plan. The plan shall be submitted to the Board for
review so as to meet all of the requirements of OSHA regulations,
to include, but not limited to, 29 CFR 1910.1030, OSHA Bloodborne
Pathogens Standards, et seq., as amended from time to time. A
copy of the plan shall be maintained at the body art establishment
at all times and shall be made available to the Board upon request.
(2)
No person shall establish or operate a mobile or temporary body art
establishment.
F.
§ 400-19.6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.7
1:895
A practitioner shall perform all body art procedures in accordance with
Universal Precautions set forth by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
A.
A practitioner shall refuse service to any person who may be under the
influence of alcohol or drugs.
B.
Practitioners who use ear-piercing systems must conform to the
manufacturer's directions for use, and to applicable U.S. Food and Drug
Administration requirements. No practitioner shall use an ear-piercing
system on any part of the client's body other than the lobe of the ear.
C.
Health history and client informed consent. Prior to performing a body
art procedure on a client, the practitioner shall:
Inform the client, verbally and in writing, that the following health
conditions may increase health risks associated with receiving a
body art procedure:
(a) History of diabetes;
(b) History of hemophilia (bleeding);
History of skin diseases, skin lesions, or skin sensitivities to
soaps, disinfectants, etc.;
(c)
History of allergies or adverse reactions to pigments, dyes, or
other sensitivities;
(d)
(e) History of epilepsy, seizures, fainting, or narcolepsy;
Use of medications such as anticoagulants, which thin the
blood and/or interfere with blood clotting; and
(f)
(g) Any other conditions such as hepatitis or HIV.
(1)
Require that the client sign a form confirming that the above
information was provided, that the client does not have a condition
that prevents them from receiving body art, that the client consents
to the performance of the body art procedure and that the client
has been given the aftercare instructions as required by Subsection
K of this section.
(2)
D.
A practitioner shall maintain the highest degree of personal cleanliness,
conform to best standard hygienic practices, and wear clean clothes
when performing body art procedures. Before performing body art
procedures, the practitioner must thoroughly wash his/her hands in
hot running water with liquid soap, then rinse hands and dry with
disposable paper towels. This shall be done as often as necessary to
remove contaminants.
E.
In performing body art procedures, a practitioner shall wear disposable
single-use gloves. Gloves shall be changed if they become pierced, torn,
or otherwise contaminated by contact with any unclean surfaces or
F.
§ 400-19.7 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.7
1:896
objects or by contact with a third person. The gloves shall be discarded,
at a minimum, after the completion of each procedure on an individual
client, and hands shall be washed in accordance with Subsection E
before the next set of gloves is put on. Under no circumstances shall
a single pair of gloves be used on more than one person. The use of
disposable single-use gloves does not preclude or substitute for handwashing
procedures as part of a good personal hygiene program.
The skin of the practitioner shall be free of rash or infection. No
practitioner affected with boils, infected wounds, open sores, abrasions,
weeping dermatological lesions or acute respiratory infection shall
work in any area of a body art establishment in any capacity in which
there is a likelihood that that person could contaminate body art
equipment, supplies, or working surfaces with body substances or
pathogenic organisms.
G.
Any item or instrument used for body art that is contaminated during
the procedure shall be discarded and replaced immediately with a
new disposable item or a new sterilized instrument or item before the
procedure resumes.
H.
Preparation and care of a client's skin area must comply with the
following:
Any skin or mucosa surface to receive a body art procedure shall
be free of rash or any visible infection.
(1)
Before a body art procedure is performed, the immediate skin area
and the areas of skin surrounding where body art procedure is to
be placed shall be washed with soap and water or an approved
surgical skin preparation. If shaving is necessary, single-use
disposable razors or safety razors with single-service blades shall
be used. Blades shall be discarded after each use, and reusable
holders shall be cleaned and autoclaved after use. Following
shaving, the skin and surrounding area shall be washed with soap
and water. The washing pad shall be discarded after a single use.
(2)
In the event of bleeding, all products used to stop the bleeding
or to absorb blood shall be single-use and discarded immediately
after use in appropriate covered containers and disposed of in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000.
(3)
I.
Petroleum jellies, soaps, and other products used in the application of
stencils shall be dispensed and applied on the area to receive a body
art procedure with sterile gauze or other sterile applicator to prevent
contamination of the original container and its contents. The applicator
or gauze shall be used once and then discarded.
J.
The practitioner shall provide each client with verbal and written
instructions on the aftercare of the body art site.
(1) The written instructions shall advise the client:
K.
§ 400-19.7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.7
1:897
§ 400-19.8. Exposure incident reports.
On the proper cleansing of the area which received the body
art;
(a)
To consult a health care provider for:
Unexpected redness, tenderness or swelling at the site of
the body art procedure;
[1]
[2] Any rash;
Unexpected drainage at or from the site of the body art
procedure; or
[3]
[4] A fever within 24 hours of the body art procedure; and
(b)
(c) Of the address, and phone number of the establishment.
A copy shall be provided to the client. A model set of aftercare
instructions shall be made available by the Board.
(2)
Contaminated waste shall be stored, treated and disposed in
accordance with 105 CMR 480.000, Storage and Disposal of Infectious
or Physically Dangerous Medical or Biological Waster, State Sanitary
Code Chapter VIII.
L.
An exposure incident report shall be completed by the involved or
knowledgeable body art practitioner by the close of the business day
during which an exposure has or might have taken place for every
exposure incident occurring in the conduct of any body art activity.
A.
Each exposure incident report shall contain:
A copy of the application and consent form for body art activity
completed by any client or minor client involved in the exposure
incident;
(1)
A full description of the exposure incident, including the portion of
the body involved therein;
(2)
(3) Instrument(s) or other equipment implicated;
A copy of body art practitioner license of the involved body art
practitioner;
(4)
(5) Date and time of exposure;
A copy of any medical history released to the body art
establishment or body art practitioner; and
(6)
Information regarding any recommendation to refer to a physician
or waiver to consult a physician by persons involved.
(7)
B.
§ 400-19.7 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.9
1:898
§ 400-19.9. Injury and/or complication reports.
§ 400-19.10. Complaints.
§ 400-19.11. Application for body art establishment permit.
A written report of any injury, infection complication or disease as
a result of a body art procedure, or complaint of injury, infection
complication or disease, shall be forwarded by the operator to the
Board which issued the permit, with a copy to the injured client within
five working days of its occurrence or knowledge thereof.
A.
The report shall include:
(1) The name of the affected client.
(2) The name and location of the body art establishment involved.
(3) The nature of the injury, infection complication or disease.
The name and address of the affected client's health-care provider,
if any.
(4)
(5) Any other information considered relevant to the situation.
B.
The Board shall investigate complaints received about an
establishment's or practitioner's practices or acts which may violate
any provision of the Board's regulations.
A.
If the Board finds that an investigation is not required because the
alleged act or practice is not in violation of the Board's regulations,
then the Board shall notify the complainant of this finding and the
reasons on which it is based.
B.
If the Board finds that an investigation is required because the alleged
act or practice may be in violation of the Board's regulations, the Board
shall investigate; and if a finding is made that the act or practice
is in violation of the Board's regulations, then the Board shall apply
whatever enforcement action is appropriate to remedy the situation and
shall notify the complainant of its action in this manner.
C.
No person may operate a body art establishment except with a valid
permit from the Board.
A.
Applications for a permit shall be made on forms prescribed by and
available from the Board. An applicant shall submit all information
required by the form and accompanying instructions. The term
"application" as used herein shall include the original and renewal
applications.
B.
An establishment permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and for
no longer than one year unless revoked sooner by the Board.
C.
§ 400-19.9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.11
1:899
§ 400-19.12. Application for body art practitioner permit.
The Board shall require that the applicant provide, at a minimum, the
following information in order to be issued an establishment permit:
Name, address, and telephone number of:
(a) The body art establishment;
(b) The operator of the establishment; and
(c) The body art practitioner(s) working at the establishment;
(1)
The manufacturer, model number, model year, and serial number,
where applicable, of the autoclave used in the establishment;
(2)
A signed and dated acknowledgement that the applicant has
received, read and understood the requirements of the Board's
body art regulations;
(3)
A drawing of the floor plan of the proposed establishment, to scale,
for a plan review by the Board, as part of the permit application
process;
(4)
(5) An exposure report plan; and
(6) Such additional information as the Board may reasonably require.
D.
A permit for a body art establishment shall not be transferable from one
place or person to another.
E.
No person shall practice body art or perform any body art procedure
without first obtaining a practitioner permit from the Board. The Board
shall set a reasonable fee for such permits.
A.
B. A practitioner shall be a minimum of 18 years of age.
A practitioner permit shall be valid from the date of issuance and shall
expire no later than one year from the date of issuance unless revoked
sooner by the Board.
C.
The application for a practitioner permit shall include:
(1) Name;
(2) Date of birth;
(3) Residence address;
(4) Mailing address;
(5) Phone number;
(6) Place(s) of employment as a practitioner; and
(7) Training and/or experience as set out in Subsection E below.
D.
§ 400-19.11 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.12
1:900
Practitioner training and experience.
In reviewing an application for a practitioner permit, the Board
may consider experience, training and/or certification acquired in
other states that regulate body art.
(1)
Training courses.
Training for all practitioners shall be approved by the Board
and, at a minimum, shall include the following:
Bloodborne pathogen training program (or equivalent)
which includes infectious disease control; waste disposal;
hand-washing techniques; sterilization equipment
operation and methods; and sanitization, disinfection and
sterilization methods and techniques; and
[1]
Current certification in first aid and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation (CPR).
[2]
(a)
Examples of courses approved by the Board include
"Preventing Disease Transmission" (American Red Cross) and
"Bloodborne Pathogen Training" (OSHA). Training/Courses
provided by professional body art organizations or associations
or by equipment manufacturers may also be submitted to the
Board for approval.
(b)
The applicant for a body piercing practitioner permit shall
provide documentation, acceptable to the Board, that s/he
completed a course on anatomy and physiology with a grade
of C or better at a college accredited by the New England
Association of Schools and Colleges, or comparable accrediting
entity. This course must include instruction on the system of
the integumentary system (skin).
(c)
The applicant for a tattoo, branding or scarification
practitioner permit shall provide documentation, acceptable
to the Board, that s/he completed a course on anatomy and
physiology with a grade of C or better at a college accredited
by the New England Association of Schools and Colleges, or
comparable accrediting entity. This course must include
instruction on the system of the integumentary system (skin).
Such other course or program as the Board shall deem
appropriate and acceptable may be substituted for the
anatomy course.
(d)
The applicant for all practitioner permits shall submit evidence
satisfactory to the Board of at least two years of actual
experience in the practice of performing body art activities of
the kind for which the applicant seeks a body art practitioner
permit to perform, whether such experience was obtained
within or outside of the commonwealth.
(e)
(2)
E.
§ 400-19.12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.12
1:901
§ 400-19.13. Grounds for suspension, denial, revocation, or refusal
to renew permit.
A practitioner's permit shall be conditioned upon continued compliance
with all applicable provisions of these rules and regulations.
F.
The Board may suspend a permit, deny a permit, revoke a permit or
refuse to renew a permit on the following grounds, each of which, in
and of itself, shall constitute full and adequate grounds for suspension,
denial, revocation or refusal to renew:
Any actions which would indicate that the health or safety of the
public would be at risk;
(1)
Fraud, deceit or misrepresentation in obtaining a permit, or its
renewal;
(2)
Criminal conduct which the Board determines to be of such a
nature as to render the establishment, practitioner or applicant
unfit to practice body art as evidenced by criminal proceedings
resulting in a conviction, guilty plea, or plea of nolo contendere or
an admission of sufficient facts;
(3)
Any present or past violation of the Board's regulations governing
the practice of body art;
(4)
Practicing body art while the ability to practice is impaired by
alcohol, drugs, physical disability or mental instability;
(5)
Being habitually drunk or being dependent on, or a habitual user
of, narcotics, barbiturates, amphetamines, hallucinogens, or other
drugs having similar effects;
(6)
Knowingly permitting, aiding or abetting an unauthorized person
to perform activities requiring a permit;
(7)
Continuing to practice while his/her permit is lapsed, suspended,
or revoked;
(8)
Having been disciplined in another jurisdiction in any way by the
proper permitting authority for reasons substantially the same as
those set forth in the Board's regulations; and
(9)
Other just and sufficient cause which the Board may determine
would render the establishment, practitioner or applicant unfit to
practice body art.
(10)
A.
The Board shall notify an applicant, establishment or practitioner, in
writing, of any violation of the Board's regulations for which the Board
intends to deny, revoke, or refuse to renew a permit. The applicant,
establishment or practitioner shall have seven days after receipt of such
written notice in which to comply with the Board's regulations. The
Board may deny, revoke or refuse to renew a permit if the applicant,
B.
§ 400-19.12 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.13
1:902
§ 400-19.14. Grounds for suspension of permit.
The Board may summarily suspend a permit pending a final hearing on
the merits on the question of revocation if, based on the evidence before
it, the Board determines that an establishment and/or a practitioner is an
immediate and serious threat to the public health, safety or welfare. The
suspension of a permit shall take effect immediately upon written notice of
such suspension by the Board.
§ 400-19.15. Procedure for hearings.
The owner of the establishment or practitioner shall be given written notice
of the Board's intent to hold a hearing for the purpose of suspension,
revocation, denial or refusal to renew a permit. This written notice shall
be served through a certified letter sent return receipt requested or by
constable. The notice shall include the date, time and place of the hearing
and the owner of the establishment's or practitioner's right to be heard.
The Board shall hold the hearing no later than 21 days from the date the
written notice is received. In the case of a suspension of a permit as noted
in § 400-19.13, a hearing shall be scheduled no later than 21 days from the
date of the suspension.
§ 400-19.16. Variances.
§ 400-19.17. Severability.
If any provision contained in the model regulations is deemed invalid for any
reason, it shall be severed and shall not affect the validity of the remaining
provisions.
establishment or practitioner fails to comply after said seven days,
subject to the procedure outlined in § 400-19.15.
C. Applicants denied a permit may reapply at any time after denial.
The Board of Health may vary the application of any provision of these
regulations with respect to any particular case when the Board finds
the enforcement thereof does manifest injustice.
A.
Every request for a variance shall be made in writing to the Board and
shall state the specific variance sought and the reasons therefor.
B.
The Board may establish additional conditions in connection with the
granting of a variance where the interest of public health so requires.
C.
Any Board of Health determination relative to a request for a variance
shall be in writing, with a copy available to the public at all reasonable
hours in the office of the Board of Health. Any variance granted must
be posted on the premises in a prominent location for the duration that
the variance is in effect.
D.
§ 400-19.13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-19.18
1:903
§ 400-19.18. Violations and penalties.
The fine for a violation of any provision of these rules and regulations shall
be $100 per offense. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed to
be a separate offense.
§ 400-19.19. Noncriminal disposition of violations.
In accordance with MGL c. 40, § 21D, and Chapter 1, Article II, Fees and
Fines, of the City Code, whoever violates any provision of these rules and
regulations may be penalized by noncriminal disposition.
§ 400-19.20. When effective.
These rules and regulations shall be effective upon publication in the local
newspaper.
§ 400-19.18 BEVERLY CODE § 400-19.20
1:904
ARTICLE XX
Administration
[Adopted 7-25-1990]
§ 400-20.1. Employment of consultants.243
Pursuant to the authority granted by MGL c. 111, § 31, the Beverly Board
of Health, by this regulation, is authorized to engage outside consultants
to assist the Board of Health in reviewing, assessing or evaluating any
project, proposal, activity or function which is subject to the authority,
approval or other purview of the Board of Health pursuant to any statute
or regulation promulgated by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or any
of its departments or agencies, pursuant to any ordinances of the City of
Beverly or pursuant to any rule or regulation promulgated by the Board
of Health or otherwise. The selection of such outside consultant shall be
subject to an administrative appeal to the City Council, as more particularly
provided in Chapter 593 of the Acts of 1989 (MGL c. 44, § 53G). The
grounds for such an appeal shall be limited to a claim that the consultant so
selected by the Board of Health has a conflict of interest or does not possess
the minimum required qualifications as provided in said Chapter 593.
§ 400-20.2. Consultant fees.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 593 of the Acts of 1989 (MGL
c. 44, § 53G), the Beverly Board of Health is authorized to require the
reasonable fees of any consultant engaged by the Board of Health pursuant
to § 400-20.1 to be deposited or paid by the owner of the subject or the
person or entity seeking Board of Health action thereon, all as the Board of
Health may determine. Such fees shall be held in a special account therefor
and expended and distributed as provided in said Chapter 593.
243. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code.
§ 400-20.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-20.2
1:905
Chapter 565
WETLANDS PROTECTION REGULATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 249.
Wetlands protection — See Ch. 287.
Zoning — See Ch. 300.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 375.
NOTE TO APPLICATIONS
Application forms, instructions, fee
calculation sheets, checklists and other
related materials are available at the
Conservation Commission's office and/or
Conservation Commission's section of the City
website: www.beverlyma.gov.
§ 400-20.2 BEVERLY CODE § 400-20.2
1:906
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 565-1. Authority; when effective.
These regulations are promulgated under the authority of the Home Rule
Amendment, Article LXXXIX (89) of the amendments of the Constitution of
Massachusetts, 1966, as amended from time to time, and in accordance
with the City of Beverly Wetlands Protection Ordinance, Chapter 287 of
the Revised Ordinances of the City of Beverly, and shall be effective upon
fulfillment of all legal requirements.
§ 565-2. Purpose.
§ 565-3. Jurisdiction.
The purpose of the Beverly Wetlands Protection Ordinance (hereafter
referred to as the "ordinance") is stated in Chapter 287, § 287-1. These
regulations are promulgated to ensure fairness, to create uniformity
of process, and to clarify and further define the provisions of the
ordinance, administered by the Beverly Conservation Commission
(hereafter called the "Commission").
A.
Wetlands contribute to a wide array of public interests and are
therefore protected by the ordinance. Interests protected by the
Wetlands Protection Act (hereinafter called the "Act") include: public
and private water supply, groundwater supply, flood control, storm
damage prevention, prevention of pollution, fisheries, land containing
shellfish, and protection of wildlife habitat, and are hereby
incorporated by reference and made part hereof. The ordinance
identifies five additional public interests not recognized by the Act and
they include: the prevention and control of erosion and sedimentation,
the protection of rare plant and animal species habitat, the protection
of agriculture, the protection of aquaculture and the protection of
recreation. Any permit issued under the ordinance must therefore not
adversely affect these public interests, as well as those recognized by
the Act.
B.
The areas subject to protection under the ordinance differ from those
protected by the Act in that the ordinance protects additional wetland
resource areas, as well as additional interests as described above.
Wetland resource areas protected by the ordinance include:
(1) Any isolated vegetated wetland.
(2) Any vernal pool (certified or uncertified).
Any vegetated wetlands bordering on any creek, river, stream,
pond or lake.
(3)
Any bank, beach, freshwater or saltwater marsh, wet meadow, bog
or swamp.
(4)
A.
§ 565-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-3
1:907
§ 565-4. Fee schedule.
(5) Any land under any creek, river, stream, pond or lake.
Any 100-foot buffer zone of wetland areas in Subsection A(1)
through (5) listed above ("buffer zone").
(6)
Any land subject to storm flowage or flooding by groundwater or
surface water.
(7)
(8) The two-hundred-foot riverfront area.
(9) The ocean, including land under the ocean.
Water bodies located in Beverly, and their contiguous two-hundredfoot
riverfront areas, have been identified by the Commission and
include, but are not limited to, the following: Bass River, Danvers River,
Lawrence Brook, Chubbs Brook, and Centerville Creek.
B.
Request for determination of applicability (RDA).
Standard filing fee. A fee of $50 shall be submitted with each RDA
application.
(1)
A.
Abbreviated notice of resource area delineation (ANRAD).
Standard filing fee. ANRADs submitted under the Act and the
ordinance shall be subject to the filing fees as outlined in
MassDEP's Wetland Fee Transmittal Form, as well as an additional
$100 plus $1/linear foot for each resource area.
(1)
B.
Notice of intent (NOI) or abbreviated notice of intent (ANOI).
Standard filing fee. NOIs and ANOIs submitted under the Act and
the ordinance shall be subject to the filing fees mandated by state
regulations [310 CMR 10.03(7)] as well as an additional fee for
each activity under review by the Commission as follows:
(a) Category 1: $110 for each activity.
(b) Category 2: $500 for each activity.
(c) Category 3: $1,050 for each activity.
(d) Category 4: $1,450 for each activity.
Category 5: $4/linear foot; not less than $100 or more than
$2,000.
(e)
Category 6: $100 plus $1/linear foot for each resource area.
For each resource area delineation, the fee shall not exceed
$200 for activities associated with a single-family house or
$2,000 for all other activities.
(f)
(1)
(2) Additional fees for NOIs and ANOIs.
C.
§ 565-3 BEVERLY CODE § 565-4
1:908
An additional fee of $300 shall be paid if the project requires
wetland replication as a result of direct wetland impacts or
requires filling of land subject to flooding.
(a)
Septic systems. An additional fee of $50 shall be paid for new
septic systems or repairs to existing septic systems that do not
meet Title V requirements for setbacks to wetlands.
(b)
The following activities shall be subject to a filing fee of 1.5
times the otherwise applicable fee(s) as listed above:
Activities proposed within the 25-foot no-disturbance zone
or 100-foot no-disturbance zone for vernal pools that are
subject to the applicable performance standards for those
zones.
[1]
Buildings or structures proposed within the 50-foot nobuild
zone that are subject to § 565-10D(3)(a).
[2]
(c)
Order of conditions (OOC).
Minor modification or amendment. A fee of $100 shall be submitted
with the first requested minor modification or amendment
(requiring a public hearing), as well as an additional $50 for each
additional minor modification or amendment (for example: first
minor modification = $100, second = $150, third = $200, fourth =
$250, etc.).
(1)
Certificates of compliance (COC). A fee of $100 shall be submitted
with each request for a COC if before the expiration date or $150 if
after expiration. If the first request has been denied, there shall be
a charge of $75 for each additional request.
(2)
Extension permit. A fee of $100 shall be submitted with each
request for an extension permit of an order of conditions.
(3)
D.
Emergency certification.
Standard filing fee. A fee of $50 shall be submitted with each
request for an emergency certification.
(1)
E.
Minor project permit and tree removal permit.
Standard filing fee. A fee of $25 shall be submitted with each
request for a minor project permit or for a tree removal permit.
(1)
F.
After-the-fact filings. All permit applications filed after the work has
begun shall pay a filing fee two times the otherwise applicable fee as
provided above.
G.
Waivers of filing fees. The City of Beverly and its departments shall
be exempt from paying a filing fee. The Commission may also, in its
sole discretion, waive or reduce the filing fee for any applicant that
demonstrates an unjust disproportionality to the subject application or
H.
§ 565-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-4
1:909
§ 565-5. Conservation Commission and outside consultants.
for a permit application filed by a city, town, state or federal entity or
land trust.
Officers. There shall be a Chair and a Vice-Chair of the Conservation
Commission, who shall be elected by a majority vote of the Commission
members. Their terms of office shall be one year, commencing and
ending with the second regular Commission meeting following the end
of the calendar year. In the event of a vacancy in either position, a new
Chair or Vice-Chair shall be elected by a majority vote of the eligible
Commission members.
A.
Members.
New Commission members shall be appointed by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council. The Commission may, through its
Chair, offer its views to the Mayor on the qualifications and
suitability of potential candidates.
(1)
A quorum consists of a majority of the Commission members who
are serving in office at the time a vote is taken by the Commission.
A majority vote of a quorum of the Commission shall constitute the
decision of the Commission.
(2)
The Commission members shall have such powers as are vested in
them by law, regulation, custom, and practice.
(3)
B.
Committees. There shall be such committees as the Commission may
decide are necessary for the efficient execution of its duties.
C.
Outside consultants.
The Commission may, by vote at any public meeting, appoint
consultants to the Commission as allowed in Chapter 287, § 287-8,
and in MGL c. 40, § 8C. Such consultants shall not have the right
to vote, nor to represent themselves as official members of the
Commission, but shall have the right to advise the Commission,
as the Chair may designate upon the advice and consent of the
Commission.
(1)
As provided by MGL c. 44, § 53G, the Beverly Conservation
Commission may impose reasonable fees for the employment of
outside consultants, engaged by the Commission, for specific
expert services deemed necessary by the Commission to come to
a final decision on an application submitted to the Commission
pursuant to the requirements of the Wetlands Protection Act (MGL
c. 131, § 40), the Beverly Wetlands Protection Ordinance (Chapter
287 of the City Code), Commission Act (MGL c. 40, § 8C) or
regulation, as they may be amended or enacted from time to time.
(2)
D.
§ 565-4 BEVERLY CODE § 565-5
1:910
§ 565-6. Burden of proof.
Funds received by the Commission pursuant to these rules
shall be deposited with the City Treasurer, who shall establish
a special account for this purpose. Expenditures from this
special account may be made at the direction of the
Commission without further appropriation as provided in MGL
c. 44, § 53G. Expenditures from this account shall be made
only in connection with the review of a specific project or
projects for which a consultant fee has been collected from the
applicant.
(a)
Specific consultant services may include but are not limited
to resource area survey and delineation, analysis of resource
area values, hydrogeologic and drainage analysis, impacts on
municipal conservation lands, and environmental or land use
law. The consultant shall be chosen by, and report only to, the
Commission and/or its Administrator.
(b)
The Commission shall give written notice to the applicant of
the selection of an outside consultant, which notice shall state
the identity of the consultant, the amount of the fee to be
charged to the applicant, and a request for payment of said fee
in its entirety. Such notice shall be deemed to have been given
on the date it is mailed or delivered. No such costs or expenses
shall be incurred by the applicant if the application request is
withdrawn within five days of the date notice was given.
(c)
The fee must be received in its entirety prior to the initiation
of consulting services. The Commission may request additional
consultant fees if necessary review requires a larger
expenditure than originally anticipated or new information
requires additional consultant services. Failure by the
applicant to pay the consultant fee specified by the
Commission within 10 business days of the request for
payment shall be cause for the Commission to deny the permit.
(d)
The applicant may appeal the selection of the outside
consultant to the City Council, which may disqualify the
outside consultant selected only on the grounds that the
consultant has a conflict of interest or does not possess the
minimum required qualifications. The minimum qualifications
shall consist of either an educational degree or three or more
years of practice in the field at issue or a related field. Such
an appeal must be in writing and received by the City Council
and a copy received by the Commission, so as to be received
within 10 days of the date consultant fees were requested
by the Commission. The required time limits for action upon
the application shall be extended by the duration of the
administrative appeal.
(e)
§ 565-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-6
1:911
The applicant shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of
credible evidence as to any issue before the Commission, including, but
not limited to, the following:
To demonstrate that an activity proposed in a notice of intent will
not cause adverse impacts, immediately or cumulatively, to any of
the interests and values intended to be protected by the ordinance
or the Act;
(1)
(2) To overcome any presumptions of significance;
To demonstrate the presence or the absence of resource areas or
to demonstrate the extent of the resource areas;
(3)
To demonstrate compliance with applicable performance
standards;
(4)
To demonstrate the applicability of exemptions or to establish facts
warranting a waiver.
(5)
A.
Failure to provide the Commission adequate evidence to meet the
applicant's burden of proof or for the Commission to make the
necessary determination shall be sufficient cause for the Commission
to deny the requested approval, or to impose conditions that the
Commission deems reasonable, necessary, or desirable to carry out
the purposes of the ordinance, or to postpone or continue the hearing
to another date certain to enable the applicant and others to present
additional evidence, upon such terms and conditions as deemed by the
Commission to be reasonable.
B.
§ 565-6 BEVERLY CODE § 565-6
1:912
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 565-7. Terms defined.
MGL c. 40, § 8C, and MGL c. 131, § 40 (hereafter referred to as the "Act"),
as well as 310 CMR 10, Wetlands Regulations, are hereby incorporated
by reference and made part hereof, except as otherwise modified by the
Beverly Wetlands Protection Ordinance and the regulations promulgated
herein and any subsequent amendments. The definitions provided in the
state regulations, 310 CMR 10.04, shall apply to the ordinance and
regulations except as otherwise modified below:
ABUTTER — An owner of land in any direction sharing a common boundary
or corner with the property of the proposed activity, including any land
located across a street, way, river, stream, brook, channel, pond or
diagonally across from an intersection of roads, and an owner of land within
300 feet of the property line of the proposed activity. An owner of land
located more than 300 feet across a body of water shall not be considered
an abutter.
ALTER — Includes, without limitation, the following actions when
undertaken in areas subject to the ordinance:
BORDERING LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — An area which floods from
a rise in a bordering waterway or water body (i.e., surface water). [See 310
CMR 10.57(2)(a) for definition, critical characteristics and boundaries for
this resource area.]
BUFFER ZONE or 100-FOOT BUFFER ZONE — The resource area which
extends 100 feet from the edge of those wetland resource areas identified
in § 565-3A(1) through (5). The 100-foot buffer zone may overlap with other
resources (e.g., riverfront area and land subject to flooding). The following
are within the 100-foot buffer zone:
Changing the preexisting drainage characteristics, sedimentation
patterns, flow patterns or flood retention characteristics.
A.
B. Placement of fill, excavation, or regrading.
Destruction of or adverse impact to plant life, including mowing,
cutting, removal and/or stockpiling of trees and shrubs.
C.
Changing water temperature, biochemical oxygen demand, or other
physical or chemical characteristics of water.
D.
Any activities, changes, or work which pollutes or causes displacement
of any body of water or groundwater.
E.
Any activities, changes or work that cause negative impact or loss of
wildlife habitat.
F.
Driving of piles, erection or repair of buildings or structures of any kind
that involves ground disturbance.
G.
§ 565-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-7
1:913
EMERGENCY PROJECT — An activity undertaken to provide immediate
protection to public health, safety and welfare.
EXTENDED DROUGHT — Coincides with an "advisory" or more severe
drought as declared by the Massachusetts Drought Management Task Force
in accordance with a statewide drought management plan.
GROWING SEASON — The period from March 15 to October 15.
ISOLATED LAND SUBJECT TO FLOODING — An isolated depression or
a closed basin which serves as pond area for surface runoff (i.e., storm
flowage) or high groundwater which has risen above the ground surface.
[See 310 CMR 10.57(2)(b) for definition, critical characteristics and
boundaries of this resource area.]
ISOLATED VEGETATED WETLAND — Defined in §§ 565-3 and 565-9.
MINOR MODIFICATION — A project change that the Commission
determines will not result in an adverse impact to wetland resource area(s)
and/or the interests protected under the Act and/or this ordinance and that
the Commission otherwise deems not to be of sufficient magnitude in its
nature, scope or impact to warrant a public hearing, pursuant to § 565-24B.
NORMAL MAINTENANCE OF LAND IN AGRICULTURAL USE — Defined
under these regulations the same as it is in 310 CMR 10.04 (Agriculture).
FOOT NO-DISTURBANCE ZONE — — That portion of the buffer zone
which extends 25 feet from the edge of those wetland resource areas
identified in § 565-3A(1), (3), (4), (5). Disturbance of any kind is
prohibited within this zone, including but not limited to grading,
landscaping, vegetation removal, pruning, cutting, filling, excavation,
roadway construction and/or driveway construction, except as provided
in § 565- 10D(2)(a).
A.
FOOT NO-BUILD ZONE — - That portion of the buffer zone which
extends 50 feet from the edge of those wetland resource areas
identified in § 565-3A(1), (3), (4), (5). Most buildings and structures are
prohibited from this area, except as provided in § 56510D(3).
B.
FOOT NO-DISTURBANCE ZONE FOR VERNAL POOLS — S — The land
area that extends 100 feet from the edge of any vernal pool that is
located in an upland area or, in the case of a wetland resource area,
that encompasses the pool [§ 565-3A(1), (3), (4), (5)], within 100 feet
from the edge of said wetland resource area. Disturbance of any kind
is prohibited within this zone, including but not limited to grading,
landscaping, vegetation removal, pruning, cutting, filling, excavating,
shading, roadway construction and/or driveway construction. The
Commission may change the extent and location of this 100-foot nodisturbance
zone for vernal pools based on the results of a biological
and/or habitat evaluation, which may be required to determine the
migratory pathways and other important habitat usage of vernal pool
breeders.
C.
§ 565-7 BEVERLY CODE § 565-7
1:914
PERMITS — Collectively refers to orders of conditions, determination(s)
of non-significance, enforcement order(s), determinations of applicability,
orders of resource area delineation, minor project permits, minor
modifications or amendments to order of conditions, tree removal permits
and any other approval decision issued by the Commission.
POND — Any open body of fresh water, either naturally occurring or manmade,
with a surface area observed or recorded within the last 10 years of
at least 5,000 square feet, and which is never without standing water due
to natural causes, except during periods of extended drought, as defined
above.
PUBLIC HEARING(S) — A formal meeting open to the public, subject to
statutory requirements, at which the Commission allows members of the
public to ask questions and provide comments. A public hearing is required
for a notice of intent, abbreviated notice of intent, abbreviated notice of
resource area delineation, and amendments to orders of conditions under
the Act and the ordinance.
PUBLIC MEETING(S) — Meetings open to the public but at which the
Commission is not legally required to accept questions or comments from
the public. Requests for determination of applicability, requests for
extension, minor modifications, requests for certificate of compliance and
minor project permits are reviewed and determined at public meetings.
RECREATION — Passive recreation activities that do not conflict with or
diminish other wetland values and functions. Examples include, without
limitation, bird watching, nature studies, walking, hiking, and canoeing.
REVOCATION — To officially rescind or annul an order of conditions or
other permit issued under the Act and ordinance.
RIVER — Any natural flowing body of water that empties to any ocean, lake,
pond or other river and which flows throughout the year. Rivers include
streams (see 310 CMR 10.04, Stream) that are perennial because surface
water flows within them throughout the year. [See 310 CMR 10.58(2) et seq.
for what constitutes a perennial stream.]
VERNAL POOL — Defined in §§ 565-3 and 565-8 of these regulations.
WETLAND RESOURCE AREA or RESOURCE AREA — Those areas subject
to protection under the Act, the ordinance and these regulations.
WILDLIFE HABITAT — Those areas subject to the ordinance which, due
to their plant community composition and structure, hydrologic regime
or other characteristics, provide food, shelter, or areas for migration,
overwintering, breeding, nursing or rearing for wildlife.
§ 565-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-7
1:915

ARTICLE III
Additional Wetland Resource Areas Protected Under Wetland
Protection Ordinance
§ 565-8. Vernal pools and 100-foot no-disturbance zones.
Vernal pools and their associated habitat, including the 100-foot nodisturbance
zone (as defined above), are significant to the protection
of wildlife habitat and rare plant and animal habitat. Vernal pools
constitute a unique and increasingly rare type of wetland that is
inhabited by many species of wildlife, some of which are totally
dependent on vernal pools and their associated habitat for their
survival. Areas in the immediate vicinity of the vernal pool (including,
but not necessarily limited to, the 100-foot no-disturbance zone) and
the airspace above provide these species with important non-breeding
habitat functions, such as migratory pathways, feeding, shelter, and
over-wintering sites. Many species utilize vernal pools and their
associated 100-foot no-disturbance zone for breeding and non-breeding
functions, although they are not restricted to this type of wetland. The
protection of vernal pools and their associated 100-foot no-disturbance
zone are essential for the survival of wildlife species that depend on
these unique and threatened resource areas. The ordinance and these
regulations protect all vernal pools, whether or not they have been
certified as such by the Massachusetts Division of Fisheries and Wildlife
and whether or not they are regulated under 310 CMR 10.57(2).
A.
Definition, critical characteristics and boundary. Vernal pools exhibit a
tremendous variation in physical, dimensional, geographic, hydrologic
and vegetative conditions, and therefore, for the purposes of this
ordinance, a vernal pool is a freshwater body that, in most years (or all
years in some cases), holds water for a minimum of two months and that
is free of established, reproducing fish populations, and meets either of
the following criteria:
The vernal pool contains evidence of the presence of any one
or more of the following obligate indicator species: spotted
salamander, blue-spotted salamander, Jefferson salamander,
marbled salamander, wood frog or fairy shrimp;
(1)
In the absence of evidence of the presence of any obligate indicator
species, the vernal pool contains evidence of two or more of any of
the following facultative indicator species: spring peeper, American
toad, green frog, Pickerel frog, gray tree frog, four-toed
salamander, spotted turtle, caddisfly larvae or cases of caddisfly
larvae, dragonfly or damselfly larvae or shed skins (exuvia) of
dragonfly or damselfly larvae, adults, juveniles or shells of either
fingernail clams or amphibious, air-breathing snails, isopods.
(2)
B.
C. Evidence collection.
§ 565-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-8
1:917
Timing. Many of the indicators of vernal pool habitat are seasonal.
For example, certain salamander egg clusters are only found
between late March and late May. Wood frog chorusing only occurs
between late March and late May, and then typically at night.
Consequently, failure to find evidence of breeding or the presence
of the indicator species specified above only has evidentiary value
if the investigation is conducted during those periods in which
breeding is likely to occur or when the indicator species are likely
to be present. The Commission may require that the pool be
investigated at least two times during these months, but not two
consecutive days in a row.
(1)
Should any area that the Commission believes may function as a
vernal pool contain any of the following characteristics when dry,
the area shall be presumed to contain a vernal pool and shall be
reinvestigated in the spring during vernal pool breeding season as
described above:
(a) Stained leaves in a depression;
Water stains or siltation marks on surrounding tree trunks or
vegetation;
(b)
(c) Trees with buttressed trunks or stilt trunks;
(d) Wetland plants or sphagnum moss growing in a dry depression;
(e) Wetland or hydric soils;
(f) Cases of caddisfly larvae (Trichoptera);
Adults, juveniles or shells of either freshwater clams
(Pisidiidae) or amphibious, air-breathing snails;
(g)
Shed skins or exuvia of dragonfly or damselfly larvae on
vegetation along the edge of the dry depression.
(h)
(2)
To overcome the presumption of significance provided for in
§ 565-8D, the Commission may require that the determination be
postponed until evidence is compiled during the appropriate time
period as described above. The Commission may also require its
own site visits as necessary to confirm any evidence presented to
it.
(3)
The Commission may accept and consider evidence that is not in
strict compliance with these requirements if it deems the evidence
to be credible and relevant.
(4)
Presumptions of significance. Where a proposed activity involves the
removing, filling, dredging, or altering of a vernal pool, its 100-foot nodisturbance
zone, or the airspace above the vernal pool or 100-foot nodisturbance
zone, the Commission shall presume that the vernal pool
and its 100-foot no-disturbance zone are significant to the protection
D.
§ 565-8 BEVERLY CODE § 565-8
1:918
of wildlife habitat and rare plant and animal habitat. This presumption
may be overcome by the applicant's presentation of evidence sufficient
to demonstrate, by a preponderance of credible evidence, that the
vernal pool or its 100-foot no-disturbance zone (or some portion of it)
does not play a role in the protection of said interests. In the event the
presumption is deemed by the Commission to have been overcome, the
Commission shall make a written determination to this effect, setting
forth its grounds.
Performance standards. For areas in which the presumption set forth in
§ 565-8D of these regulations is not overcome, the following standards
shall apply to vernal pools and their 100-foot no-disturbance zones:
Vernal pool and 100-foot no-disturbance zone for vernal pools. No
activity shall be permitted within or above (1) the vernal pool,
(2) the 100-foot no-disturbance zone for vernal pools, or (3) in
the case of a vernal pool located within another wetland resource
area [§ 565-3A(1), (3), (4), (5)], the area extending 100 feet of the
delineated edge of that wetland resource area. Prohibited activities
include, but are not limited to, grading, landscaping, vegetation
control, pruning, cutting, filling, excavation, shading, roadway
construction and/or driveway construction. It is the opinion of the
Commission that due to the uniqueness of vernal pool resource
areas, protecting the associated 100-foot no-disturbance zone for
vernal pools is necessary to protect wildlife and rare plant and
animal habitat. As noted in the definition of the 100-foot nodisturbance
zone for vernal pools in § 565-7, the Commission may
change the regulated extent and location of this no-disturbance
zone based on the results of a biological and/or habitat evaluation,
which may be required to determine the migratory pathways and
other important habitat usage of vernal pool breeders. These
performance standards also do not apply to those portions of the
100-foot no-disturbance zone for vernal pools that the Commission
has determined under § 565-8D are not significant to the protection
of wildlife habitat and rare plant and animal habitat.
(1)
One-hundred-foot septic system setback. Components of
subsurface sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted within
100 feet of the delineated edge of a vernal pool or the delineated
edge of the encompassing wetland resource area when the
proposed system is located up-gradient of the vernal pool.
(2)
No-disturbance zone demarcation. To maintain the perpetual
integrity of the 100-foot no-disturbance zone for vernal pools and
to ensure that there will be no encroachments into this zone by the
applicant or future owners of the subject property, the Commission
may require the no-disturbance zone to be marked on the ground,
at the applicant's expense, with permanent markers. These
markers shall be made of weather-resistant material (i.e., granite
or concrete), and the Commission shall determine their number,
location and size. The Commission may require one or more of
(3)
E.
§ 565-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-8
1:919
§ 565-9. Isolated vegetated wetlands.
these markers to bear, on their upland side, writing (i.e., a
permanent plaque or engraving) that shall read "No Disturbance
Beyond This Point By Order of the Beverly Conservation
Commission."
Migratory pathway of vernal pool breeders. Work or final project
elements shall not be allowed that obstruct the migratory pathways
of vernal pool breeding species.
(4)
Isolated vegetated wetlands are likely to be significant to the interests
identified in 310 CMR 10.55(1) that are supported by bordering
vegetated wetlands and other interests identified in the ordinance,
including protection of private and public water supply and
groundwater, flood control, storm damage prevention, prevention of
pollution, protection of fisheries, wildlife habitat, erosion and
sedimentation control, and rare plant and animal habitat.
A.
Definition, critical characteristics, and boundary. Isolated vegetated
wetlands protected under the ordinance are freshwater wetlands, of at
least 1,000 square feet in area, that do not border on creeks, rivers,
streams, ponds or lakes and that do not qualify as a vernal pool under
§ 565-8 (in which case the area will be regulated as a vernal pool). The
types of isolated vegetated wetlands include, but are not limited to, wet
meadows, marshes, swamps and bogs. In addition to the minimum size
requirement, isolated vegetated wetlands must also meet at least two
of the following three criteria:
The vegetation community of an isolated vegetated wetland
consists of 50% or more wetland indicator plants. Wetland
indicator plants are classified in the following categories:
facultative, facultative +, facultative wetland -, facultative wetland,
facultative wetland +, or obligate wetland (source: U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service); or
(1)
Other indicators of hydrology, including site inundation or
saturation, water marks, drift lines, sediment deposits, oxidized
rhizospheres, water-stained leaves, shallow root systems,
buttressed tree trunks, and recorded hydrologic data (stream
gauge, aerial photo, or other); or
(2)
(3) Presence of hydric soils.
B.
Presumption of significance. Where a proposed activity involves the
removing, filling, dredging, or altering of an isolated vegetated wetland
or land within the 100-foot buffer zone to an isolated vegetated
wetland, the Commission shall presume that the isolated vegetated
wetland is significant to the interests specified in § 565-9A of these
regulations. This presumption may be overcome by the applicant's
presentation of evidence sufficient to demonstrate, by a preponderance
C.
§ 565-8 BEVERLY CODE § 565-9
1:920
§ 565-10. Buffer zones.
of credible evidence, that the isolated vegetated wetland does not
play a role in the protection of said interests. If the Commission finds
that this presumption has been overcome, it shall make a written
determination to this effect, setting forth its grounds.
Performance standards. When the presumption set forth in Subsection
C of this section is not overcome, any proposed work in the isolated
vegetated wetlands shall comply with the following performance
standards:
No alteration or impairment of isolated vegetated wetland. No
activity is permitted within or above an isolated vegetated wetland.
No activity is permitted within the associated 100-foot buffer zone
that is likely to destroy or otherwise impair the isolated vegetated
wetland.
(1)
25-foot no-disturbance zone. Work within the area extending 25
feet from the edge of the isolated vegetated wetland shall be
subject to the 25-foot no-disturbance zone standards and
demarcation requirements set forth in § 565-10D(2).
(2)
D.
Findings.
Buffer zones are likely to be significant to the interests identified
in the ordinance, including protection of private and public water
supply and groundwater, flood control, storm damage prevention,
prevention of pollution, protection of fisheries, wildlife habitat,
prevention and control of erosion and sedimentation, and the
protection of rare plant and animal species habitat, and recreation.
Buffer zones are protected resource areas under the ordinance
because they play a vital role in protecting the adjacent resource
areas and also provide their own important functions in many ways,
including, but not limited to, the following:
Scattering sunlight and providing shade, thereby lowering
water temperature within wetlands and adjacent areas;
(a)
Slowing water flow, thereby decreasing water velocities,
allowing infiltration, and reducing the erosion potential of
stormwater runoff;
(b)
Storing water, thereby helping to maintain stream base flow
and provide water quality benefits during low flow periods;
(c)
Trapping and filtering sediment and other contaminants (i.e.,
pesticides, heavy metals etc.);
(d)
Producing leaf litter and biomass which increases the humus
content of the soil and increases absorption and infiltration;
(e)
(f) Providing essential habitat for wetland-associated species;
(1)
A.
§ 565-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-10
1:921
Reducing nutrient overloading by filtering nutrients bound to
sediment in the surface flow and removing nutrients from
groundwater through uptake in vegetation; and
(g)
(h) Protecting adjacent resource areas.
Projects located in close proximity to a wetland have a high
likelihood of resulting in adverse impacts to the wetland itself,
either immediately as a consequence of construction or over time
as a consequence of daily operation or maintenance of the
completed project. Such adverse impacts typically result from
activities including, but not limited to, extension of lawns,
depositing/dumping of yard waste, over-grading, siltation,
deposition of construction debris, unregulated filling, and clearing
of vegetation.
(2)
Definition, critical characteristics, and boundary.
A buffer zone is the area of land extending 100 feet horizontally
from the delineated edge of the following resource areas:
(a) Isolated vegetated wetland;
Any vernal pool, although the buffer zone to a vernal pool is
regulated under § 565-8;
(b)
Vegetated wetlands bordering on any creek, river, stream,
pond or lake;
(c)
Bank, beach, freshwater or saltwater marsh, wet meadow, bog,
or swamp;
(d)
(e) Land under any creek, river, brook, stream, pond or lake;
(1)
Note that riverfront area and bordering and isolated land subject
to flooding do not have a buffer zone.
(2)
B.
Presumptions of significance. Where a proposed activity involves the
removing, filling, dredging, or altering of a buffer zone, the Commission
shall presume that protection of the buffer zone as a resource area
is significant to the interests specified in Chapter 287, § 287-1, and
that the buffer zone is best left in an undisturbed and natural state.
This presumption may be overcome by the applicant's presentation
of evidence sufficient to demonstrate, by a preponderance of credible
evidence, that the buffer zone or that portion of the buffer zone that
will be altered by the project does not play a role in the protection of
said interests. In the event that the Commission determines that the
presumption has been overcome, it shall make a written determination
to this effect, setting forth its grounds.
C.
Performance standards. When the presumption set forth in § 565-10C
of these regulations is not overcome, any work proposed in the buffer
zone shall comply with the following performance standards:
D.
§ 565-10 BEVERLY CODE § 565-10
1:922
No alteration or impairment of adjacent resource area. Except as
otherwise provided in these regulations, no activity is permitted
in the buffer zone that will alter, impair or adversely impact the
adjacent wetland resource areas, unless that alteration,
impairment or impact complies with the applicable performance
standard for the altered resource area and is approved by the
Commission.
(1)
25-foot no-disturbance zone.
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, no activity
is permitted within or above the area within 25 feet of the
delineated edge of the adjacent wetland resource areas.
Prohibited activities include, but are not limited to, grading,
landscaping, shading, vegetation clearing, mowing, cutting,
filling, depositing/dumping of yard waste, excavating, road
construction, and driveway construction. The 25-foot nodisturbance
zone shall remain unchanged from its
predevelopment project state. Notwithstanding the foregoing,
the Commission may allow, in its discretion, without a waiver:
Activities that it concludes will improve the 25-foot nodisturbance
zone; or
[1]
Temporary activities subject to specific time frames and
conditions requiring the successful return of the buffer
zone to its preexisting or improved state.
[2]
(a)
No-disturbance zone demarcation. To maintain the perpetual
integrity of the no-disturbance zone and to ensure that there
will be no encroachments into this zone by the applicant or
future owners of the subject property, the Commission may
require the no-disturbance zone to be marked on the ground,
at the applicant's expense, with permanent markers. These
markers shall be made of weather-resistant material (i.e.,
granite, or concrete), and the Commission shall determine
their number, size and location. The Commission may require
one or more of these markers to bear, on their upland side,
writing (i.e., permanent plaque or engraving) that shall read
"No Disturbance Beyond This Point By Order of the Beverly
Conservation Commission."
(b)
(2)
50-foot no-build zone.
Except as otherwise provided in these regulations, the
following shall be prohibited from the area within 50 feet of the
delineated edge of the adjacent wetland resource areas:
[1] Buildings/Structures that require a building permit;
Structures or other fixtures that do not require a building
permit, including, but not limited to, swimming pools and
[2]
(a)
(3)
§ 565-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-10
1:923
pool decks, patios or decks, sports courts, parking lots/
areas, driveways/roadways (except those allowed as
limited projects), sheds, utility lines, stormwater outfalls,
and the like, but excluding limited or minor accessory
structures or items such as lawn furniture, sandboxes,
swing sets or the like;
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Commission may allow, in
its discretion, without a waiver:
Buildings/Structures that it concludes will improve the
50-foot no-build zone; or
[1]
Temporary buildings/structures subject to specific time
frames and conditions requiring the successful return of
the buffer zone to its preexisting or improved state.
[2]
(b)
Replacement of buildings, structures or fixtures that existed
prior to the Commission's adoption of these 50-foot no-build
zone performance standards is exempt from these 50-foot nobuilding
zone performance standards so long as either:
The replacement structure is within the same footprint as
the original structure and will not otherwise result in a
greater impact to the fifty-foot buffer zone; or
[1]
The replacement structure is no larger than the existing
structure, is located a greater distance from the boundary
of the adjacent resource area, and will not otherwise result
in a greater impact to the fifty-foot buffer zone.
[2]
(c)
100-foot buffer zone. The Commission has discretion to permit,
condition, and prohibit work within the buffer zone as the specific
situation warrants to ensure protection of the interests of the
ordinance, taking into consideration the following factors:
Values and functions of the buffer zone and those particular
areas of the buffer zone that will be impacted by the proposed
project;
(a)
Pre-project characteristics of the buffer zone and the
particular area to be impacted, including, but not limited to,
ground slope, soil conditions, vegetation, and prior
disturbances;
(b)
Availability of reasonable alternatives to the project as
proposed that would avoid or further minimize or mitigate
impacts to the buffer zone; and
(c)
The proposed project's likely short-term and long-term impacts
to the buffer zone and/or adjacent resource areas.
(d)
(4)
§ 565-10 BEVERLY CODE § 565-10
1:924
ARTICLE IV
Stormwater Management244
§ 565-11. Stormwater management standards.
The Commission has adopted as part of these regulations the Massachusetts
Department of Environmental Protection's Stormwater Management
Standards per 310 CMR 10.05(6)(k)(1) through (10), as those standards
may be amended from time to time. The stormwater management standards
apply to industrial, commercial, institutional, residential subdivision, and
roadway projects, including, but not limited to, site preparation,
construction, redevelopment, and ongoing operation of facilities. For
projects of any size, direct discharge of untreated stormwater to wetland
resource areas is prohibited and erosion and sedimentation control must be
provided during construction. For projects of any size, peak rates of runoff
shall not increase above those of preexisting conditions.
244. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 249, Stormwater Management.
§ 565-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-11
1:925

ARTICLE V
Waivers and Mitigation
§ 565-12. Purpose; burden of proof; waiver decision.
§ 565-13. Waivers for 100-foot no-disturbance zone for vernal pools.
The Commission may grant a waiver or partial waiver of the 100-foot
no-disturbance zone for vernal pools performance standard and impose
such additional or substituted mitigation requirements as it determines are
warranted or necessary, based on the applicant's presentation of evidence
sufficient to demonstrate, by a preponderance of credible evidence, that:
§ 565-14. Waivers for 25-foot no-disturbance zone and 50-foot nobuild
zone.
The Commission may grant a waiver or partial waiver of the 25-foot nodisturbance
zone or 50-foot no-build zone performance standards and
impose such additional or substituted mitigation requirements as it
The performance standards for wetland resource areas have been
created to ensure that the interests of the Act and the ordinance
are adequately protected. The Commission recognizes that, in certain
situations, a waiver of certain performance standards may be
appropriate for a particular project when the waiver is consistent with
the intent and purpose of the ordinance and these regulations.
A.
The applicant shall have the burden of proof with respect to any waiver
requests, as described in § 565-6.
B.
The Commission shall act on the request for a waiver and shall provide
to the applicant, either by certified mail or hand delivery, its written
decision. The following section describes the standards for waivers and
associated mitigation measures.
C.
No alternative. There are no feasible or practicable alternatives that
would allow the project to proceed in full compliance with the
applicable performance standards; and
A.
Impacts minimized and mitigated. Any adverse effects on any protected
interests are minimized, by carefully considered and environmentally
sensitive project design, and appropriately mitigated to offset any
impacts such that the project will, including mitigation measures,
protect the interests identified in the ordinance. The Commission shall
require such mitigation measures as it determines necessary to offset
impacts to the 100-foot no-disturbance zone. For example, the
Commission may require the permanent preservation of additional
upland areas to compensate for the requested alterations,
improvements to previously damaged areas on-site, invasive plant
eradication, or monetary or other improvements to other, off-site public
areas that would improve wetland resources elsewhere in Beverly.
B.
§ 565-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-14
1:927
determines are warranted or necessary, based on the applicant's
presentation of evidence sufficient to demonstrate, by a preponderance of
credible evidence, that:
§ 565-15. Waivers for other wetland resource areas; replication.
No alternative. There are no feasible or practicable alternatives that
would allow the project to proceed in full compliance with the 25-foot
no-disturbance zone or 50-foot no-build zone performance standards;
and
A.
Impacts minimized and mitigated. Any alteration to the 25-foot nodisturbance
zone or 50-foot no-build zone is 1) minimized, by carefully
considered and environmentally sensitive project design and
consideration of reasonably available alternatives, and 2) appropriately
mitigated. The Commission shall require such mitigation measures as
it determines necessary to offset impacts to the 25-foot no-disturbance
zone or 50-foot no-build zone. For example, the Commission may
require the permanent preservation of additional upland land to
compensate for the requested alterations, improvements to previously
damaged areas on-site, invasive plant eradication, or monetary or other
improvements to other, off-site public areas that would improve wetland
resources elsewhere in Beverly; and
B.
No adverse impacts to adjacent resource area. The project, or its
natural and consequential effects, will have no adverse impacts on the
interests or values of the adjacent wetland resource area.
C.
Waiver standards. The Commission may, in its discretion, grant a partial
waiver of the performance standards for work within wetland resource
areas to allow the alteration or temporary surface disturbance of up to a
cumulative total no greater than 5,000 square feet of wetland resource
area and impose such additional or substituted mitigation requirements
as it determines are warranted or necessary, based on the applicant's
presentation of evidence sufficient to demonstrate, by a preponderance
of credible evidence, that:
No alternative. There are no feasible or practicable alternatives
that would allow the project to proceed in full compliance with the
applicable performance standard; and
(1)
Impacts minimized and mitigated. Any adverse effects on any
protected interests are a) minimized, by carefully considered and
environmentally sensitive project design and consideration of
reasonably available alternatives, and b) appropriately mitigated to
offset any impacts such that the project will, including mitigation
measures, protect the interests identified in the ordinance. The
Commission shall require such mitigation measures as it
determines necessary to offset impacts to the resource area(s). For
example, the Commission may require the permanent preservation
of additional upland land to compensate for the requested
(2)
A.
§ 565-14 BEVERLY CODE § 565-15
1:928
alterations, improvements to previously damaged areas on-site,
invasive plant eradication, or monetary or other improvements to
other, off-site public areas that would improve wetland resources
elsewhere in Beverly.
Replication areas. The Commission strongly discourages any plan that
requires as mitigation resource replication as scientific reviews
conclude that for the most part replications fail to reproduce the range
of values, in quantity and quality, of the wetlands they ostensibly
replace. However, there may be situations in which replication is
appropriate to protect the interests of the ordinance. The Commission
may, in its discretion, credit resource replication when altered areas are
replaced or restored according to the following criteria:
Wetlands replication must be at least a 2:1 ratio (replicated
wetland to altered wetland).
(1)
Replicated wetlands shall be made contiguous or hydrologically
connected to existing wetlands unless the applicant is able to
demonstrate that another location (adjacent to other resource
areas) would have a greater ability to protect the interests of the
Act and the ordinance.
(2)
Replicated areas must be constructed prior to other construction
activity on site. The applicant shall have the burden of proving
where this requirement may not be appropriate to the interests of
the Act and the ordinance in certain instances.
(3)
Wetland soils from the altered wetland shall be excavated and kept
intact to the greatest extent possible and used for the replicated
wetland when these soils are suitable for such purpose.
(4)
A combination of natural reseeding, transplanting, and new
plantings shall be used to reestablish a vegetational community
and structural diversity similar to the disturbed area.
(5)
At least 75% of the surface area of the replicated area must be
established with native wetland plant species within two growing
seasons. If this condition is not met, the applicant must propose
and implement corrective steps to be approved by the Commission.
(6)
Colonization of invasive species must be documented and
controlled. Evidence of the spread of invasive species within a
replication area shall require the development and implementation
of a management/control plan.
(7)
A qualified wetland scientist chosen by the Commission and hired
at the applicant's expense shall monitor replicated wetlands and
submit written reports to the Commission at least twice per year
(May and October unless otherwise required by the Commission).
(8)
B.
§ 565-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-15
1:929
§ 565-16. Additional waiver standards.
An "interim as-built plan" complete with one foot contours, spot
elevations, surface area and cross sections of the replication area
shall be prepared by a registered professional land surveyor and
submitted to the Commission within 30 days of completion of final
grading of the replication area.
(9)
Any replication or restoration work that creates a resource area
on abutting properties shall require an easement from the abutting
property owner covering the full extension of the resource area on
that property prior to commencement of the work.
(10)
Roadways. The Commission may, in its discretion, grant a waiver from
these regulations for the construction and maintenance of a new
roadway or driveway of minimum legal and practical width consistent
with the Planning Board dimensional requirements or any waivers
granted by the Planning Board for reduced dimensions to provide a
single means of access from an existing public or private way to an
upland area of the same owner, where no such means of access would
otherwise be available or would have been available across other land
formerly held in common ownership with such upland area. The
applicant is still bound by the maximum alteration limit of 5,000 square
feet as described in § 565-15A, above. Replication of altered wetland
resource areas, as described in the preceding section, shall be required
by the Commission to minimize and mitigate adverse impacts and to
protect the interests defined in the ordinance.
A.
Prohibited wetland alterations. Wetland alterations intended to make
lands buildable, as by fulfilling septic system setback requirements,
flood elevation requirements, or other minimum construction setback
requirements, or to achieve minimum lot area requirements, are
prohibited. Wetland alterations required to access upland parcels will
not be allowed if that landowner, or a preceding owner, landlocked the
parcel by selling upland access.
B.
Wildlife habitat evaluation. Where alterations exceed the maximum
allowable thresholds described in the state regulations, 310 CMR
10.00, for bank, bordering vegetated wetland, land under a water body,
bordering land subject to flooding or riverfront area, or where the
alteration of a habitat of rare species is involved, or where vernal
pool or the associated 100-foot no-disturbance zone would be altered,
a wildlife habitat evaluation shall be performed in accordance with
310 CMR 10.60. The Commission may also require a wildlife habitat
evaluation to be conducted when the applicant proposes alterations to
any wetland resource area that the Commission determines to be of
exceptional value to the wildlife habitat interests of the ordinance.
C.
Upland habitat. In siting proposed wetland replication areas, mature
vegetated upland habitat shall be preserved to the fullest extent
possible.
D.
§ 565-15 BEVERLY CODE § 565-16
1:930
Planning Board waivers. The Commission may require the applicant
to file a request for a waiver of certain Planning Board requirements
in order to minimize resource area impacts (for example, waivers of
pavement width requirements).
E.
§ 565-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-16
1:931

ARTICLE VI
Filing Procedures and Submittal Requirements245
§ 565-17. Request for determination of applicability.
Any person or persons who desire a determination as to whether the Act or
the ordinance applies to an area, or work to be performed in an area, shall
submit a written request for determination of applicability ("RDA") to the
Commission in accordance with Chapter 287, § 287-4.
General filing requirements. All applications shall comply with the
following, except to the extent the Commission modifies these
requirements on a case-by-case basis or in its application forms or
instructions.
Nine copies (one original and eight copies) and an electronic copy
of an RDA and accompanying plans, along with a check for the
appropriate filing fee, shall be received eight business days prior
to the anticipated hearing date by certified mail or hand delivery to
the Conservation Commission at 3rd Floor, Planning Department,
City Hall, 191 Cabot Street, Beverly, MA 01915.
(1)
Upon receipt of an application, the Commission or Conservation
Administrator will determine, within two business days, if the
application meets the minimum submittal requirements identified
in Subsection B below. Those applications that do not meet the
minimum submittal requirements will be rejected until the
necessary information is provided.
(2)
A.
General plan requirements. In addition to and in conformance with the
requirements of 310 CMR 10.00, the following shall be submitted:
An 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches copy of the USGS quadrangle map, or
other locus map, with the area circled showing the location of the
project.
(1)
A plan of sufficient size and scale that completely and accurately
depicts the existing conditions on the site, the proposed project,
and all of the resource areas and associated buffer zones located
on the site.
(2)
When the RDA is for the verification of the delineation of a wetland
resource area(s), the request shall be prepared by a professional
wetland scientist accompanied by a field-surveyed plan depicting
the existing conditions, the delineated boundary of the resource
area(s) with flag numbers and elevations extending off the project
site.
(3)
B.
C. Public meeting.
245. Editor's Note: Application forms, instructions, fee calculation sheets and checklists are
available at the Conservation Commission's office and/or Conservation Commission's
section of the City's website: www.beverlvma.gov.
§ 565-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-17
1:933
§ 565-18. Notice of intent, abbreviated notice of intent or
abbreviated notice of resource area delineation.
The Commission shall hold a public meeting to consider the RDA
and shall issue a written determination within 21 days upon receipt
of such request. Prior to making a determination, the Commission
may require the submission of additional information deemed
pertinent to the determination.
(1)
The Commission may continue the public meeting in the following
instances:
With the consent of the applicant, to an agreed-upon date
which shall be announced at the meeting; or
(a)
Without the consent of the applicant, to a specified date for
the reasons stated at the meeting, including but not limited to
additional information from the applicant or others.
(b)
(2)
Time frame for filing and review.
Any person who desires review of a notice of intent (NOI),
abbreviated notice of intent (ANOI) or abbreviated notice of
resource area delineation (ANRAD) shall file with the Commission
plans and specifications as required under MGL c. 131, § 40 and as
further defined below. In order to demonstrate full compliance with
the ordinance and these regulations, the applicant has the burden
of proof to completely describe the site, the work, and its effect
on resource areas and the interests they protect, and to otherwise
meet its burden of proof pursuant to § 565-6. The applicant is
obligated to demonstrate that the work subject to regulation under
the ordinance and these regulations can be carried out in a manner
that meets all applicable performance standards and results in
no impact to the wetland resource areas in question. Applicants
are urged to retain the services of a qualified, experienced,
professional consultant when filing an NOI, ANOI or ANRAD.
Submission of incomplete or inadequate information or a failure to
meet the burden of proof may result in delays and continuations
in the review and approval procedure. Failure to provide adequate
and credible documentation describing the impact of the project on
resource areas may result in the issuance of a denial prohibiting
the work.
(1)
Resource area boundary delineations, however requested, shall
be reviewed only between April 15 and October 1 of each year,
unless the Commission grants a waiver due to low probability of
error on a particular site. Delineations may be reviewed at the
sole discretion of the Commission between October 2 and April
14 and shall be reviewed only when site conditions are such that
the Commission believes it can adequately review the relevant
resource area indicators (e.g., soils, vegetation, hydrology).
(2)
A.
§ 565-17 BEVERLY CODE § 565-18
1:934
General filing requirements. All applications shall comply with the
following, except to the extent the Commission modifies these
requirements on a case-by-case basis or in its application forms or
instructions.
Nine copies (one original and eight copies) and an electronic copy
of the NOI, ANOI or ANRAD, and accompanying plans, as well as
any pertinent data, along with a check for the appropriate filing
fee, payable to the City of Beverly, shall be received pursuant to
the Commission's meeting dates and filing deadlines as published,
by certified mail, or hand delivery to the Conservation Commission
at 3rd Floor, Planning Department, City Hall, 191 Cabot Street,
Beverly, MA 01915.
(1)
Upon receipt of the application, the Commission or Conservation
Administrator will determine, within two business days, if the
application meets the minimum submittal requirements. A notice
of intent checklist is available at the Conservation Commission's
office. Those applications that do not meet minimum submittal
requirements will be rejected until the necessary information is
provided.
(2)
B.
Abutter notification requirements. The applicant shall provide
notification to abutters within 300 feet of the property line (as defined
in § 565-7) where the work is proposed. The notification shall include
sufficient explanation of the proposed work and all information
pertinent to the date, time and location of the public hearing, and shall
be sent by certified mail. In addition, a copy of the "Abutters' Guide
to Beverly Conservation Commission Meetings and Process" shall be
included with the notification to all abutters. The applicant shall notify
abutters simultaneously to filing the application with the Commission,
in order to provide abutters sufficient time to review the application
and accompanying plans.
C.
Plan requirements. All applications shall include nine copies of detailed
plans. Technical data should be submitted to support the plans and
shall be in narrative form, with calculations submitted as necessary to
substantiate the designs proposed. The applicant, upon submission of
an NOI, shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 287, §§ 287-4
and 287-5, and incorporate the following:
All drawings shall be drawn with the title designating the name
of the project, location and the names of the person(s) preparing
the drawings, and the date prepared, including the latest revision
date. Drawings shall be stamped and signed by a duly qualified
registered professional civil engineer and registered professional
land surveyor of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. For certain
projects, including but not limited to additions to existing
structures, the Commission may accept plans not drawn by a
surveyor or civil engineer when these plans utilize a stamped plan
(1)
D.
§ 565-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-18
1:935
as a "base map." In this case, the base map shall also be submitted
or referenced.
Plans depicting proposed drainage systems and/or a subsurface
sewage disposal system must be stamped by a registered
professional civil engineer of the commonwealth.
(2)
An 8 1/2 inches by 11 inches photocopy of the USGS topographic
quadrangle indicating the location of the proposed activity and the
outline of the area in which the activity is located.
(3)
Technical reports on both the engineering aspects of the project as
well as the wetland resources of the project site shall accompany
the NOI application.
(4)
Source material for any plan submitted must be referenced on the
new plan.
(5)
If the applicant has submitted or anticipates submitting plans for
the subject property to any other City board, he/she shall submit
those plans to the Commission for its review.
(6)
Existing conditions site plan(s).
The following standards and design specifications are intended
to provide the Commission with the minimum amount of data
necessary to determine the impact of a proposed project on
wetland resource areas and/or the ability of said resource area to
provide documented functions and values. The Commission may
from time to time adopt and publish additional guidelines and
minimum technical standards for plans, calculations, and
environmental impact reports submitted with an application for a
permit. The Commission may find it necessary to request additional
site-specific information to adequately determine the effect of the
work on resource areas.
(1)
Existing conditions site plans shall incorporate the following
information, as applicable:
Property boundaries and abutters from the most recent
information on record at the Assessor's office.
(a)
Watershed Protection Overlay District boundaries from the
most recent Zoning Map.
(b)
Existing and proposed contours at two-foot intervals
throughout the entire plan and the source for any data used to
establish these contours.
(c)
All existing natural and man-made features, including tree
lines, rock outcrops, stone walls, fence lines, cart roads,
footpaths, overhead and underground utilities, and drainage
structures.
(d)
(2)
E.
§ 565-18 BEVERLY CODE § 565-18
1:936
The location of all surface water supplies, wells, and septic
systems on the property, and on abutting properties, within
100 feet of proposed work.
(e)
Elevations of all natural and man-made drainage structures,
waterways, and wetlands (as defined by the Act and
ordinance).
(f)
All wetland resource areas, including the 100-foot buffer zone,
25-foot no-disturbance zone, 50-foot no-build zone and the
100-foot no-disturbance zone for vernal pools.
(g)
(h) Flag numbers of all field-delineated wetland resource areas.
One-hundred-year flood elevations of all natural and man-made
waterways and water bodies as determined from the most
current online FEMA Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Boundary and Floodway Maps. Where the floodplains of
wetlands and water bodies have not been mapped by FEMA,
hydrologic and calculations may be required, prepared by a
registered professional engineer, to determine the boundary of
the ten-year and one-hundred-year floodplain.
(i)
Hydrologic calculations showing the full-flow capacity and
velocity of all watercourses, open and only sometimes closed
channels, and storm drains flowing into, on and out of the
property.
(j)
Site plans shall be submitted at a scale of one inch equals
10 feet, one inch equals 20 feet, or one inch equals 40 feet.
Additional plans with greater or lesser detail may also be
required if such plans would provide valuable information to
the Commission in its review. The Commission may request
a plan at a different scale for large properties or unique
circumstances.
(k)
Wetland replication or restoration plans. A complete wetland
replication or restoration plan shall be submitted with the permit
application. Such a plan will meet all state and local performance
standards and take all site-specific and Commission-directed issues
into consideration. The plan shall be prepared by an individual with
demonstrated experience in wetland science and will include a
description of the qualifications of the individual(s) who prepared the
plan. In addition, this plan and report shall include the following
information:
Proposed and existing species list using both common and genus/
species identification, describing densities at each vegetative layer
and discussion of vigor.
(1)
(2) Depth to seasonal high groundwater.
F.
§ 565-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-18
1:937
Proposed contour elevations for the wetland resource replication
areas (at one inch equals 40 feet) and cross-section profiles
showing relationship to existing elevations. Discussion should be
provided as to how the replication area will provide similar and
adequate conditions to support the proposed replication vegetative
community.
(3)
Current wetland resource area functions (including wildlife
habitat) shall be identified with a description of how the replication
area will provide these functions. The proposal shall identify if the
replication is intended to be "in-kind" or "out-of-kind" (with a clear
discussion of the particular appropriateness of that selected to this
site) and if any of the existing vegetation in the replication area can
be retained for replanting.
(4)
A plan of how the proposed topography for the replication area will
meet the necessary hydrological conditions, including a diagram
of a planting scheme and a cross section of the pre- and postreplication
area.
(5)
The name and address of the firm and/or qualified individual
experienced in wetland replication that will oversee the replication
area construction and provide detailed monitoring reports to the
Commission.
(6)
If additional soils or vegetation are required for augmentation,
sources must be identified.
(7)
Public hearing. The Commission shall hold a public hearing to consider
the notice of intent, abbreviated notice of intent, or abbreviated notice
of resource area delineation and shall issue a written decision within 21
days after the close of the public hearing. Prior to the close of a public
hearing, all data deemed pertinent to the decision must be submitted
and reviewed by the Commission. The Commission may continue or
adjourn a public hearing in the following situations:
With the consent of the applicant, to an agreed-upon date which
shall be announced at the hearing; or
(1)
Without the consent of the applicant, to a specific date for the
reasons stated at the hearing, including but not limited to receipt
of additional information from the applicant or others.
(2)
G.
Minor modification or amendment applications. The requirements of
§ 565-18 shall also apply to an application for a minor modification
or amendment to an order of conditions or order of resource area
delineation to the extent relevant to the minor modification or
amendment application as determined by the Commission. Applicants
are encouraged to review the proposal and application requirements
with the Conservation Administrator prior to filing with the
Commission.
H.
§ 565-18 BEVERLY CODE § 565-19
1:938
§ 565-19. Minor project permits.
§ 565-20. Tree removal permits.
The Commission recognizes that dead, dying and compromised trees can
pose safety and property damage issues in some situations. The Commission
has established a "Tree Removal Request Protocol" to facilitate the
Commission's prompt administrative review of these situations. In some
situations, the Commission may approve tree removals administratively.
In others, the Commission may decide that a more formal RDA or NOI
is required. This administrative review process is optional and is not a
prerequisite to the filing of a formal RDA or NOI. The Tree Removal Request
Protocol is available at the office of the Conservation Administrator and may
be modified by a simple vote by the Commission at a regularly scheduled
meeting.
Some projects are simple, routine and involve very little activity or
alteration within the buffer zone and pose no significant potential
adverse impact on the resource area. The Commission may consider
such projects to be minor in nature and is of the opinion that requiring
an RDA or NOI would be unnecessary as long as certain conditions are
adhered to.
A.
The Conservation Administrator or a member of the Commission shall
have the authority to issue a minor project permit, which shall be
reviewed and approved by the Commission at a subsequent regularly
scheduled meeting. The applicant may proceed with the project at his/
her own risk pending the Commission's review and approval.
B.
The minor project permit application available at the office of the
Conservation Administrator sets forth the fees, parameters and
conditions that qualify and govern a project for this expedited
permitting process. The fees, parameters and conditions of the minor
project permit application may be modified by a simple vote by the
Commission at a regularly scheduled meeting.
C.
§ 565-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-20
1:939

ARTICLE VII
Public Hearings and Public Meetings
§ 565-21. Combined meetings and decisions.
Public hearings and public meetings on applications filed pursuant to the
ordinance and regulations may be conducted simultaneously with public
hearings and public meetings held pursuant to the Massachusetts Wetland
Protection Act (MGL c. 131, § 40), as amended. Permit applications filed
with the Commission shall include both the Act and ordinance under one
cover. The decisions rendered by the Commission shall also include both the
Act and ordinance under one cover.
§ 565-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-21
1:941

ARTICLE VIII
Permits and Decisions
§ 565-22. Decisions.
As part of a permit issued pursuant to the ordinance, the Commission shall
impose such conditions as are necessary to protect the values of wetland
resource areas under its jurisdiction. If the Commission deems that the
interests stated in the ordinance are not adequately protected under the
terms of the applicant's proposal, the Commission may refuse to issue a
permit. When the Commission votes to deny a permit, it shall issue a written
decision supported by facts and findings explaining why the project has
been denied and, as related to notices of intent, why the project may not
be properly conditioned to meet the interests of the Act and the ordinance.
The applicant shall have the burden of proof by a preponderance of credible
evidence as to any issue before the Commission, as provided in § 565-6.
§ 565-23. Extension permits.
The Commission may issue an extension permit for up to a period of one
year, provided that a written request for an extension is filed at least 30
days prior to the expiration date of the order of conditions. The Commission
may grant only two extension permits for an individual order of conditions.
Extension permit requests must also meet all of the following conditions at
the time of the written request:
§ 565-24. Minor modifications, amendments and revocation.
No request for an extension permit will be granted unless the wetland
is either reflagged by a qualified wetland biologist or the original
approved flagging is reestablished in the field by survey. The wetland
delineation shall be verified by the Commission and/or its designated
agent. The Commission may require a new filing, or the reopening of
the public hearing, if the wetland delineation has changed from the
original submittal.
A.
No request for an extension permit will be reviewed until the necessary
filing fee is received by the Commission.
B.
No request for an extension permit will be granted for an expired order
of conditions.
C.
At the time of the request for an extension permit, the project must
be in compliance with the order of conditions and other permit
requirements.
D.
Minor modifications, amendments and revocation generally.
The Commission may modify, amend or revoke an order of
conditions on its own initiative.
(1)
A.
§ 565-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-24
1:943
The Commission may, upon the petition of the applicant, modify
or amend an order of conditions issued under the ordinance and
these regulations. The Commission shall first determine whether
a proposed modification constitutes a "minor modification" or an
"amendment" and then proceed in accordance with Subsections B
and C, below.
(2)
In connection with a minor modification or an amendment review
process, the Commission may require that the wetland resource
areas be reflagged by a qualified wetland scientist or that the
original flagging be reestablished in the field by professional
survey. The Commission may require a new filing or the reopening
of the public hearing if the wetland delineation has changed since
the order of conditions was issued, even in connection with
requests for a minor modification.
(3)
If the scope or purpose of the proposed project has changed
substantially or the wetland interests identified in the Act and
ordinance are not protected, the Commission shall require the
applicant to file a new notice of intent.
(4)
Filing requirements. The requirements of § 565-18 shall apply to
an application for a minor modification or amendment to an order
of conditions or order of resource area delineation to the extent
relevant to the minor modification or amendment application as
determined by the Commission. Applicants are encouraged to
review the proposal and application requirements with the
Conservation Administrator prior to filing with the Commission.
(5)
Minor modification.
A minor modification is a project change that will not result in an
adverse impact to wetland resource area(s) and/or the interests
protected under the Act and/or the ordinance and that the
Commission otherwise deems not to be of sufficient magnitude in
its nature, scope or impact to warrant a public hearing.
(1)
No public hearing is required for a minor modification to an order
of conditions. However, the applicant must submit a written
request fully explaining the proposed change. The applicant has
the burden of proving that a proposed modification is a minor
modification and that the proposed modification warrants approval.
(2)
A request for a minor modification will not be reviewed or
considered under the following instances:
If the appropriate filing fee is not submitted with the request
to the Commission.
(a)
(b) If the order of conditions has expired.
(3)
B.
C. Amendment.
§ 565-24 BEVERLY CODE § 565-24
1:944
§ 565-25. Certificates of compliance.
An Amendment, after a public hearing, is required when a change
in a permitted project is proposed that the Commission deems of
sufficient magnitude, in its nature, scope or impact, to potentially
warrant the imposition of additional conditions or to otherwise
warrant a public hearing. If the scope or purpose of the proposed
project has changed substantially or the wetland interests
identified in the Act and ordinance are not protected, the
Commission shall require the applicant to file a new notice of
intent.
(1)
A request for an amendment will not be reviewed or considered
under the following instances:
If the appropriate filing fee is not submitted with the request
to the Commission.
(a)
(b) If the order of conditions has expired.
(2)
Revocation.
The Commission may revoke an order of conditions issued under
the ordinance and these regulations if any of the following
circumstances occur:
The applicant and/or his/her successors fail to comply with the
terms of the order; or
(a)
New information relating to the project is obtained which
indicates that previous information presented to Commission
was inaccurate; or
(b)
The project changes substantially after the completion of the
Commission's review.
(c)
(1)
Prior to revoking an order of conditions, the Commission shall first
notify the applicant through certified mail or hand delivery and
shall hold a public hearing.
(2)
D.
Upon completion of the project, the applicant shall request in writing
from the Commission a certificate of compliance [see also 310 CMR
10.05(9)]. As-built plans may also be required as noted in the order of
conditions issued on the project. All as-built plans must be at the same
scale as the plans submitted with the notice of intent. The applicant
or his/her representative shall attend the scheduled meeting to answer
any questions the Commission may have. If the Commission determines
that the requirements of the order have not been met the request for
a certificate of compliance will be denied. The reasons for the denial
shall be forwarded to the applicant within 21 days of the receipt of the
request. The Commission may specify on the certificate of compliance
that certain conditions of the order of conditions are imposed
A.
§ 565-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-25
1:945
perpetually and do not expire with the issuance of the certificate of
compliance. The person to whom the certificate is issued shall forthwith
record it in the Southern Essex Registry of Deeds or Land Court in the
chain of title of the affected property and shall notify the Commission,
in writing, that said recording has occurred, by sending a copy of the
stamped recorded instrument to the Commission.
The following additional requirements must be satisfied in order to
receive a certificate of compliance:
A certificate of compliance can be granted for an expired order of
conditions.
(1)
When granted, a certificate of compliance will be issued to either
the original applicant or the current landowner.
(2)
The following information must be submitted to the Commission in
writing, in addition to the requirements of the order of conditions,
when requesting a certificate of compliance:
(a) The name and address of the current landowner.
The name and address of the individual/trust or corporation to
whom or which the certificate is to be granted.
(b)
(c) The street address and lot number for the project.
(d) The DEP file number.
A statement certifying compliance with the order of conditions
and the approved plan.
(e)
(3)
The person certifying compliance with the order of conditions must
have inspected the site, read the order of conditions and all
referenced documents, and reviewed the contents of the
Commission's files on the project. Depending on the scope and
complexity of the project, the Commission may require a certified
professional engineer or land surveyor to certify compliance.
(4)
B.
The Commission may withhold the issuance of a certificate of
compliance if the project in question is part of (or related to) another
project which is not currently in compliance.
C.
§ 565-25 BEVERLY CODE § 565-25
1:946
ARTICLE IX
Performance Guarantees
§ 565-26. Security.
The Commission may require the applicant to furnish a performance
guarantee in the form of a deposit of money in an amount determined by the
Commission to be sufficient to cover the cost of all or any part of the site
alterations specified in the permit and/or shown on the plans approved by
the Commission. This security shall be deposited in the name of the City of
Beverly. The standard agreement is included on the performance guarantee
form, which can be obtained from the Conservation Office. Security
amounts will be set so that funds will be adequate to comply with the
permit, repair damage to wetlands and to permanently stabilize the work
site and all soils. Security shall be determined on a site-by-site basis using
these general guidelines:
Project Range of Security
Single-family home $3,000 to $10,000 per dwelling
Commercial/Industrial facility $10,000 to $15,000 per building
Subdivision roadway $10,000 or more
Wetland replication $3 per square foot
§ 565-27. Covenant.
The Commission may require the applicant to secure the performance
and observance of conditions imposed on the project by a conservation
restriction, easement or other covenant enforceable in a court of law,
executed and duly recorded by the owner of record, running with the land
to the benefit of the City whereby the permit conditions shall be performed
and observed before any lot may be conveyed other than by mortgage deed.
§ 565-28. Reduction of security.
The penal sum of any required performance guarantee, or the amount of
any deposit held hereunder, may from time to time be reduced by the
Commission and the obligations of their parties thereto released by the
Commission in whole or in part. The release schedule(s) for the security
may be proposed by the applicant and, if acceptable, approved by the
Commission.
§ 565-29. Release of performance guarantee.
Upon completion of site alterations required in the permit, security for
the performance of which was given by security, deposit or covenant,
or upon the complete performance of the covenants with respect to the
site, the applicant may request and agree on the terms of release with
the Commission.
A.
§ 565-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-29
1:947
If the Commission determines that said alterations have been
completed in compliance with the conditions of the permits, it shall
release the interest of the City in such security and return the deposit to
the person who furnished same, or release the covenant, if appropriate.
If the Commission determines that said alterations have not been
completed in compliance with the permit, it shall, within 45 days,
specify to the applicant, in writing, the details wherein said alterations
fail to comply with the permit.
B.
If the applicant fails to complete the work secured by this agreement
by the above stated or extended deadline, the deposit of money may be
applied in whole, or in part, by and upon a vote of the Commission for
the benefit of the City of Beverly to the extent of the reasonable cost
to the City of completing such construction or installation as specified
in this agreement. Any unused money and the interest accrued on
the deposit of money, unless said interest is used to complete such
construction or installation, shall be returned to the applicant upon
completion of such construction or installation by the City upon a vote
of the Commission.
C.
§ 565-29 BEVERLY CODE § 565-29
1:948
ARTICLE X
Administration and Enforcement
§ 565-30. Availability of regulations; cost.
Copies of these regulations and the ordinance shall be made available for
purchase from the Beverly Conservation Commission, for the price of $15 in
the form of a check payable to the City of Beverly.
§ 565-31. Amendments.
These regulations may be amended from time to time by a majority vote of
the Commission. Prior to taking a vote on an amendment, the Commission
shall have held a public hearing on the proposed change(s).
§ 565-32. Policies.
The Commission may issue policy statements that further support these
regulations. These policies will be made available to any individual upon
request. Persons seeking permits under the ordinance and these regulations
should review the policy statements available in the Conservation Office.
§ 565-33. Effective date.
An advertised public hearing was held on these regulations on June 17,
2003. The Commission voted to adopt these regulations on June 17, 2003,
effective immediately. All amendments shall be effective upon their adoption
by the Commission following a public hearing and filing with the City
Clerk, subject to Article 8-4 of the City Charter, which states that no
rule or regulation adopted by a City agency shall become effective until
seven days following the date said regulation is filed with the City Clerk.
Such amendments, however, shall not apply to any permit application filed
prior to the first publication of notice of public hearing on the proposed
amendments.
§ 565-34. Severability.
If any provision of these regulations or the application thereof is held to
be invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not
affect other provisions or the application of any part of these regulations
not specifically held invalid, nor shall it invalidate any order, permit, or
determination which previously had been issued, and to this end the
provisions of these regulations are declared to be severable.
§ 565-35. Enforcement.
The Commission may enforce these regulations, or an order, permit, or
determination issued hereunder, in any manner consistent with Chapter
287, § 287-9, and all other laws. Enforcement orders (including stop-work
orders) may be issued under the ordinance and the Act (310 CMR 10.08) for
the following:
§ 565-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 565-35
1:949
Alteration of or activity or work within a wetland resource area or
associated buffer zone without a valid order of conditions; or
A.
Violation of the terms of any order of conditions, determination, or
permit; or
B.
Failure to complete a project if such failure has resulted in, or is likely
to result in, an adverse impact to a wetland resource area.
C.
§ 565-35 BEVERLY CODE § 565-35
1:950
Chapter A600
GENERAL LAWS AND SPECIAL ACTS
§ A600-1. Special Acts applicable to the City of Beverly.
The following table lists Acts of the General Court applicable to the City
of Beverly. Many of these acts require acceptance by the voters of the City
or the governing body to become effective, while others require no such
acceptance but are effective upon passage. Those acts specifically accepted
by the voters or the governing body are indicated as such. See also Charter
Article 9, Section 9-7, which recognizes and retains and/or repeals certain
Special Acts.
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1872, c.
24
Construction of buildings in
regard to fire
4-29-1897
Acts of 1881, c.
231
Refund of City indebtedness 7-6-1881 TM
Acts of 1882, c.
154
Public parks within City limits 3-3-1884 TM
Acts of 1885, c.
294
Furnishing the town with
water, and increasing the
supply
8-11-1885 TM
Acts of 1886, c.
264
Precinct voting in towns 9-16-1886 TM
Acts of 1890, c.
386
Printing and distributing of
ballots for town election
12-30-1890 TM
Acts of 1891, c.
97
Appointment of sewer
assessments
10-20-1899 Mayor
Acts of 1891, c.
179, § 4
Watering of streets 7-8-1896 Mayor
Acts of 1892, c.
377
Establishment of city
governments
9-7-1893 TM
Acts of 1893, c.
250
Incurring indebtedness for
purpose of constructing a
system of sewerage
5-2-1893 TM
Acts of 1893, c.
259
Cancellation of bonds held in
the sinking fund
5-2-1893
Acts of 1893 c.
364
Additional water supply **
Acts of 1894, c.
161
Incorporation of the City 5-1-1894
§ 565-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-1
1:951
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1894, c.
455
Licensing of plumbers and the
supervision of plumbing
3-22-1901 Mayor
Acts of 1896, c.
271
Indebtedness for park
purposes
6-30-1896
Acts of 1899, c.
344
Eight hours a day's work for
employees
Accepted at City
election, 12-11-1900
Referendum for same
Acts of 1913, c. 822,
12-9-1913
Acts of 1902, c.
437
Annuities to families of
members of police
departments
6-22-1911
Acts of 1903, c.
428
Police pensions in cities (see
also Acts of 1909, c. 188)
8-9-1911 Mayor
Acts of 1905, c.
373
Terms of auditors 12-12-1905 Election
Acts of 1906, c.
476
Pension of call firemen or
substitute call firemen
12-1911 Election
Acts of 1908, c.
216
Appointment of sidewalk
assessments
9-27-1911 Mayor
Acts of 1908, c.
513
Providing for public
playgrounds
12-8-1908 Election
Acts of 1909, c.
188
Police pensions in cities (see
also Acts of 1903, c. 428)
8-9-1911 Mayor
Acts of 1909, c.
423
Sale of ice cream,
confectionery, etc., on the
Lord's Day
3-26-1910
Acts of 1910, c.
505
Confirming proceedings of
Council
Acts of 1910, c.
542
Revision of Charter 11-8-1910 Election
Acts of 1912, c.
447
Retirement of certain veterans 12-18-1912 Mayor
Acts of 1912, c.
503
Pensioning laborers **
Acts of 1912, c.
544
Discontinuing use of land for
playground purposes
5-23-1912 Mayor
(hearing held as required
5-16-1912)
§ A600-1 BEVERLY CODE § A600-1
1:952
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1912, c.
546
Vacations of members of Fire
Department
12-10-1912 Election
Acts of 1913, c.
208
School Committee to appoint
school physician
1-30-1914 Mayor
Acts of 1913, c.
487
Promotion of call men in Fire
Department
12-9-1913 Election
Acts of 1913, c.
807
Compensating public
employees for injuries
12-12-1913 Election
Acts of 1913, c.
819
Submitting to voters on official
ballots questions of public
policy
11-7-1916 Election
Acts of 1914, c.
217 (amended
by Acts of
1932, c. 109;
Acts of 1937, c.
15)
Vacations of laborers 11-3-1914 Election
Acts of 1914, c.
650
Pension to George O. Obear 6-25-1914 Mayor
Acts of 1914, c.
688
Saturday half-holiday for
laborers, workmen and
mechanics
11-3-1914 Election
Acts of 1914, c.
790
Abolishing enrollment of
members of political parties
and limiting membership of
ward and town committees
11-3-1914
Special Acts of
1915, c. 72
Payment of permanent men in
Fire Department $3 a day
3-1-1915
Special Acts of
1915, c. 266
Indebtedness for the purpose
of relaying certain water mains
4-22-1915 Mayor
Acts of 1916, c.
98
Relative to calling and holding
of constitution convention
**
Acts of 1916, c.
104
New Year's Day as legal
holiday.
11-7-1916 Election
Acts of 1916, c.
179
Voters of one political party not
to vote in primaries of another
part
11-7-1916 Election
Acts of 1916, c.
185
Maintenance of schools of
agriculture and horticulture
11-7-1916 Election
§ A600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-1
1:953
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1916, c.
293
Leasing of motor vehicles
carrying passengers for hire
4-22-1918 Mayor
Acts of 1919, c.
116
Deposits on interest monthly 11-4-1919 Election
Acts of 1919, c.
311
Establishment and
maintenance of continuation
schools for minors
11-4-1919 Election
Acts of 1920, c.
26
Salaries of Mayor and other
public officers
2-18-1920 Mayor
Acts of 1920, c.
240
Sports and games on the
Lord's Day
4-20-1920
Acts of 1920, c.
619
State Bong Commission. 12-14-1920 Election (not
accepted by Board of
Aldermen)
Acts of 1922, c.
87
Payment to estate of Patrick
Gallagher for erroneous taxes
11-8-1922 Mayor
Acts of 1922, c.
140
Preliminary election for the
choice of officers in City
11-7-1922 Election
Acts of 1922, c.
155; Acts of
1924, c. 333
Payment to the widow of James
J. Fagan
3-31-1922; 5-23-1924
Mayor
Acts of 1923, c.
26
Changing name of Overseers of
Poor to the Board of Public
Welfare
5-25-1923 Mayor
Acts of 1923, c.
356
Pension to Walter Farnham 5-25-1923 Mayor
Acts of 1923, c.
391
Collection of water rates 7-20-1923 Mayor
Acts of 1923, c.
458, para. b
Pensions of foremen,
inspectors, mechanics, etc.
4-4-1928
Acts of 1930, c.
351
Uniforms for members of
Police and Fire Departments
6-25-1930 Mayor
Acts of 1930, c.
399
Uniform system of fire
prevention (licensing of openair
parking spaces)
5-19-1944 Mayor
Acts of 1931, c.
458, § 4
Indemnification of officers and
employees for damages
sustained on account of
operation of publicly owned
motor vehicles
2-16-1932 Mayor
§ A600-1 BEVERLY CODE § A600-1
1:954
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1936, c.
29
Biennial elections and other
Charter changes
11-3-1936 Election
Acts of 1936, c.
142
Chief of Police under civil
service
11-3-1936 Election
Acts of 1936, c.
223
Pension for retired public
school janitors
7-8-1936 Mayor
Acts of 1936, c.
231
Inspector of Wires under civil
service law
11-3-1936 Election
Acts of 1936, c.
290 (amended
by Acts of
1939, c. 243)
Pension for laborers 6-22-1937 Mayor
Acts of 1936, c.
318, §§ 26-31H
Contributory retirement
systems and making other
changes in the laws relative to
retirement systems
11-3-** Election
Acts of 1936, c.
439
Retirement of policemen and
firemen
Acts of 1937, c.
85
One day off in seven for police
officers
12-31-1943 Mayor
Acts of 1937, c.
102, § 1
Advancing date for abolition of
noncontributory pensions and
retirement allowances
Acts of 1938, c.
203
Chief of Fire Department
under the civil service
11-8-1939 Election
Acts of 1938, c.
415
Liens for and the collection of
water rates and charges
Acts of 1938, c.
426
One day off in six for police
officers
7-6-1942 Mayor
Acts of 1939, c.
108 (amended
by MGL c. 44,
§ 8A)
Approving or disapproving
orders authorizing issue of
bonds, etc.
1940 Election
Acts of 1939, c.
152
Absentee voting (amending
MGL c. 54, § 103A)
6-4-1942 Mayor; revoked
in accordance with MGL
c 54, § 103A 7-21-1948
Acts of 1941, c.
469
Authorizing City to take
property in Town of Danvers
for airport
§ A600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-1
1:955
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1941, c.
638
Hours of duty of members of
Fire Departments
7-6-1942 Mayor
Acts of 1941, c.
710
Bicycle registration 9-10-1942 Mayor
Acts of 1946, c.
113
Authorizing the number of
members of the reserve police
force
4-4-1946 Mayor
Acts of 1946, c.
576
Retirement of certain firemen
and policemen
8-3-1946
Acts of 1950, c.
820
Increase in the annual amounts
of certain pensions, etc.
2-12-1951 Mayor
Acts of 1951, c.
234
Salaries of ex officio members
of Water Supply Board
5-21-1951 Mayor
Acts of 1951, c.
238
Municipal election for Mayor,
members of Board of Aldermen
and members of School
Committee
4-12-1951
Acts of 1952, c.
624
Increase in the amounts of
pensions, retirement
allowances and annuities
payable to former public
employees
**
Acts of 1953, c.
434
Rent control 7-6-1953
Acts of 1954, c.
602
Amending Charter relative to
the election of certain officials
by the Board of Aldermen
Acts of 1955, c.
223
Additional pay to police
officers in attendance in
certain criminal cases
2-15-1967
Acts of 1955, c.
478
Salaries of Mayor and Board of
Aldermen
Acts of 1955, c.
670
Increase in the amounts of
pensions, retirement
allowances and annuities
payable to certain former
public employees
6-1-1956
Acts of 1956, c.
374
Pensions for widows of
policemen and firefighters
under the noncontributory
retirement law
9-25-1956
§ A600-1 BEVERLY CODE § A600-1
1:956
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1956, c.
401
Indemnification of civil defense
volunteers for damages
sustained through the
operation of publicly owned
vehicles
10-21-1957
Acts of 1956, c.
730
Contributory group life,
accident, hospitalization,
medical and surgical insurance
of persons in the service of the
City and their dependents
10-7-1957
Acts of 1957, c.
104
Compensation of certain
members of the South Essex
Sewerage District Board
3-18-1957
Acts of 1957, c.
133
Certain members of the School
Committee to be elected by
wards
3-29-1957
Acts of 1957, c.
427
Increasing the amount of
pension of certain retired
police officers and firefighters
10-7-1957
Acts of 1958, c.
145
Relative to the retirement of
veterans employed by the
South Essex Sewerage District
5-29-1958
Acts of 1959, c.
162
Granting a license for the sale
of alcoholic beverages to
Vittori Rocci Post No. 56 of the
Italian-American War Veterans
Acts of 1959, c.
204
Authorizing the payment of
sums of money to William
Devitt, Alice Huson, Bayard D.
Huson, Lawrence Lapointe,
Marie and Anthony Vaccaro
and Clifford and Henrietta C.
Caverly
5-4-1959
Acts of 1959, c.
434
Authorizing the payment of a
certain unpaid bill to
Merrimack-Essex Electric Co.
Acts of 1959, c.
493
Increasing the amounts of
pensions and retirement
allowances payable to certain
former public employees
11-19-1962
§ A600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-1
1:957
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1959, c.
595
Contribution for one-half of the
cost of certain premiums of
insurance of retired employees
11-2-1959, effective
1-1-1960
Acts of 1960, c.
113
Authorizing the establishment
of a separate account in the
City treasury for receipts of
Recreation Commission and
providing for expenditures
therefrom without further
appropriation
5-2-1960
Acts of 1960, c.
155
Providing for the initiative and
referendum
Acts of 1962, c.
112
Changing the date of biennial
municipal elections in City
3-19-1962
Acts of 1962, c.
249
Regulating the issuance of
nomination papers for use in
city and town primaries and
elections, and providing a limit
to the number of such papers
obtainable
6-10-1963
Acts of 1963, c.
139
Authorizing the acquisition of
land and construction of an offstreet
parking area
Acts of 1963, c.
478
Increase in the amounts of
pensions and retirement
allowances payable to certain
former public employees
11-2-1964
Acts of 1964, c.
486
Increase in the amounts of
pensions and retirement
allowance payable to certain
former public employees
Acts of 1965, c.
588
Life tenure for Walter T.
Barnes, incumbent City
Collector
11-15-1965
Acts of 1965, c.
613
License for the purpose of
maintaining solid fill with rip
rap slopes over certain
tidewaters in Beverly Harbor
to be irrevocable
Acts of 1966, c.
568
Authorizing City to appropriate
money to pay unpaid bills
§ A600-1 BEVERLY CODE § A600-1
1:958
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1967, c.
146
Authorizing City to pay unpaid
bill to Sid's Donuts, Inc.
Acts of 1968, c.
571
Validating certain building
permit issued by City
Acts of 1969, c.
74
Increasing amount authorized
for awarding contracts without
advertising
3-25-1969
Acts of 1969, c.
308
Accounting for receipts of
Youth Activities Commission
6-11-1969
Acts of 1969, c.
872
Overtime pay for police 12-29-1969
Acts of 1970, c.
624
Authorizing city to appropriate
money to pay unpaid bills
Acts of 1970, c.
661
Authorizing City to appropriate
money to pay unpaid bills
Acts of 1970, c.
857
Providing that a certain license
for placing and maintaining
solid fill on the Bass River be
irrevocable
Acts of 1971, c.
979
Authorizing the Salem and
Beverly Water Supply Board to
borrow money to expand its
facilities
Acts of 1972, c.
545
Authorizing the formation of a
vocational regional school
district
Acts of 1973, c.
563
Authorizing the conveyance of
certain commonwealth land in
the City of Beverly
Acts of 1973, c.
1139
Authorizing the conveyance of
certain land in the City of
Beverly
Acts of 1974, c.
64
Authorizing the City of Beverly
to convey certain land
Acts of 1974, c.
735
Authorizing the City of Beverly
to enter into a certain contract
with Gordon College for
sewage disposal
Acts of 1975, c.
67
Authorizing the borrowing of
money for the Salem and
Beverly Water Supply Board
§ A600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-1
1:959
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1975, c.
406
Establishes a Historic and
Scenic District Planning
Commission in Essex
Acts of 1975, c.
423
Authorizing the redrawing of
ward lines in the City of
Beverly
Acts of 1975, c.
735
Authorizing the borrowing of
money for the Salem and
Beverly Water Supply Board
Acts of 1975, c.
770
Establishes the South Essex
Solid Waste Disposal District
Acts of 1976, c.
521
Authorizing the reimbursement
of the City of Beverly for
certain land
Acts of 1981, c.
185
Authorizing the City of
Danvers to lay and maintain a
water main in the City of
Beverly
Acts of 1981, c.
192
Compensation of the Chairman
of the Salem and Beverly
Water Supply Board
Acts of 1981, c.
357
Authorizing certain licenses be
irrevocable
Acts of 1981, c.
461
Authorizing the Beverly
Firemen's Relief Association to
pay certain benefits to its
inactive members
Acts of 1982, c.
296
Compensation for School
Board members
9-20-1982 School Board
Acts of 1983, c.
250
Licensing and keeping of dogs
in City of Beverly
Acts of 1983, c.
493
Authorizing City of Beverly to
acquire easements for the
construction of **
Acts of 1984, c.
431
Provides funds for disaster
relief in City of Beverly
Acts of 1985, c.
131
Relating to the amount of
certain retirement and death
benefits which may be paid by
the Beverly Police Relief
Association, Inc.
§ A600-1 BEVERLY CODE § A600-1
1:960
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1985, c.
308
An act authorizing cities and
towns to assume responsibility
and liability for dog licensing,
control and regulation
4-7-1986
Acts of 1985, c.
360
An act further regulating the
rights of certain firefighters
and police officers who were
laid off in the years 1981 and
1982
4-7-1986
Acts of 1985, c.
727
An act further regulating real
estate tax exemptions of
organizations of Veterans of
War
3-3-1986
Acts of 1986, c.
194
Allows City to collect
scholarship funds by tax
checkoff
12-22-1988
Acts of 1986, c.
265
Requiring automatic sprinklers
in rooming houses
10-6-1986 Board
Acts of 1986, c.
366
Authorizing City of Beverly to
enter into a certain contract
with Gordon College for
sewage disposal
Acts of 1986, c.
533
Authorizing the acquisition of
land in the Town of Wenham by
City of Beverly
Acts of 1986, c.
705
An act further regulating
group life insurance
10-5-1987
Acts of 1987, c.
221
Establishing Beverly Harbor
Management Authority
Acts of 1987, c.
499
Allows communities to raise
exemption or property owned
by veterans' organizations to
$700,000
6-20-1988
Acts of 1987, c.
697
Pension reform bill 4-18-1989
§ A600-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-1
1:961
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Acts of 1988, c.
281
Required registrars and
election commissioners to
conduct voter education and
voluntary registration sessions
one day each year, between
April 1 and May 15, in each
public, private and vocational
high school in City
1-17-1989
Acts of 1989, c.
136
Authorizes City to pay certain
retroactive compensation
Acts of 1989, c.
653, § 40
New construction or other
physical additions to real
property occurring by
6-30-1990, to be valued and
assessed for fiscal year
beginning June 1 [amends
MGL c. 59, § 2A(a)]
6-18-1990
Acts of 1990, c.
254
Allows persons remaining in
service after the age of 70 to
be granted creditable service
for that time; and further
allows the Retirement Board to
pay for the physical
examination required for
service after the age of 70
3-4-1991
Acts of 1990, c.
281
Board of Assessors re:
removing minimal balance on
taxes owed
10-18-1993
Acts of 1990, c.
291
Implementation of enhanced
911 emergency service
9-3-1991
Acts of 1991, c.
330
Amends § 1 of c. 131 of the
Acts of 1985 by increasing
certain retirement and death
benefits
2-8-1992 Board
House Bill
144888
Charter change - amend House
Bill
4-20-1993
§ A600-2. General Law acceptances.
The following table lists General Laws of the state accepted by the City of
Beverly, including their date of acceptance or approval.
§ A600-1 BEVERLY CODE § A600-2
1:962
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
Rev. Laws, c.
32, § 82
Pensions to certain members of
Fire Department
12-14-1915 Election
Rev. Laws, c.
108, §§ 26-28
An ordinance relating to a
reserve police force
4-12-1902 Mayor
MGL c. 29,
§ 64D
7.5% to deferred compensation 6-27-1996
MGL c. 31,
§ 47
Civil service status for
employees in labor service
2-13-1945 Mayor
MGL c. 32,
§ 4(1)(h)
Veterans to purchase up to
four years of service to be
added to retirement
9-6-1996
MGL c. 32,
§ 12(2)(d) (Acts
of 2011, c.
176)
Retirement increase benefit to
surviving spouse
4-2-2012
MGL c. 32,
§ 22(1) (as
established by
Acts of 1987, c.
697)
Pension reform bill 4-18-1989
MGL c. 32,
§ 44
Increasing pension to retired
public school janitors
7-8-1936
MGL c. 32,
§§ 56-59
(amended by
Acts of 1934, c.
285, § 2; Acts
of 1937, c. 102,
§ 2)
Retirement systems and
pensions to veterans, etc.
4-27-1936 Mayor
MGL c. 32,
§ 77A
Providing pensions for widows
of laborers under the
noncontributory pension
system
11-7-1960
MGL c. 32,
§ 89A
Increase in annuities to
dependents of certain public
employees killed or dying from
injuries received or hazards
undergone in performance of
duty
12-4-1950
§ A600-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-2
1:963
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
MGL c. 32,
§ 89B
Providing annuities to
dependents of certain police
officers and firefighters killed
in the performance of duty
5-20-1963
MGL c. 32,
§§ 90A, 90C
Increasing allowances of
certain retired employees
10-6-1969
MGL c. 32,
§ 95A
Granting annuities to surviving
spouse, or children, of certain
officials or employees who
have been retired or pensioned
under any noncontributory
retirement law
11-6-1961
MGL c. 32B,
§ 9D
Contribution by City toward
former employee's surviving
spouse's insurance premium
9-6-1977
MGL c. 32B,
§ 11A
Allowing any City employee to
purchase additional life
insurance at no additional cost
to City
6-29-1972
MGL c. 32B,
§ 11B
Extension of contributory
group hospital, surgical,
medical insurance to elderly
persons retired from the
service of the commonwealth
and from certain counties,
cities, towns and districts and
to their dependents
9-4-1962
MGL c. 32B,
§ 11E
Regarding retired school
teacher's insurance
6-5-1972
MGL c. 32B,
§ 18
Medicare Part B Extension
Plans
12-6-2004
MGL c. 32B,
§ 20
Establish OPEB Trust Fund 4-6-2015
MGL c. 32B,
§ 20 (as
amended)
Establish OPEB Trust Fund
(amended)
11-21-2016
MGL c. 32B,
§§ 22 and 23
and Acts of
2011, c. 69
Health insurance benefit
changes
8-2-2012
MGL c. 33,
§ 54
Pay and vacation status of
municipal employees in militia
8-5-1948 Mayor
§ A600-2 BEVERLY CODE § A600-2
1:964
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
MGL c. 39, § 6 Election warrants 12-17-1973
MGL c. 39, § 7 Holding other offices 11-28-1979
MGL c. 39,
§ 23D
Attendance leeway to board
and commission members
9-18-2006
MGL c. 40,
§ 6E
Temporary minor repairs on
private ways
10-4-1951 Mayor
MGL c. 40,
§ 6F
Making repairs on private
ways
7-6-1953
MGL c. 40, § 6J Purchase of work clothes 5-2-1969 Mayor
MGL c. 40,
§ 6K
Authorizing City to purchase
uniforms for certain public
health nurses
5-22-1967
MGL c. 40,
§ 8A
Establishing Development and
Industrial Commission.
11-17-1958
MGL c. 40,
§ 8C
Pertaining to establishment of
a Conservation Commissioner
5-15-1961
MGL c. 40,
§ 8D
Establishment of Historical
Commission
3-15-1965
MGL c. 40,
§ 8G
Police Mutual Aid Programs 3-15-2004
MGL c. 40,
§ 12
Public bathhouses 2-16-1916
MGL c. 40,
§ 13
Authorizing the appropriation
of money to establish and
maintain a municipal buildings
insurance fund
11-21-1965
MGL c. 40,
§ 21
Parking on private property 7-2-1962
MGL c. 40,
§§ 21, 22, 22A
and 22D
Handicapped parking 6-15-1987
MGL c. 40,
§ 21D
Noncriminal disposition of
ordinance violations; use of
citations in a form approved by
the Chief Justice of the District
Courts
§ A600-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-2
1:965
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
MGL c. 40,
§ 22D
Authorizing removal and
storage by private contractors
at direction of City Police at
owner's expense of vehicle
impeding snow removal or
parked in violation of parking
regulations
10-30-1968
MGL c. 40,
§ 22F
Increase in municipal lien fees 6-7-2004
MGL c. 40,
§ 32A
Publication of ordinances 10-31-1934 Mayor
MGL c. 40,
§§ 42A-42F
Sewer liens 4-20-1993
MGL c. 40,
§§ 42G-42L
Special assessments to meet
cost of laying water pipes in
certain ways
3-20-1958 Mayor
MGL c. 40,
§§ 42H, 42I
Uniform rate of assessment,
recordation of assessment to
establish lien on property;
amount of assessment and
extension of time for payment
MGL c. 40,
§§ 42H, 42I
Water connection fee 3-3-1986
MGL c. 40,
§ 57
License and permits of
delinquent taxpayers
10-19-1992
MGL c. 40,
§ 61
Permitting City to construct,
etc., any private way which has
been used by the public for 50
years or more
6-14-1965
MGL c. 40,
§ 611
Providing that cities and towns
may make repairs on private
ways without liability for
damage
9-8-1964
MGL c. 40,
§ 100B
Indemnification of retired
police officers and firefighters
for reasonable hospital,
medical and surgical expenses
1979
MGL c. 41,
§ 13B
Delegation of authority to City
Clerk pertaining to renewal of
licenses and permits
7-30-1979
§ A600-2 BEVERLY CODE § A600-2
1:966
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
MGL c. 41,
§ 19F
Providing that city clerks shall
be paid additional
compensation as clerks of the
city council
5-3-1965
MGL c. 41,
§ 38A
Collection by Collector of
accounts due to City
9-4-1941 Mayor
MGL c. 41,
§§ 81A-81J
Municipal planning 4-23-1945 Mayor
MGL c. 41,
§ 91
Appointment and removal of
constables in cities
4-21-1959
MGL c. 41,
§ 100B
Indemnification of retired
police officers and firefighters
for reasonable hospital,
medical and surgical expenses
12-5-1960
MGL c. 41,
§ 100F
Indemnification of
Harbormaster against certain
actions and claims
4-2-1973
MGL c. 41,
§ 108L
Quinn Bill 10-4-1999
MGL c. 42, § 2
(Acts of 1992)
Recreation and Park Revolving
Fund
2-1-1993
MGL c. 44,
§ 16A
Use of facsimile
countersignatures upon bonds,
notes and certificates of
indebtedness
9-4-1962
MGL c. 44,
§ 53C
Repayment of off-duty police
officers
1-22-1973
MGL c. 44,
§ 53E
Offset receipts 2-1-1993
MGL c. 44,
§ 53F 1/2
Enterprise Funds 2-17-1998
MGL c. 44,
§ 55C
Beverly Affordable Housing
Trust Fund
2-6-2017
MGL c. 44,
§ 64
Payment of bills in excess of
appropriations
6-5-1972
MGL c. 44B,
§§ 3-7
Community Preservation Act 11-6-2012 Election
MGL c. 48,
§ 57A
Days off for working on
holidays for members of Fire
Department
10-1-1958
§ A600-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-2
1:967
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
MGL c. 48,
§ 57C
Permitting time off without loss
of pay for delegates to certain
conventions of firefighters
9-3-1963
MGL c. 48,
§ 57E
An additional day's pay for the
fire chief on duty on certain
holidays
6-18-1965
MGL c. 48,
§ 58B
Hours of duty of permanent
members of Fire Department
11-8-1960 Election
MGL. c. 48,
§ 59A
Aid of Fire Department to
other cities
9-7-1932
MGL c. 48,
§§ 59B, 59C,
59D
Reserve list firefighters 3-21-2005
MGL c. 54,
§ 11
Election officers, deputy, etc. 11-8-1922
MGL c. 59, § 5,
cl. 41
Over 65 taxes 4-5-1999
MGL c. 59, § 5,
cl. 50
Residential tax exemption for
alterations to property to
accommodate person over 60
6-25-2007
MCL c. 59, § 5,
cl. 55
Increase personal exemption
amount for Clause 17D, Clause
41C; increase qualifying asset
limit for Clause 17D
6-22-2018
MGL c. 59,
§ 21A
Compensation for assessors 5-1-1972
MGL c. 59,
§ 59 5(54)
Tax exemption on personal
property accounts under
$2,000
5-15-2006
MGL c. 64G,
§ 3A
Hotel-motel excise tax 2-1-1988
MGL c. 64J,
§ 13
Imposition, payment, collection
of excise tax on sale or use of
aircraft fuel
12-5-1988
MGL c. 71,
§ 40
Extending minimum salary for
teachers.
2-18-1987
MGL c. 71,
§ 71E
Establishment of revolving
accounts for adult education
and summer school
2-26-1979
§ A600-2 BEVERLY CODE § A600-2
1:968
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
MGL c. 80,
§ 14 (repealed
Acts of 1923, c.
377, § 6)
Betterments 2-19-1921
MGL c. 83,
§§ 16A-16F
Sewer liens 4-20-1993
MGL c. 90,
§ 17C
Lower speed limit to 25 miles
per hour
2-6-2017
MGL c. 90,
§ 18A
Pedestrian jaywalking law 12-26-1968
MGL c. 90,
§ 20A 1/2
Collection of parking fine
monies
9-8-1981
MGL c. 90,
§ 20C
Fines and penalties 7-15-1969 Mayor
MGL c. 130,
§§ 1, 8A
Enforcement of certain marine
fisheries laws by police officers
3-31-1964
MGL c. 136,
§ 7 (amended
by Acts of
1934, c. 373,
§ 7)
** **
MGL c. 140,
§ 47
Licensing tea houses. 6-29-1923 Mayor
MGL c. 147,
§ 13B
Appointment of reserve police
force
6-21-1965
MGL c. 147,
§ 17A
Days off for working on
holidays for members of Police
Department
10-1-1958
MGL c. 148,
§§ 26C, 26D
and 26E
Heat and smoke detectors 2-4-1980
MGL c. 148,
§ 26G
Installation of automatic
sprinkler systems
1-21-1985
MGL c. 148,
§ 26H
Sprinklers 3-1-2004
MGL c. 148,
§ 26I
Automatic sprinkler systems in
residential properties with four
or more units
6-18-1990
MGL c. 149,
§ 33B
Compensation for overtime 5-12-1969 Mayor
§ A600-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A600-2
1:969
Citation Subject Acceptance/Approval
Date
MGL c. 152,
§ 69
Extend workers' compensation
to all school personnel
3-7-2011
MGL c. 152,
§ 69
Extend workers' compensation
to all workers except police
and Fire
6-4-2012
MGL c. 180,
§ 17A
Authorizing payroll deductions
on account of union dues or
dues to state employees'
association for certain
employees.
7-27-1964
MGL c. 268A,
§§ 1(n), 17(c)
Members of Conservation
Commission designated special
municipal employees
6-5-1989
Acts of 1999, c.
158, § 4
Extend mailing time tax bills 3-3-2000
Acts of 2002, c.
116
Early Retirement Incentive
Program
9-9-2002
Acts of 2005, c.
157, §§ 1 and 2
Retirement benefits for
veterans
1-16-2007
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of Code of Ordinances to 2016 Code.
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. III.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Article/Section from Prior Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
Article I, General Provisions
1.01, How Code Designated and Cited NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. III
1.02, Rules of Construction and Definitions Ch. 1, Art. I
1.03, References to Titles, Chapters, or
Sections
NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. III
1.04, When Ordinances Take Effect Ch. 1, Art. I
1.05, Fees Ch. 1, Art. II
1.06, Fines for Penalties Ch. 1, Art. II
1.07, Regulations Ch. 1, Art. I
§ A600-2 BEVERLY CODE § DT-1
1:970
Article/Section from Prior Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
1.08, Severability NLP; see Ch. 1, Art. III
1.09, City Seal Ch. 1, Art. I
Article II, Elective Offices in General Ch. 26
Article III, Officers and Employees Chosen by
the City Council
Ch. 58, Art. I
Article IV, The School Committee Ch. 72
Article V, The Mayor Ch. 58, Art. II
Article VI, City Agencies Ch. 7
Article VII, Multiple Member Bodies Ch. 15
Article VIII, City Officers Ch. 58, Art. III and Art. IV
Article IX, Airport Ch. 105, Art. I
Article X, Animals Ch. 117
Article XI, Buildings and Building Regulations Ch. 130
Article XII, Electricity Ch. 253, Art. I
Article XIII, Fire Prevention and Protection Ch. 159
Article XIV, Solid Waste
14.01, Dumpster Regulations Ch. 244, Art. I, § 244-1
14.02, Construction/Alteration Projects Ch. 244, Art. I, § 244-2
14.03, Residential Storage of Rubbish and
Garbage
Ch. 244, Art. II
Article XV, Historic Districts Ch. 168, Art. I
Article XVI, Demolition of Historically
Significant Buildings
Ch. 168, Art. II
Article XVII, License and Business Regulations Ch. 192
Article XVIII, Motor Buses and Hackney
Carriages
Ch. 274, Art. I
Article XIX, Taxicabs and Liveries Ch. 274, Art. II
Article XX (Reserved) Omitted
Article XXI, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 270
Article XXII, Offenses and Miscellaneous
Provisions
22.01, Abandoned Refrigerators Ch. 244, Art. III, § 244-7
22.02, Advertisements and Notices Ch. 215, § 215-1
22.03, Air Guns, Snowballs, Roller Skating,
Etc., in Streets
Ch. 215, § 215-2
22.04, Ashes, Rubbish, Etc. Ch. 244, Art. III, § 244-8
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:971
Article/Section from Prior Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
22.05, Litter Ch. 244, Art. III, § 244-9
22.06, Obstructing Traffic by Stopping,
Loitering or Sauntering
Ch. 253, Art. II, § 253-2
22.07, Auctions Ch. 215, § 215-3
22.08, Defacing Public Property Ch. 215, § 215-4
22.09, Drinking Fountains Ch. 215, § 215-5
22.10, Possession or Consumption of
Alcoholic Beverages in Public Buildings
Ch. 113, § 113-1
22.11, Barriers Required During Excavations Ch. 215, § 215-6
22.12, Fences Ch. 253, Art. II, § 253-23
22.13, Firearms Ch. 155, § 155-1
22.14, Carrying Certain Weapons or Weapon-
Like Objects
Ch. 155, § 155-2
22.15, Gambling Ch. 215, § 215-7
22.16, Trespass in Gardens Ch. 215, § 215-8
22.17, Open-Air Fires Ch. 215, § 215-9
22.18, Peeping or Spying Ch. 215, § 215-10
22.19, Profanity Ch. 215, § 215-11
22.20, Signs, Awnings, Etc. Ch. 253, Art. II, § 253-24
22.21, Smoking Around Docks, Warehouses,
Etc.
REP
22.22, Motorboat Noise Control Ch. 124, § 124-1
22.23, Swimming or Bathing Ch. 124, § 124-2
22.24, Placing and/or Depositing Snow or Ice
into Streets or Sidewalks
Ch. 215, § 215-12
22.25, Vehicles on Sidewalks Ch. 215, § 215-13
22.26, Water Pollution Prohibited Ch. 124, § 124-3
22.27, Vessels Passing Wharves Ch. 124, § 124-4
22.28, Alcoholic Beverages Prohibited on
Public Ways, Etc.; Authorized Seizure;
Exception
Ch. 113, § 113-2
22.29, Loitering Between 10:00 P.M. and
8:00 A.M. Prohibited; Arrest; Penalty
Ch. 215, § 215-14
22.30, Access to Beverly Golf and Tennis
Club Property Restricted
Ch. 215, § 215-15
22.31
(a), Dogs in Cemeteries See Ch. 117, § 117-13C
§ DT-1 BEVERLY CODE § DT-1
1:972
Article/Section from Prior Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
(b), Nighttime limitation on retail sale of
food
Ch. 215, § 215-16
22.32, Smoking Prohibited in Municipal
Buildings and Upon Public School Grounds
REP
22.33, Motorized Scooter, Motorized
Skateboard, or other Similar Motorized
Motor Vehicle
Ch. 236, § 236-1
22.34, Skateboarding Ch. 236, § 236-2
22.35 - 22.39, Noise Ch. 201
22.40, Waterways Regulations Ch. 124, § 124-5
22.41, Glover Wharf Regulations Ch. 124, § 124-6
22.42, Camping, Storage and Open Fires on
Public Property
Ch. 210, Art. II
Article XXIII, Alarm Systems Ch. 109
Article XXIV, Child Safety Zones Ch. 136
Article XXV, Parks and Recreation Ch. 210, Art. I
Article XXVI, Personnel Ch. 69, Art. I
Article XXVII, Classification and Pay Plan Ch. 69, Art. II
Article XXVIII, Public Services
28.01, Recycling Certain Rubbish Materials Ch. 244, Art. IV
28.02, Trash Removal and Disposal Service
Fee
Ch. 244, Art. V
28.03, Same - Unaccepted Streets Ch. 253, Art. III
Article XXIX, Streets, Highways and Bridges Ch. 253, Art. IV
Article XXX, Water Ch. 282
Article XXXI, Cross-Connection Control
Program
Ch. 143
Article XXXII, Stormwater and Construction
Site Management
Ch. 249
Article XXXIII, Trench Safety and Permits Ch. 253, Art. V
Article XXXIV, Sewers Ch. 227
Article XXXV, Shellfish Ch. 232
Article XXXVI, Trees Ch. 261
Article XXXVII, Wetlands Protection Ch. 287
Article XXXVIII, Zoning Ch. 300
38-1, Title, Purpose, and Interpretation Art. I
38-2, Definitions Art. II
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:973
Article/Section from Prior Code of
Ordinances
Location in 2016 Code
38-3, Zoning Districts Art. III
38-4, Zoning Map Art. IV
38-5, General Provisions Art. V
38-6, Common Permitted Uses Art. VI
38-7 - 38-23, District Regulations Art. VII
38-24, Special Density and Dimensional
Regulations
Art. IX
38-25, Parking and Loading Requirements Art. X
38-26, Signs Art. XI
38-27, Nonconforming Situations Art. XII
38-28, Board of Appeals Art. XIII
38-29, Administration and Enforcement Art. XIV
38-30, Amendment Art. XIV
38-31, Overlay District(s) Art. VIII
38-32, Validity Art. XIV
38-33, Municipal Open Space and Recreation
District
Art. VII
38-34, Inclusion of Affordable Housing Art. XV
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Adoption
Date
Ord. No. Subject Disposition
2-1-2016 033 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2-1-2016 034 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2-1-2016 035 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
2-16-2016 013 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. III
2-16-2016 036 Animals amendment Ch. 117
3-7-2016 032 Personnel policies
amendment
Ch. 69, Art. I
§ DT-1 BEVERLY CODE § DL-1
1:974
Adoption
Date
Ord. No. Subject Disposition
3-21-2016 069 Boards, commissions,
councils, committees
and authorities
amendments
Ch. 15
4-19-2016 014 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
4-19-2016 055 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
4-19-2016 082 Investment Policy NCM
5-2-2016 067 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
5-2-2016 068 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
5-2-2016 088 Board of Health fees
amendment
Ch. 400, Art. XIII
5-2-2016 081 Licenses and business
regulations amendment
Ch. 192
6-6-2016 101 Water amendment Ch. 282
6-20-2016 070A Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
8-1-2016 169 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
8-1-2016 172 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
9-6-2016 181 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
9-19-2016 199 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
9-19-2016 200 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
10-17-2016 212 Licenses and business
regulations amendment
Ch. 192
10-17-2016 222 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
10-17-2016 225 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
11-7-2016 236 Boards, commissions,
councils, committees
and authorities
amendment
Ch. 15
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:975
Adoption
Date
Ord. No. Subject Disposition
12-5-2016 197A Classification and pay
plan amendment
Ch. 69, Art. II
12-5-2016 248 Inclusionary housing
regulations amendment
Ch. 315
12-5-2016 250 Licenses and business
regulations amendment
Ch. 192
1-3-2017 280 Boards, commissions,
councils, committees
and authorities
amendment; officers
and employees
amendment
Ch. 15; Ch. 58
2-6-2017 301 Affordable Housing
Trust Fund
Ch. 33, Art. I
3-20-2017 211A Zoning amendment Ch. 300
3-20-2017 328 Boards, commissions,
councils, committees
and authorities
amendment
Ch. 15
4-3-2017 334 Child safety zones
amendment
Ch. 136
4-3-2017 346 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
6-5-2017 401 Boards, commissions,
councils, committees
and authorities
amendment
Ch. 15
6-5-2017 405 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
6-19-2017 144A Zoning amendment Ch. 300
6-19-2017 386 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
6-28-2017 Board of
Health
Smoking in workplaces
and public places
amendment
Ch. 400, Art. IX
6-28-2017 Board of
Health
Sale of tobacco
products amendment
Ch. 400, Art. IXA
7-18-2017 Planning
Board
Inclusionary housing
regulations amendment
Ch. 315
7-31-2017 374A Zoning amendment Ch. 300
9-27-2017 Planning
Board
Inclusionary housing
regulations amendment
Ch. 315
§ DL-1 BEVERLY CODE § DL-1
1:976
Adoption
Date
Ord. No. Subject Disposition
10-16-2017 495 Alcoholic beverages
amendment
Ch. 113
10-16-2017 496 Boards, commissions,
councils, committees
and authorities
amendment
Ch. 15
11-6-2017 373 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
11-6-2017 482 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
11-6-2017 482A Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
11-20-2017 507 Zoning amendment Ch. 300
11-20-2017 519 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
11-20-2017 520 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
3-20-2018 ConCom Wetlands protection
regulations
Ch. 565
4-17-2018 048 Parks, Recreation Areas
and Public Property:
Use of Parks and Public
Spaces
Ch. 210, Art. III
4-17-2018 049 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
5-21-2018 079 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 270
6-20-2018 Board of
Health
Noise Control
Amendment
Ch. 400, Art. XI
6-18-2018 117B Solid Waste: Bring Your
Own Bag
Ch. 244, Art. VI
6-18-2018 067B Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
12-3-2018 225-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 270
12-3-2018 226-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 270
12-3-2018 227-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 270
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:977
Adoption
Date
Ord. No. Subject Disposition
6-22-2018 General Laws and
Special Acts
Amendment
Ch. A600
6-22-2018 General Laws and
Special Acts
Amendment
Ch. A600
6-22-2018 General Laws and
Special Acts
Amendment
Ch. A600
1-7-2019 211B Peace and Good Order
Amendment
Ch. 215
1-7-2019 213A Zoning Amendment Ch. 300
1-7-2019 231 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 270
§ DL-1 BEVERLY CODE § DL-1
1:978

ZONING
300 Attachment 2
City of Beverly
Table of Dimensional Requirements

District Minimum Lot Area
Frontage
Front Yard 
Side Yard
Rear Yard 
Maximum Height

R-90 90,000 square feet 225 30 20 25 35
R-45 45,000 square feet 175 30 20 25 35
R-22 22,000 square feet 150 30 15 25 35
R-15 15,000 square feet 125 30 15 25 35
R-10 10,000 square feet 100 20 15 25 35
R-6 1,000 square feet 65 20 10 25 35
RMD 4,000 square feet 65 20 10 20 35
RHD 3,000 square feet 50 15 15 20 55
CC1 None None None None None 55
CG2 10,000 square feet 80 30 15 15 35
IR 2 acres 225 30 20 25 60
IG None None None None None 70 
HD 10 acres 225 30 20 25 65
BHD - None 5 25 20 35
WDR - 65 5 25 20 See § 300-46
NOTES:
1 For CC-zoned lots with side and/or rear lot lines abutting residentially-zoned lots, setback and height requirements are the same as that abutting residential
zone.
2 See § 300-41D.
300 Attachment 2:1 01 - 01 - 2016