Chapter 10 

GENERAL PROVISIONS 

10:1 

ARTICLE 1 
Construction and General Penalty[Adopted as Art. 1 of the 1981 Bylaws] 
§ 10-100. Organization of bylaws. 
A. 	The bylaws of the Town of Belmont shall consist of two parts, as follows: 
(1) 	
Part I, General Bylaws. 

(2) 	
Part II, Zoning Bylaw. 


B. 	The Zoning Bylaw, as amended, in force on the effective date of this codification of the General Bylaws, shall remain in force and shall notbe affected by any provisions of the General Bylaws except as may bespecifically provided therein. 
§ 10-105. Repealer. 
All bylaws of the Town in force prior to the effective date of these GeneralBylaws, except the Zoning Bylaw, are hereby repealed, subject to the provisions of the following § 10-110. 
§ 10-110. Effect of repeal. 
The repeal of any bylaw shall not affect any act theretofore done, any liability incurred, any right accrued or established, any action, suit or proceeding commenced, or any punishment, penalty or forfeiture incurredunder such repealed bylaw. The repeal of a bylaw shall not have the effect of reviving any bylaw previously in force. 
§ 10-115. Construction of General Bylaws. 
A. 	If any of the provisions of the General Bylaws shall affect matters addressed in a statute to which the Town is subject, a reasonable effortshall be made to construe such provisions consistently with the statute.In case of conflict between the provisions of a statute and any provision of the General Bylaws, the statute shall control, but only to the extentof such conflict. 
B. 	Words importing the singular number may extend and be applied to several persons or things, words importing the plural number mayinclude the singular, and words of one gender may be construed to include the other gender and the neuter. [Added 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
C. 	Headings and captions are for reference purposes only as an editorialaid to the reader and are not substantive provisions of the bylaws. They are not legally adopted parts of the bylaws as voted by Town Meetingand shall not be used in the interpretation of the bylaws. [Added5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
10:3 

§ 10-115 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 10-120 

D. 	Historical information (adoption and approval dates) and cross-references appearing in brackets and footnotes are not part of the bylaws and have been inserted for reference purposes only. [Added5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
E. 	The General Bylaws may be adopted, repealed, or amended at any Town Meeting in accordance with law. At the direction of the Bylaw ReviewCommittee, the Town Clerk shall assign appropriate alphanumericreferences to chapters, articles, sections, subsections, paragraphs, and subparagraphs of the General Bylaws and, in each case, the assignmentof references shall be identified by a footnote or other convention.
[Added 5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-2015] 
§ 10-120. General penalty. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved10-8-2013] 
Any person violating any provision of the General Bylaws shall be subject to a fine of $100 for each offense, unless the bylaw specifically provides for adifferent amount. 
10:4 

Chapter 20 
ELECTED OFFICIALS 

10:5 

ARTICLE 1 
Moderator 
[Adoption of a bylaw pertaining to the Moderator is pending. Thisarticle is reserved for the inclusion of that bylaw following itsadoption.] 
10:7 

ARTICLE 2 
Town Clerk [Adopted as Art. 5 of the 1981 Bylaws] 
§ 20-200. General powers and duties. 
A. 	The Town Clerk shall have all the powers and perform all the duties of town clerks under the General Laws, any special laws applicable tothe Town, including the Representative Town Meeting Act,1 the General Bylaws and the Zoning Bylaw of the Town. 
B. 	The Town Clerk shall be the keeper of the Town Seal. 
C. 	The Town Clerk shall have stated hours for the transaction of business on all days on which the Town offices are open and shall give public notice thereof. 
D. 	A schedule of fees fixed by the Town Clerk shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the Clerk's office and may be revised from time to time as the Clerk sees fit, in accordance with the provisions of MGL c.40, § 22F. [Amended 4-25-2005 ATM, approved 6-8-2005] 
§ 20-205. Town records. 
A. 	The Town Clerk shall: 
(1) 	
Keep a file of all Town reports, reports and records of boards and committees of the Town and all original documents relating to theaffairs of the Town which come into the Town Clerk's custody.The Town Clerk shall suitably index all such reports, records and documents in a manner convenient for reference and examination. 

(2) 	
Maintain a list of the names and addresses of the current members of all Town boards, committees and commissions. 

(3) 	
Annually furnish the Selectmen, for publication in the Annual TownReport, a copy of the motions presented and the action takenthereon under all articles in the warrant for every Town Meeting held during the preceding year. 

(4) 	
Keep a true copy of all deeds or conveyances executed by theSelectmen in a book to be kept for that purpose alone. 


B. 	It shall be the duty of the Town Clerk to see that every conveyance tothe Town of an interest in land is properly recorded in the Registry ofDeeds. 
§ 20-210. Town Meeting. 
1. Editor's Note: See Ch. A201, Representative Town Meeting Act. 
10:9 
§ 20-210 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 20-215 

A. 	The Town Clerk shall employ a competent stenographer who shall besworn and shall make a verbatim record of the entire proceedings of every Town Meeting, in order to assist the Town Clerk in obtainingand retaining a proper record of the proceedings. The Town Clerk,the Board of Selectmen and any other Town officer may require the stenographer to transcribe the whole or any part of the notes of suchproceedings. The stenographer's notes shall be filed with the TownClerk and shall be a public record of the Town. Compensation for the stenographer shall be paid by the Town. Any voter of the Town mayat any time request that the Town Clerk require the stenographer totranscribe and furnish such voter with a record of the whole or any part of the proceedings of any Town Meeting, provided such voter shall paythe stenographer in advance therefor, at the customary rates chargedby such stenographer. 
§ 20-215. Town Election. 
A. 	Not later than 60 days before the date of the Annual Town Electionat which the term of office of any Town Meeting Members will expire, the Town Clerk shall notify all such Town Meeting Members of theexpiration date of their term and shall make available to them a formof written notice of their intent to run for reelection pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 53, § 10. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
B. 	As soon as practicable after each Town Election, the Town Clerk shall notify each person who was duly elected to a Town office of suchelection. 
10:10 

ARTICLE 3 
Town Treasurer 
[Adopted as Art. 6 of the 1981 Bylaws] 

§ 20-300. General powers and duties. 
A. 	The Town Treasurer shall: 
(1) 	
Be the Collector of Taxes and shall have all the powers and performthe duties imposed by law on town treasurers and collectors of taxes. 

(2) 	
Have stated hours for the transaction of business on all days onwhich Town offices are open and shall give public notice thereof. 

(3) 	
Have custody of all funds belonging to the Town, except funds for which other provision is made by law or these bylaws. 

(4) 	
Annually make a report of the activities of the office, which reportshall include a detailed statement of all trust and other funds in his charge, together with a statement of the Town debt, and shall beprinted in the Annual Town Report. 


B. 	All Town officers shall pay all fees received by them by virtue of their office into the Town treasury. 
§ 20-305. Licenses and permits. [Added 4-25-1994 ATM, approved10-12-1994] 
A. 	The Town Treasurer shall annually furnish to each department, board,commission or division, hereinafter referred to as the "licensingauthority," that issues licenses or permits, including renewals and transfers, a list of any person, corporation, or business enterprise,hereinafter referred to as the "party," that has neglected or refused topay any local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges for not less than a twelve-month period, and that such partyhas not filed in good faith a pending application for an abatement ofsuch taxes or a pending petition before the Appellate Tax Board. 
B. 	The licensing authority may deny, revoke or suspend any license orpermit, including renewals and transfers, of any party whose nameappears on said list furnished to the licensing authority from the Town Treasurer or with respect to any activity, event or other matter whichis the subject of such license or permit and which activity, event ormatter is carried out or exercised or is to be carried out or exercised on or about real estate owned by any party whose name appears onsaid list furnished to the licensing authority from the Town Treasurer;provided, however, that written notice is given to the party and the Town Treasurer, as required by applicable provisions of law, and theparty is given a hearing, to be held not earlier than 14 days after saidnotice. Said list shall be prima facie evidence for denial, revocation or 
10:11 

§ 20-305 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 20-305 

C. 
D. 
E. 
suspension of said license or permit to any party. The Town Treasurershall have the right to intervene in any hearing conducted with respect to such license denial, revocation or suspension. Any findings made bythe licensing authority with respect to such license denial, revocationor suspension shall be made only for the purposes of such proceeding and shall not be relevant to or introduced in any other proceedingat law, except for any appeal from such license denial, revocationor suspension. Any license or permit denied, suspended or revoked under this section shall not be reissued or renewed until the licensingauthority receives a certificate issued by the Town Treasurer that theparty is in good standing with respect to any and all local taxes, fees, assessments, betterments or other municipal charges, payableto the Town as of the date of issuance of said certificate. [Amended5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
Any party shall be given an opportunity to enter into a payment agreement, thereby allowing the licensing authority to issue a certificate indicating said limitations to the license or permit, and the validity of said license shall be conditioned upon the satisfactorycompliance with said agreement. Failure to comply with said agreementshall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of said license or permit; provided, however, that the holder be given notice and a hearing as required by applicable provisions of law. 
The Board of Selectmen may waive such denial, suspension or revocation if it finds there is no direct or indirect business interest bythe property owner, its officers or stockholders, if any, or members ofhis immediate family, as defined in MGL c. 268A, § 1, in the business or activity conducted in or on said property. 
This section shall not apply to the following licenses and permitsdescribed in the General Laws: open burning (MGL c. 48, § 13); sales of articles for charitable purposes (MGL c. 101, § 33); children workpermits (MGL c. 149, § 69); clubs or associations dispensing food orbeverage licenses (MGL c. 140, § 21E); dog licenses (MGL c. 140, § 137); fishing, hunting and trapping license (MGL c. 131, § 12);marriage licenses (MGL c. 207, § 28); and theatrical events or public exhibition permits (MGL c. 140, § 181.). [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
10:12 

Chapter 30 
TOWN MEETINGS 
§ 30-100. Definitions. 
As used in the General Bylaws, the words "Town Meeting" shall mean aRepresentative Town Meeting, unless the context requires otherwise. The words "Town Election" shall mean that part of the Annual Town Meeting atwhich Town officers and Town Meeting Members are elected and mattersto be acted upon and determined by ballot are acted upon and determined. A "Town Election" shall also mean any special meeting for the election of aTown officer or officers or for acting upon and determining matters to beacted upon and determined by ballot, including referenda. 
§ 30-105. Schedule. [Amended 4-26-1999 ATM, approved10-18-1999; 1-18-2012 STM, approved 3-22-2012; 5-14-2012 STM,approved 9-11-2012] 
The Annual Town Election shall be held on the first Tuesday of April in eachyear and the Annual Town Meeting shall be held on the fifth Monday ofApril, if any, or otherwise the first Monday of May in each year. The Annual Town Election and the Annual Town Meeting may be called pursuant to asingle warrant or separate warrants may be used, at the discretion of theSelectmen. 
§ 30-110. Warrant and notice. 
A. 	Unless a different time or method is prescribed by law, notice of allTown Meetings and Town Elections shall be given by posting an attested copy of the warrant therefor on the Town Clerk's official bulletin board in the Town Hall at least seven days before the date fixedfor the Annual Town Election or Annual Town Meeting and at least 14 days before the date fixed for a Special Town Meeting or Special TownElection. The Town Clerk shall notify the Town Meeting Members ofthe time and place at which Representative Town Meetings are to be held, the notice to be sent by mail or distributed electronically at leastseven days before the meeting. Compliance with this subsection shall constitute full legal notice of any Town Meeting or Election. [Amended4-25-1994 ATM, approved 10-12-1994; 4-26-2010 ATM, approved9-30-2010; 4-25-2011 ATM, approved 6-22-2011] 
(1) 	Pursuant to MGL c. 53, § 10, the last day for filing, with the TownClerk, nomination papers for election as Town Meeting Membershall be the 35th day before the Annual Town Election. Any incumbent Town Meeting Member may become a candidate forreelection by giving written notice thereof to the Town Clerk notlater than 35 days prior to the last day and hour for filing nomination papers. The Town Clerk shall give incumbent Town 
10:13 

§ 30-110 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 30-115 

Meeting Members at least 14 days' notice of the deadline for filingnotices of their intent to run for reelection. 
B. 	At least seven days prior to the date of any Annual or Special TownMeeting, the Town Clerk shall cause a copy of the warrant thereforto be sent by mail, distributed electronically, or delivered to the Town Meeting Members. Copies of the warrant shall be made available tothe public at the Town Clerk's office and public libraries before the date fixed for Town Meeting. [Amended 4-25-1994 ATM, approved10-12-1994; 4-25-2011 ATM, approved 6-22-2011] 
C. 	Notice of every adjourned Town Meeting, except a stated adjournmentof the Annual Town Election to the first business session of the Annual Town Meeting, shall be posted by the Town Clerk in five or more publicplaces in the Town as soon as practicable after the adjournment. Thenotices so posted shall state briefly the business to be acted upon and shall include notice of any proposed reconsideration. [Amended4-25-1994 ATM, approved 10-12-1994] 
D. 	Copies of the warrant shall be made available at all Town Meetings. 
§ 30-115. Procedural rules. [Amended 6-16-1986 STM, approved10-8-1986; 4-28-1997 ATM, approved 8-11-1997; 11-8-2010 ATM,approved 12-16-2010; 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
The Moderator shall determine the procedural rules to be followed at allTown Meetings, subject to the following provisions of this section: 
A. 	At any Town Meeting, if the Moderator or a vote of the Meeting so orders, no person who is not a Town Meeting Member, other than a press reporter or the official stenographer, shall be admitted to that portion of the meeting place which is reserved for Town Meeting Members. The Moderator shall determine the limits of the reserved area. 
B. 	Articles in the warrant shall be acted upon in their order, unless the Meeting votes otherwise. 
C. 	All motions that involve the expenditure of money shall be submitted inwriting. Any report, motion or resolution shall be reduced to writing if the Moderator so directs. 
D. 	Every person desiring to speak shall first be recognized by the Moderator and shall stand while speaking unless the Moderator shall otherwise direct. A Town Meeting Member who speaks upon any matterin which the speaker or his or her immediate family has a direct financial interest shall first disclose such interest to the Meeting. The words "direct financial interest" shall include, but not be limited to, employment as attorney or consultant with respect to the matter. 
E. Unless the Meeting consents, no person shall speak more than twice upon any question, except to correct an error or to make an 
10:14 

explanation. No person shall speak for more than five minutes whenspeaking for the second time and then only after others who have not spoken upon the question shall have had the opportunity to speak. 
F. 	All votes, unless otherwise provided by law, shall be taken in the firstinstance by a "YES" and "NO" voice vote. If the Moderator is in doubt as to the vote or if any Town Meeting Member immediately doubts thevote, the Moderator shall call for a standing vote; provided, however,that any Town Meeting Member may request a roll call vote when doubting the vote or immediately after the result of a standing votehas been announced. Such a request shall be valid only if 35 or moreTown Meeting Members concur in the request and it is requested in connection with final action upon any article in the warrant. If a validrequest for a roll call vote is made, the Town Clerk shall record the"YES" and "NO" votes forthwith so as to indicate the individual vote of each Town Meeting Member who shall have voted, and such recordshall be made available to the public at the office of the Town Clerk andshall be printed in the Town Report. 
(1) 	
Whenever a two-thirds vote is required on any matter, the Moderator may declare a motion passed by a voice vote of atleast 2/3 in favor and a count need not be taken unless otherwise required by law or these bylaws. The Town Clerk shall record theModerator's declaration that the motion passed by two-thirds votein favor. 

(2) 	
Notwithstanding the provisions of the foregoing Subsection F andSubsection F(1), subject to the availability of a system to enableelectronic voting by Town Meeting Members using wireless handheld mobile devices, the Moderator may count the vote, orconduct a roll call vote, on any matter before the Town Meeting by the use of such system. [Added 6-3-2013 ATM, approved 10-9-2013] 


G. 	Motions. 
(1) 	When a question is before the Meeting, the following motions shall be received and shall have precedence in the following order: 
(a) 	
To adjourn. 

(b) 	
To lay on the table. 

(c) 	
For the previous question. 

(d) 	
To postpone to a time certain. 

(e) 	
To commit, recommit or refer. 

(f) 	
To amend. 

(g) 	
To postpone indefinitely. 


10:15 

§ 30-115 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 30-115 

(2) 	Motions to adjourn, to lay on the table or for the previous questionshall be decided without debate. 
H. 	A motion to reconsider any vote must be made before the dissolutionof the Meeting at which the vote was passed, but such motion toreconsider shall not be made at an adjourned Meeting unless the mover has given notice of his intention to make such a motion, either at thesession of the Meeting at which the vote was passed or by writtennotice delivered to the Town Clerk by 12:00 noon on the first business day following the commencement of such session. There can be noreconsideration of a vote once reconsidered or after a vote not to reconsider it. No article in the warrant shall be reconsidered after it has been disposed of, unless 2/3 of the Town Meeting Members presentshall so vote. 
I. 	In matters not specifically provided for by law or by the General Bylaws, the Moderator shall be guided by the principles and rules of practicecontained in Town Meeting Time, A Handbook of Parliamentary Practice, by Johnson, Trustman and Wadsworth. 
Chapter 40 
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 
10:16 

ARTICLE 1 
General Provisions 
[Adopted as Art. 3 of the 1981 Bylaws] 

§ 40-100. Applicability; definitions. 
A. 	Except as otherwise provided by law, or by these bylaws, or by specific vote of the Town Meeting, all Town boards shall be subject to theprovisions of this article. 
B. 	As used in this article, the following terms shall have the following meanings: [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
APPOINTED BOARD — A board any of the members of which are appointed by an appointing authority. 
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Moderator, the Board of Selectmen or any other officer or board of officers, or combination thereof, responsible for the appointment of members of an appointed board. 
BOARD — Any board, committee, commission or other body of theTown, however named or constituted, which is composed of two or more members and has been or is established pursuant to statute, thesebylaws, vote of the Town Meeting or vote of the Board of Selectmen. 
ELECTED BOARD — Any board the members of which are elected by all the voters of the Town at the Town Election. 
PERMANENT APPOINTED BOARD — An appointed board the purposeof which is ongoing and is not limited to one or more specifically defined objects culminating in the filing of a report or the completion of anauthorized or delegated assignment. 
§ 40-105. Term of office for members of permanent appointedboards. 
The members of each permanent appointed board shall be appointed for aterm of three years ending on June 30 of the third year following the year of appointment, except that, when appointing the initial members of a newlyestablished permanent appointed board or when appointing the membersof a permanent appointed board established prior to the effective date of this article the members of which had been appointed for a term of oneyear, the appointing authority shall appoint as nearly 1/3 of the members aspossible for terms expiring on June 30 of the first, second and third years, respectively, following the year of appointment. The members of permanentappointed boards shall serve until their respective successors are appointedand qualified. 
§ 40-110. Vacancies on appointed boards. 
If a vacancy occurs in the membership of an appointed board, the appointing authority shall appoint a new member to serve for the balance of the unexpired term. 
10:17 

§ 40-115 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-125 

§ 40-115. Officers; records; annual report; conduct of meetings. 
A. 	Every board, including every elected board, shall annually select a chair, a clerk or secretary and such other officers, if any, as the boardshall deem necessary. The clerk or secretary may, but need not, be amember of the board. 
B. 	The clerk or secretary shall keep an accurate record of each meeting ofthe board and shall file such records with the Town Clerk following theirapproval by the board. All rules and regulations adopted by a board shall likewise be filed with the Town Clerk. 
C. 	Every board shall annually file a report of its activities, in form suitablefor printing in the Annual Town Report, on or before such date as may be fixed by the Selectmen. 
D. 	Every board shall conduct its meetings in accordance with the Open Meeting Law of the commonwealth.2 [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
§ 40-120. Failure to attend meetings. 
The chair of each appointed board shall report to the appointing authority the name of any member who fails to attend any three successive meetingsof the board. The appointing authority may thereupon declare the officeof such member vacant and appoint a successor to fill such vacancy in accordance with § 40-110. This section shall not apply to persons who areserving as members of an appointed board solely by virtue of their holdinganother Town office. 
§ 40-125. Use of Town materials. 
No Town officer or member of a Town board shall use any paper, stationeryor other article bearing the Town Seal or representation thereof or bearing the name of a Town board for other than official Town purposes regardlessof whether private payment has been made for such use. 
2. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 30A, §§ 18 to 25. 
10:18 
ARTICLE 2 
Elected Boards, Commissions and Committees [Adopted as Arts. 4, 8, 9 and 10 of the 1981 Bylaws] 
§ 40-200. Board of Selectmen. 
A. 	The Board of Selectmen shall consist of three members elected by ballot at the Annual Town Election for a term of three years. Onemember shall be elected in each year. 
B. 	The Selectmen shall have the general direction and management of the property and affairs of the Town in all matters not otherwise providedfor by law or by these bylaws. 
C. 	The Selectmen may appear, either personally or by the Town Counsel or by special counsel duly employed by them, before any court, committeeof the Legislature or any state or county board or commission or othertribunal to protect the interests of the Town. 
D. 	All conveyances of land or interests in land which may hereafter beauthorized by vote of the Town or otherwise, except land held under taxtitles, shall be signed by a majority of the Board of Selectmen, unless otherwise provided by law or these bylaws or by special vote of theTown, and the same shall be sealed with the Town Seal. 
E. 	The Selectmen shall specify the date when the warrant for any Town Meeting shall close and shall set the date for any Special Town Meetingor Special Town Election. 
F. 	The Selectmen shall annually cause to have printed an annual report of the Town. Reports of all boards, commissions, committees or officerswhich are to be published in the Annual Town Report shall be deliveredto the Selectmen as soon after the first day of January as possible, but not later than January 30 unless the Selectmen shall fix another datetherefor.3 
G. 	The Selectmen shall have the following appointment powers: 
(1) 	
The Selectmen shall annually, and whenever a vacancy shall exist,choose some competent lawyer to act as Town Counsel. He shallbe paid such compensation as the Selectmen may determine and they may remove him at pleasure. The Town Counsel shall providesuch legal services concerning the affairs of the Town as maybe required of him by any Town officer, board, committee or commission. [Amended 4-26-2004 ATM, approved 8-19-2004] 

(2) 	
As provided in Chapter 376 of the Acts of 2010, there shall be a Police Chief appointed by the Board of Selectmen who shallhave and exercise all the powers and discharge all the duties 


3. Editor's Note: Original § 4.7, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed4-29-2013 ATM, approved 10-9-2013. 
10:19 
§ 40-200 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-200 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


conferred by law generally upon police chiefs. The Chief shallappoint such police officers as the Chief deems necessary, and may remove the same at any time for cause after a hearing. TheChief shall have full and absolute authority in the administrationof the Police Department, including the appointment and removal of special and auxiliary police officers and other personnel, shallmake all rules and regulations for the Department’s operation,shall report to the Board of Selectmen from time to time as the Board may require, and shall annually report to the Town the condition of the Department with the Chief's recommendationsthereon. The Chief shall fix the compensation of all members of the Department, subject to the approval of the Board of Selectmen. TheChief shall be in immediate control of all Town property used by theDepartment, and of the police officers, whom the Chief shall assign to their respective duties and who shall obey the Chief's orders.
[Amended 4-29-2013 ATM, approved 10-9-2013] 
The Selectmen shall appoint a permanent Fire Chief who shall be in charge of the Fire Department. 
The Board of Selectmen may appoint a Town Administrator for aterm of one or three years and may remove the Town Administrator so appointed at its discretion. The Town Administrator shall besworn to the faithful performance of his or her duties. During thetime that he or she holds office the Town Administrator shall hold no elective Town office but may be appointed by the Selectmen or,with their approval, by any other Town officer, board, committeeor commission to any other Town office or position consistent with the office. The Town Administrator shall receive such aggregatecompensation, not exceeding the amount appropriated therefor, asthe Selectmen may determine. The Town Administrator shall act by and for the Selectmen in any matter which they may assign tohim or her relating to the administration of the affairs of the Townor of any Town office or department under their supervision and control and, with the approval of the Selectmen, may perform suchother duties as may be requested of him or her by any other Town officer, board, committee or commission. [Added 6-7-1993 ATM, approved 8-20-1993] 
The Selectmen may appoint and prescribe the duties of a Directorof Public Works who shall be especially fitted by education, training, and experience to perform the duties of said office. SuchDirector shall not be subject to the provisions of MGL c. 31. Theterm of office of the Director shall be determined by the Selectmen and said Director shall serve at the pleasure of the Selectmen.
[Added 4-28-2003 ATM, approved 10-16-2003] 
The Selectmen shall appoint such other officers and the members of such other boards, committees, commissions or other bodies of the Town as may be required by law, these bylaws or vote of the Town. They may establish and appoint or provide for the 
10:20 

appointment of the members of any board, committee or commission for which other provision is not made and which, in their judgment, is required to assist them or the Town on anymatters subject to the Selectmen's jurisdiction. 
H. 	Except as otherwise provided by law or these bylaws, the Selectmen shall have the power to issue all licenses and permits required by law orthese bylaws and to establish reasonable fees therefor. The Selectmenmay from time to time adopt rules, regulations and restrictions relative to the business of persons licensed by them under the General Laws orthese bylaws and to the supervision thereof, including the impositionof lawful penalties for violations of such rules, regulations and restrictions. The rules, regulations and restrictions adopted by theSelectmen shall be provided in writing to all applicants for such licenses.4 [Amended 4-28-1986 ATM, approved 7-23-1986] 
I. 	Upon the certification of any department head that such departmenthas within its control tangible personal property of the Town which has become obsolete or is no longer of practical value to the Town,the Selectmen shall authorize the sale thereof. The terms of the sale shall be fixed by the Selectmen, provided that where the fair value of such property exceeds the sum of $500, it will only be sold to thehighest responsible bidder after competitive bids have been invited bypublished notice. 
J. 	The Board of Selectmen shall act as the Town's Board of Park Commissioners. 
K. 	The Board of Selectmen shall act as the Town's Municipal Light Board. 
L. 	The Board of Selectmen shall act as the Board of Survey pursuant toChapter 141 of the Acts of 1903. 
M. 	The Board of Selectmen shall promulgate regulations establishing addressing standards and governing the numbering of properties. Allproperties, buildings and structures are required to have a valid address. [Added 4-25-2011 ATM, approved 6-22-2011] 
(1) 	
The regulations promulgated by the Board of Selectmen shall designate a Town official(s) as the sole authority to assign andmodify addresses for all taxable and nontaxable properties. 

(2) 	
The Town will maintain an up-to-date Master Address Table using the addresses assigned by the Board of Selectmen's designatedTown official(s) and parcel identification numbers for all taxableand nontaxable properties. No one may publicly use or list an address for a property, building, or structure located within theTown of Belmont, for any purpose, unless that address is includedin the Master Address Table.5 


4. Editor's Note: Original §§ 4.9.1 to 4.9.6, which were included in this subsection, have beenmoved and included as § 60-900, Business licenses issued by Board of Selectmen. 
10:21 
§ 40-205 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-215 

§ 40-205. School Committee 
(Reserved) 
§ 40-210. Board of Assessors. 
(Reserved) 
§ 40-215. Board of Cemetery Commissioners. [Amended 4-28-2003ATM, approved 10-16-2003] 
A. 	The Board of Cemetery Commissioners shall consist of three memberselected by ballot at the Annual Town Election for a term of three years. One member shall be elected in each year. No sooner than five yearsfrom the date of passage of that certain special act entitled "HomeRule Petition for Belmont, An Act To Reorganize the Public Works Functions in the Town of Belmont," the Board of Selectmen may requestTown Meeting to convert the Board of Cemetery Commissioners to anappointive body. Upon a two-thirds vote of Town Meeting, the Board of Selectmen shall establish and appoint a three-member Board of Cemetery Commissioners, consisting of the incumbent elected members for the duration of their term. Should an incumbent member choose not to serve in an appointive capacity, the Board of Selectmenshall appoint a new Commissioner to fill the remainder of that term.Upon the expiration of the initial terms of appointment, the Board of Selectmen shall appoint Commissioners in a manner consistent withArticle 1 of this chapter. 
B. 	The Board of Cemetery Commissioners shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1) 	
To educate the Board of Selectmen, Town administration and the citizens of Belmont regarding the need for burial space and cemetery services; 

(2) 	
To advocate on behalf of the citizens of Belmont for burial spaceand cemetery services, including expansion, maintenance, and beautification of existing facilities; 

(3) 	
To establish policies and regulations relating to the cemetery,including but not limited to the terms and conditions of burial rights, the prices for sale of lots and graves and other services andthe erection of monuments and ornamentation; 

(4) 	
To identify and advocate for major capital and facility improvements, including expansion, to meet the long-term needsof the cemetery system and to work cooperatively with the Town's 


5. Editor's Note: Original § 4.14, which immediately followed this subsection and providedfor the appointment of a sealer and the fees of the sealer, added 11-17-2003 STM andapproved 1-20-2004, was repealed 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013. 
10:22 
staff to develop an appropriate financing plan for such improvements; 
(5) 	
To develop an appropriate marketing strategy to sell cemetery lotsas required to meet financial requirements of cemetery needs; 

(6) 	
To certify and recommend for Town Meeting appropriation the amount and use of proceeds from the sale of cemetery lots paidinto the Town treasury for reimbursement to the Town for thecost of the land, its care, improvement and embellishment, or the enlargement of the cemetery; 

(7) 	
To report annually, in cooperation with the Director of Public Worksand the Town Treasurer, on the status of the Perpetual Care Fund and on progress in implementing the capital improvement plan. Incooperation with the Town Accountant, to certify and recommendfor Town Meeting appropriation the amount of perpetual care interest income to offset the cost of routine cemetery maintenance;and 

(8) 	
To assume jurisdiction and representation of applicable provisions of that certain Memorandum of Agreement dated November 22,1999, relating to the use of land in Belmont formerly owned byMcLean Hospital, including, without limitation, Attachment B2 ­Conservation Restriction, Attachment E -Land Use and Management Plan, and Attachment K - Cemetery Agreement. 


§ 40-220. Board of Health. 
A. 	The Board of Health shall consist of three members elected by ballot atthe Annual Town Election for a term of three years. One member shallbe elected in each year. 
B. 	The Board shall make and publish from time to time such regulations asit deems necessary for the public health and safety and shall cause thesame to be printed in suitable form for public distribution. 
C. 	The Board shall have charge of all appropriations made by the Town forhealth and sanitary purposes which are not especially entrusted to anyother department. 
D. 	The Board shall annually make a report to be printed in the AnnualTown Report showing in detail the statistics of the health and sanitarycondition of the Town with recommendations for its improvement, together with a full and comprehensive statement of its work and thatof its appointees during the previous year. The report shall also containa detailed statement of the amounts expended by the Board during the year. 
E. 	The noncriminal disposition of violations of any Town bylaw within thejurisdiction of the Board of Health, or any rule or regulation of the Board of Health, is hereby authorized in accordance with the provisions 
10:23 

§ 40-220 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-225 


of MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). [Added 4-23-1990 ATM, approved 8-13-1990] 
(1) 	
"Enforcing person" as used in this Subsection E shall mean anypolice officer of the Town, the Health Director, any member of theBoard of Health and any other Town employee designated by the Board of Health as an enforcing person. 

(2) 	
An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of any bylaw,rule or regulation hereunder may, as an alternative to instituting criminal proceedings, give the offender written notice to appearbefore the Clerk of the District Court having jurisdiction thereof forthe noncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with § 21D. The provisions of § 21D are incorporated herein by this reference. 


§ 40-225. Trustees of the Public Library 
A. 	The Board of Trustees of the Public Library shall consist of six members elected by ballot at the Annual Town Election for a term of three years.Two members shall be elected in each year. 
B. 	The Trustees shall have the sole care and management of the public library and any branch or branches thereof which the Town mayestablish and the custody of the books and other property thereof andmay adopt regulations for governing the libraries and their use. 
C. 	The Trustees shall appoint a Librarian and such other employees asthey deem expedient, determine their duties and remove them at pleasure. 
D. 	The Trustees shall have charge of all appropriations made by the Townfor library purposes and shall expend the same for the purchase ofsuch books and materials as they shall select and in the maintenance, support and promotion of the libraries and their facilities. 
E. 	The Trustees shall annually make a report to be printed in the AnnualTown Report showing in detail their work and that of their appointees and the condition of the libraries. 
10:24 

ARTICLE 3 
Boards and Commissions Appointed by the Board of Selectmen[Adopted as Arts. 7, 14, 15, 17, 18, 29 and 31 of the 1981 Bylaws] 

§ 40-300. Conservation Commission. [Added 4-28-2003 ATM,approved 10-16-2003] 
A. 	There shall be a Conservation Commission for the Town in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 8C ("§ 8C"), for the promotion and development ofthe natural resources and for the protection of watershed resources of the Town. 
B. 	The Conservation Commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of three years in accordance with the provisions of § 8C. 
C. 	The Conservation Commission shall make and publish from time to timesuch rules and regulations as it deems necessary and shall cause the same to be printed in suitable form for public distribution. 
D. 	The noncriminal disposition of violations of any rules or regulationspromulgated by the Conservation Commission is hereby authorized in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). 
(1) 	
"Enforcing person" as used in this Subsection D shall mean anypolice officer of the Town, any member of the Conservation Commission and any other Town employee designated by theConservation Commission an enforcing person. 

(2) 	
An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of any rule or regulation hereunder may, as an alternative to instituting criminalproceedings, give the offender written notice to appear beforethe Clerk of the District Court having jurisdiction thereof for the noncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with § 21D. The provisions of § 21D are incorporated herein by this reference. 


§ 40-305. Council on Aging. 
A. 	There shall be a Council on Aging for the Town in accordance with MGL
c. 40, § 8B. 
B. 	The Council on Aging shall consist of 11 members appointed by the Board of Selectmen for terms of three years arranged so that the termsof no more than four members shall expire in any year. 
C. 	The Council on Aging shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1) 	
To identify the total needs of the Town's elder population; 

(2) 	
To educate and enlist support and participation of all citizensconcerning these needs; 


10:25 

§ 40-305 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-315 

(3) 	
To design, promote or implement services to fill these needs orcoordinate existing services in the Town; 

(4) 	
To promote and support any other programs for the elderly in theTown; [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 

(5) 	
To cooperate with the State Department of Elder Affairs or its successor state agency; and [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 

(6) 	
To be cognizant of federal and state legislation concerning funding,information exchange and program planning designed to promotebetter community planning for the elderly. 


§ 40-310. Disability Access Commission. [Added 4-23-2007 ATM,approved 8-16-2007] 
A. 	There shall be a Disability Access Commission for the Town in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 8J, which was accepted by the AnnualTown Meeting of April 26, 1993. 
B. 	The Disability Access Commission shall consist of seven regular and two alternate members appointed by the Board of Selectmen. A majority of the Commission members, including a majority of theregular members, shall consist of people with disabilities, one regular member shall be a member of the immediate family of a person witha disability, and one regular member shall be an elected or appointedofficial of the Town. The terms of regular and alternate members shall be three years and arranged so that the terms of 1/3 of the membersexpire each year. Upon the expiration of the term of a member, thatmember or a successor shall be appointed to a term of a duration which is consistent with the foregoing provisions of this subsection.

[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
C. 	In the case of the absence, inability to act or conflict of interest of a regular member, or in the case of a vacancy on the Commission untilthe vacancy is filled in accordance with MGL c. 40, § 8J, the Chair of theCommission may designate an alternate member to serve. 
D. 	The purpose of the Disability Access Commission shall be to provide forthe full integration and participation of people with disabilities in theTown of Belmont. 
E. 	The Disability Access Commission shall have all of the powers andduties of disability commissions established pursuant to MGL c. 40, § 8J. 
§ 40-315. Historic District Commission. 
A. 	There is established under the Historic Districts Act, MGL c. 40C, a Belmont Historic District Commission consisting of seven members tobe appointed by the Selectmen, including one member, where possible, from two nominees submitted by the Belmont Historical Society; one 
10:26 

B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
member, where possible, from two nominees, one of whom shall besubmitted by the chapter of the American Institute of Architects covering Belmont and one of whom shall be submitted by the BostonSociety of Landscape Architects; and one member, where possible, fromtwo nominees of the Board of Realtors covering Belmont. One or more of the foregoing shall be a resident of an historic district establishedin Belmont pursuant to the Historic Districts Act. The Selectmen shall also appoint three alternate members of the Commission. [Amended4-22-1991 ATM, approved 6-3-1991] 
There is established under the provisions of the Historic Districts Act,as amended, an historic district to be known as the "Wellington Historic District," bounded as shown on a map entitled "Plan ShowingWellington Historic District, Pleasant Street, Belmont, Mass.," datedDecember 16, 1971, prepared by the Town Engineer, which shall be a part of this bylaw. 
There is established under the provisions of the Historic Districts Act,as amended, an historic district to be known as the "Richardson Farm Historic District," bounded as shown on a map entitled "Plan ShowingRichardson Farm Historic District, Washington Street, Blanchard Road,and Glenn Road Belmont, Mass.," dated March 15, 2013, prepared by the Town Engineer, which shall be a part of this bylaw. [Added4-29-2013 ATM, approved 10-9-2013] 
Thaddeus Frost House Historic District. There is established, under the provisions of MGL c. 40C, as amended, an historic district to beknown as the "Thaddeus Frost House Historic District," bounded and described as shown on the map entitled "Plan Showing Thaddeus Frost House Historic District, 291 Brighton Street, Belmont, Mass.," datedFebruary 7, 2018, prepared by the Town Engineer, which shall be a part of this section. [Added 4-30-2018 ATM, approved 9-5-20186] 
The Commission established hereunder shall have all of the powers andduties of the Belmont Historical Commission, as provided in MGL c. 40, § 8D, and, upon the establishment of the Commission hereunder, theformer Belmont Historical Commission shall cease to exist. 
The Commission shall have all of the powers and duties of an historic district commission and all of the powers and duties of an historicalcommission (and may in the exercise of any of the powers and dutiesaccept money gifts and expend the same and, subject to appropriation or receipt of such gifts, employ clerical and technical assistants orconsultants), and the aforesaid powers and duties shall include withoutlimitation the following: 
(1) 	To conduct a survey of Belmont buildings for the purpose of determining those of historic significance, architecturally or otherwise, and pertinent facts about them, acting in collaboration 
6. Editor's Note: This article also redesignated former Subsections D through I asSubsections E through J, respectively. 
10:27 
§ 40-315 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-315 

G. 
H. 
I. 
with the Planning Board and the Belmont Historical Society tothe extent either may from time to time be able to undertake such work, and to maintain and from time to time revise detailed listings of historic sites and buildings in Belmont and data aboutthem appropriately classified with respect to national, state or local significance, to period or field of interest, or otherwise; 
(2) 	
To propose from time to time as it deems appropriate the establishment, in accordance with the provisions of the Historic Districts Act, of additional historic districts and changes in historicdistricts; 

(3) 	
To determine an appropriate system of markers for selected historic sites and buildings not already sufficiently marked, toarrange for preparation and installation of such markers and toarrange for care of historic markers; 

(4) 	
To arrange for preparation and publication of maps and brochuresand descriptive material about Belmont historic sites and buildings,arrange for convenient walks or tours, or otherwise; 

(5) 	
To cooperate with and advise the Planning Board, the HighwayDepartment and other Town departments in matters involvinghistoric sites and buildings; 

(6) 	
To cooperate with and enlist assistance for Belmont from theNational Park Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Society for the Preservation of New England Antiquities, and other agencies, public and private, from time to time concernedwith historic sites and buildings; and 

(7) 	
To advise owners of historic buildings in Belmont on problems of preservation. 


The Commission may recommend to the Selectmen as needed appointment of advisory committees of historians and persons interested in architecture or other arts or in historic restoration or preservation to assist in a manner comparable to the National ParkService Advisory Board or Consulting Committee. 
The Commission shall adopt rules and regulations for the conduct of itsbusiness not inconsistent with the provisions of the Historic DistrictsAct, the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 8D (the Historical Commission Act), or this section, as the case may be. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
When taking action under the provisions of Section 11 of the Historic Districts Act,7 the Commission shall make its determination within 45 days after the filing of the application for a certificate of 
7. Editor's Note: See MGL c. 40C, § 11. 
10:28 
appropriateness or hardship or such further time as the applicant mayin writing allow. 
J. 	In case any subsection, paragraph or part of this section is for anyreason declared invalid or unconstitutional by any court, every other subsection, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect.[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
§ 40-320. Planning Board. 
A. 	The Planning Board established under MGL c. 41, § 70, shall consist of five members who shall be appointed by the Selectmen; provided,however, that nothing in this subsection shall be construed to limitthe authority of the Board of Selectmen, pursuant to Section 7 of the Zoning Bylaw, to appoint an associate member for the purposes setforth therein. [Amended 11-8-2010 ATM, approved 12-16-2010] 
B. 	In the performance of its duties prescribed by law, the Planning Boardshall from time to time confer with the Selectmen, the Inspector ofBuildings, and any other Town board or committee which the Planning Board determines would be able to provide information or assistance to it. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
§ 40-325. Recreation Commission. 
A. 	There shall be a Recreation Commission consisting of nine members appointed by the Selectmen. 
B. 	The Selectmen acting as the Board of Park Commissioners shall beresponsible for the operation of the Recreation Department and shall appoint a Director of the Department. [Amended 4-27-2009 ATM, approved 10-1-2009] 
C. 	The Commission shall be responsible for the establishment of policies for the use of all playgrounds and recreation facilities of the Townwhich are not under the control of the School Department. TheCommission and the School Department shall cooperate to the end that optimum use may be made of all of the Town's recreation facilities.[Amended 4-27-2009 ATM, approved 10-1-2009] 
D. 	The Commission shall be responsible for the formulation of Recreation Department policy in the areas of: 
(1) 	
Facilities and maintenance; 

(2) 	
Recreation programs; and 

(3) 	
Long-range planning. 


E. 	The Commission shall establish such reasonable fees for use of anyrecreation facilities and programs as it deems to be consistent with recreation policy. 
10:29 

§ 40-325 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-330 

F. 	The Commission shall prepare an annual budget for the RecreationDepartment to be submitted to the Selectmen for approval on a schedule to be established by the Selectmen. 
G. 	The recreation revolving fund established pursuant to MGL c. 44, § 53D, shall be subject to annual authorization by a vote of the Annual Town Meeting. [Added 6-14-1993 ATM, approved 8-20-1993] 
H. 	Pursuant to MGL c. 45, §§ 5 and 14, and this section, the Board of Selectmen, acting in its capacity as the Board of Park Commissioners,and the Recreation Commission are authorized to jointly promulgatesuch rules and regulations for the use and government of all public parks, playgrounds, and recreation centers within the Town of Belmont as they deem necessary. [Added 4-27-2009 ATM, approved10-1-2009; amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
(1) 	
Violation of any rule or regulation adopted under Subsection Hshall be punished by a fine of $100 and may also be enforced bynoncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). The penalty under said § 21D for such violation shall be $50 foreach offense. 

(2) 	
An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of any rule or regulation adopted under Subsection H shall give the offendera written notice to appear before the Clerk of the District Courthaving jurisdiction thereof for the noncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 21D. The provisions of § 21Dare incorporated herein by this reference. 

(3) 	
"Enforcing person" as used in Subsection H(2) shall mean any police officer of the Town and any other Town employee designatedby the Board of Park Commissioners or the Recreation Commissionas an enforcing person. 


§ 40-330. Water Advisory Board. [Amended 4-28-2003 ATM,approved 10-16-2003] 
A. 	There shall be a Water Advisory Board consisting of three members appointed by the Board of Selectmen in a manner consistent with Article 1 of this chapter. 
B. 	The Water Advisory Board shall serve as the principal advocate for Town actions, policies, operational management, financial practicesand capital investments that will result in the sustained provision ofhigh-quality water service. In carrying out these responsibilities, the Water Advisory Board, acting in an advisory role to the Board of Selectmen, shall: 
(1) 	Oversee the preparation of a Water Capital Plan that identifies system capital needs, prioritizes and schedules projects and specifies methods of financing and implementing the Water CapitalPlan. Preparation and implementation of the Water Capital Plan 
10:30 

(2) 
(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


shall provide for the coordination of projects with the work ofother public agencies and private utilities. The Water Capital Plan shall be effective upon its adoption by the Board of Selectmen andapproval by the Capital Budget Committee. The Water Capital Planshall be reviewed and revised not less than every five years; 
Recommend to the Board of Selectmen the scope of work for any professional engineering work relating to preparing or implementing the Water Capital Plan. The Director of Public Works shall consult with the Water Advisory Board on the selection of aprofessional engineer; 
Advocate for actions, consistent with the priorities of the Board of Selectmen, to implement the Water Capital Plan in the annual Townbudget process and for such other programs and activities that inits judgment will enhance the quality, efficiency or effectiveness of the water service; 
Serve as the steward of the financial condition of the Belmont water system by recommending rates, charges and fees for water services provided by the Town that will fully recover the cost of providing water services and that are fair and equitable. Incarrying out this responsibility, the Water Advisory Board shall annually examine the revenue requirements of the water function.During the annual Town budget process it shall make specific recommendations to the Board of Selectmen for a revenue structure that will be adequate to provide for the financial needs ofthe water function in the next fiscal year; 
Establish policies for the adjustment of bills by the Director of Public Works due to disputes, hardship or error. These policies shallbe effective upon approval by the Board of Selectmen. In addition,the Water Advisory Board shall serve as the appeals board for citizens aggrieved by the implementation of adjustment policies bythe Director of Public Works unless the Board of Selectmen votes to assume this responsibility; 
Develop and monitor a cost allocation plan for indirect and overhead costs and any other charges that are charged to theTown's Water Special Revenue Fund. Develop and monitor a cost recovery plan to secure payment from non-water functions for theuse of equipment and labor funded by the Water Special RevenueFund. The cost allocation plan and cost recovery plans shall be effective upon approval by the Board of Selectmen. Indirect andoverhead costs shall not be charged to the Water Special RevenueFund in a manner inconsistent with the cost allocation plan recommended by the Water Advisory Board and approved by theBoard of Selectmen. Equipment and labor funded by the WaterSpecial Revenue Fund shall not be utilized for non-water functions until a cost recovery plan has been recommended by the WaterAdvisory Board and approved by the Board of Selectmen; and 
10:31 

§ 40-330 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-330 

(7) 	Prepare an annual report in order to inform and educate thecitizens of Belmont about the physical and financial condition of the water system. The annual report shall include comprehensiveinformation on the income and expenses of operating the waterfunction, the effect of the cost allocation and cost recovery plans on the Water Special Revenue Fund, the status of the Water SpecialRevenue Fund, progress in implementing the Water Capital Planand other information the Water Advisory Board deems relevant to citizen understanding of the water system. This report shall beincluded in the Annual Town Report. 
C. 	All of the duties and responsibilities of the Water Advisory Board shall be carried out in consultation with the Director of Public Works. The Director of Public Works shall provide reasonable clerical and professional staff support to the Water Advisory Board in the execution of its responsibilities. 
D. 	The Water Advisory Board shall assume additional responsibilities fromtime to time as may be determined by the Board of Selectmen. 
10:32 

ARTICLE 4 
Other Appointed Committees[Adopted as Arts. 12, 13, 16, 19, 25 and 33 of the 1981 Bylaws] 

§ 40-400. Bylaw Review Committee. [Added 4-25-1983 ATM,approved 8-2-1983] 
A. 	There shall be a Bylaw Review Committee consisting of the Town Clerkand four members appointed by the Moderator. 
B. 	It shall be the duty of the Committee to consider all articles in the warrant for any Town Meeting which propose an amendment or addition to the General Bylaws. 
C. 	The Committee Chair or some members of the Committee designated by the Chair shall report to the Town Meeting such recommendations,if any, as the Committee shall consider appropriate with respect to anyarticle in the warrant which proposes an amendment or addition to the General Bylaws. The Moderator shall call upon the Committee for suchreport prior to the discussion or vote on such article. 
D. 	Whenever practicable, the Selectmen shall submit to the Committee all proposed amendments or additions to the General Bylaws prior totheir inclusion in the warrant for any Town Meeting. The Committeeshall meet and review all such proposed amendments and additions and shall report to the Selectmen its recommendations as to their form andconsistency with existing provisions of the General Bylaws and as totheir placement in the General Bylaws. 
E. 	The Committee may propose to the Selectmen for inclusion in thewarrant for the next Annual or Special Town Meeting any amendmentsor additions to the General Bylaws which the Committee determines should be made so as to resolve inconsistencies with other provisions orwith applicable law. The Committee shall propose to the Selectmen, forinclusion in the warrant for the next Annual or Special Town Meeting, any amendments or additions to the General Bylaws which have beenrequested of it by any Town board or officer. 
F. 	The Committee may consult with Town Counsel as to the legality of any provisions or proposed provisions of the General Bylaws. 
G. 	The Committee shall assist the Town Clerk in preparing the publicationfrom time to time of appendices and supplements to the General Bylaws, including all amendments and additions thereto. [Amended5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
H. 	Failure to observe any provision of this section shall not affect the validity of any change in the General Bylaws which has been dulyadopted by vote of the Town Meeting. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
10:33 

§ 40-405 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-410 

§ 40-405. Capital Budget Committee. 

A. 	There shall be a Capital Budget Committee of seven members, consisting of the Chair of the Board of Selectmen or a member of thatBoard designated by its Chair, the Chair of the Warrant Committee ora member of that Committee designated by its Chair, the Chair of the Planning Board or a member of that Board designated by its Chair,the Chair of the School Committee or a member of that Committee designated by its Chair and three members who shall be appointed by the Moderator. [Amended 4-22-1996 ATM, approved 8-6-1996] 
B. 	It shall be the duty of the Committee annually to prepare a Capital Budget Report showing, for each of the six years next following, a listof those public improvements and nonrecurring major equipment needswhich, in its opinion, represent the most necessary and urgent projects or purchases to be undertaken by the Town during each such year.The report shall include the probable cost of each such improvementor purchase and the Committee's recommendations as to the method of financing them. For this purpose each officer, board or committeeof the Town shall submit to the Committee a list of proposed publicimprovements and nonrecurring major equipment needs together with an estimate of their cost for each of the six years next following. As usedby this bylaw, the term "public improvement" shall include the purchaseor taking of land. 
C. 	The Capital Budget Report shall be submitted to the Town Clerk insufficient time to be distributed to Town Meeting Members at least 14days prior to the commencement of the session at which the Capital Budget is to be considered. The report shall be available in the TownClerk's office for distribution to the public. The report shall also be included in the Annual Town Report. [Amended 4-29-2013 ATM, approved 10-9-2013] 
§ 40-410. Community Preservation Committee. [Added 4-25-2011ATM, approved 6-22-2011] 
A. 	There is hereby established, pursuant to MGL c. 44B (the CommunityPreservation Act, hereafter in this section referred to as "the Act"), aCommunity Preservation Committee (hereafter in this section referred to as "the Committee") consisting of nine members. [Amended5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
(1) 	
The Committee shall consist of the following members: 

(a) 	
One member of the Board of Park Commissioners as designated by the Board; 

(b) 	
One member of the Conservation Commission as designated by the Commission; 

(c) 	
One member of the Historic District Commission as designatedby the Commission; 

10:34 

(d) 	
One member of the Housing Authority as designated by theAuthority; 

(e) 	
One member of the Planning Board as designated by the Board; 

(f) 	
One member of the Recreation Commission as designated by the Board of Selectmen; and 

(g) 	
Three at-large members as designated by the Board of Selectmen. 



(2) 	
Members appointed to the Committee pursuant to Subsection A(1)(a) through (e) above are referred to hereafter in this sectionas "the statutory members." 

(3) 	
With respect to initial statutory members and the initial memberfrom the Recreation Commission, members appointed pursuant toSubsection A(1)(a) and (b) shall be appointed for one-year terms, members appointed pursuant to Subsection A(1)(c) and (d) shallbe appointed for two-year terms and members appointed pursuantto Subsection A(1)(e) and (f) shall be appointed for three-year terms or, in the case of each initial statutory member, if sooneroccurring, until such member no longer serves on the appointingboard, commission or authority or, in the case of the initial member from the Recreation Commission, if sooner occurring, until suchmember no longer serves on the Recreation Commission. After theinitial appointments, all statutory members and the member from the Recreation Commission shall serve for terms of three years or,if sooner occurring, until the statutory members no longer serve onthe appointing board, commission or authority or, in the case of the member from the Recreation Commission, until such member no longer serves on that Commission. 

(4) 	
With respect to initial at-large members, one member shall be appointed for a one-year term, one for a two-year term and onefor a three-year term. After the initial appointments, all at-largemembers shall be appointed for three-year terms. At-large members shall include persons who have expertise or demonstrated interest in open space, recreation, historic preservation or affordable housing. 

(5) 	
Mid-term vacancies in the office of at-large member, statutorymember or member from the Recreation Commission shall be filled by the board, commission or authority that made the original appointment, and members appointed to fill a vacancy shall servefor the remainder of the unexpired term. 



B. 	
The Committee shall study the needs, possibilities and resources of the Town regarding community preservation. The Committee shall consultwith other Town boards, commissions, committees and authorities, including, among others, the Conservation Commission, the Historic 


10:35 

§ 40-410 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-415 

C. 
D. 
E. 
District Commission, the Housing Authority, the Planning Board andthe Recreation Commission, and with the Belmont Housing Trust in conducting such studies. As part of its studies the Committee shallhold one or more public information hearings on the needs, possibilitiesand resources of the Town regarding community preservation, notice of which shall be posted publicly on the Town's web page at least twoweeks prior to the date of the hearing and published in each of twoweeks preceding the week in which the hearing is to be held in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town. The Committee shall filean annual report of its activities with the Town Clerk. 
(1) 	
The Committee shall make recommendations to the Town Meeting for the acquisition, creation and preservation of open space; for theacquisition, rehabilitation, restoration and preservation of historicresources; for the acquisition, creation and preservation of land for recreational use; for the acquisition, creation, preservation and support of community housing; and for the rehabilitation or restoration of open space, land for recreational use and community housing that is acquired or created as provided in the Act. Withrespect to community housing, the Committee shall recommend,wherever possible, the reuse of existing buildings or construction of new buildings on previously developed sites. 

(2) 	
The Committee may include in its recommendations to the TownMeeting a recommendation to set aside for later spending funds for specific purposes that are consistent with community preservationbut for which sufficient funds are not then available in the Community Preservation Fund to accomplish that specific purpose or to set aside for later spending funds for general purposes thatare consistent with community preservation. 


The Committee shall not meet or conduct business without the presence of a quorum. A majority of the members of the Committeeshall constitute a quorum. The Committee shall approve its actions bymajority vote of the quorum. Recommendations to the Town Meeting shall include their anticipated costs. 
The Board of Selectmen shall insert one or more articles in the warrant for each Annual Town Meeting, and for any Special Town Meeting, upon the written request of the Committee, to enable Town Meeting tomake appropriations or take other actions for community preservationpurposes recommended by the Committee for the current or next fiscal year. 
At all times this section shall be interpreted and implemented in amanner consistent with the Act, as amended. In case any subsection, paragraph or part of this section is for any reason declared invalidor unconstitutional by any court of last resort, every other subsection, paragraph or part shall continue in full force and effect. [Amended5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
10:36 

§ 40-415. Permanent Audit Committee. 
A. 	There shall be a Permanent Audit Committee of seven members consisting of the Chair of the Board of Selectmen or a member ofthat Board designated by its Chair, the Town Treasurer, the Town Accountant and four members who shall be appointed by the Selectmen. 
B. 	At periodic intervals as requested by the Selectmen, but not less oftenthan triennially, the Committee shall assist the Selectmen in the selection of an auditor who, when selected, shall perform an auditof the accounts of the Town. The Committee shall monitor the accomplishment of the selected auditor and shall participate in the review and discussion of the auditor's findings with the Selectmen. 
C. 	The Committee shall annually report to the Selectmen, which reportshall discuss the matters presented in the auditor's report and shall recommend such changes or alterations in accounting practices andprocedures as the Committee sees fit. The auditor's report shall bepublished in the Annual Town Report. 
§ 40-420. Permanent Building Advisory Committee. [Added12-13-1999 STM, approved 3-9-2000] 
A. 	There shall be a Permanent Building Advisory Committee of seven members who shall be residents of the Town, one of whom shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen and six of whom shall beappointed by the Town Moderator. To the extent possible, the Town Moderator shall appoint members who have experience in architecture,engineering, building construction, law or finance. 
B. 	Notwithstanding other provisions of these bylaws, it shall be the responsibility of the Committee to oversee all projects for the design,construction, reconstruction, alteration or enlargement of any buildingor other facilities owned by the Town, or undertaken on land owned, leased or operated by the Town, with an expected construction valueof $50,000 or more, except as the Town Meeting may authorize theappointment of a building or project committee with respect to a particular project. The Committee may also review projects with anexpected value of less than $50,000. 
C. 	Any building or project committee authorized by Town Meeting shall include one or more Committee members designated by the Committee.Committee members serving on any such building or project committeeshall serve as full voting members for the duration of said building or project committee. In the event that the Town Meeting does notauthorize the appointment of a building or project committee with respect to a particular project, the Committee shall have the sole authority to procure engineering and architectural services, to awardbids for construction and to administer contracts for construction services in accordance with applicable law. 
10:37 

§ 40-420 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-425 

D. 	Except as otherwise provided by vote of the Town Meeting, theCommittee shall assume the responsibility for any project in progress as of December 13, 1999, except the Town Hall and Town Hall Annexprojects and the new Municipal Light Department project. [Amended5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
§ 40-425. Warrant Committee. 
A. 	There shall be a Warrant Committee of 17 members, consisting of theChair of the Board of Selectmen or a member of that Board designated by its Chair, the Chair of the School Committee or a member of thatCommittee designated by its Chair, and 15 other voters of the Townwho shall be appointed by the Moderator. A majority of the entire Committee shall always be voters of the Town who hold no Town office.For purposes of these bylaws, Town Meeting Members shall not beconsidered holders of a Town office. The Committee shall serve without pay. [Amended 4-27-2009 ATM, approved 10-1-2009] 
B. 	It shall be the duty of the Committee to consider for all Town Meetings all articles in the warrant which involve an appropriation of moneyand to report thereon at the Town Meeting. The Selectmen shall,immediately upon voting to include in the warrant any such article, transmit a copy thereof to the Committee which shall thereupon takethe same under consideration. On the copies of the warrant provided bythe Selectmen for the Town Meeting Members at each Town Meeting, there shall appear a short statement of the report and recommendations of the Committee. The Committee shall also consider and report upon other warrant articles and other matters which, in the Committee's judgment, affect the financial interests of the Town.
[Amended 4-25-1983 ATM, approved 8-2-1983] 
C. 	The Committee Chair or some member designated by the Chair shall attend each Town Meeting and shall present or read to the Town Meeting the vote of the Committee containing its recommendationswith reference to each article in question, including the number in favor or against the same. Said report shall be presented or read as abovebefore any debate shall be in order on said article. 
D. 	The various Town officers and boards charged with expenditure of Town money shall submit their recommendations for appropriationsto the Committee on a schedule established by the Committee. TheCommittee may give one or more public hearings regarding every proposed appropriation and shall give public notice of the time andplace of such hearing or hearings. The various Town officers and boardsmay be required by the Committee to attend such hearing or hearings and give such evidence and explanation as may be required of themconcerning their recommendations for appropriations. 
E. The Committee shall duly consider all matters before it and shall report in writing its approval or disapproval of the articles in the warrant 
10:38 

within the scope of its investigation hereunder. The Selectmen shallinclude said report in the Annual Town Report. 
F. 	Nothing in this section shall be construed so as to prevent the Townfrom appropriating money or taking any other action according to law,without the matter first having been acted upon and recommendations and report made thereon by the Committee. [Amended 4-25-1983ATM, approved 8-2-1983; 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
10:39 

§ 40-425 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 40-425 

Chapter 50 
TOWN ADMINISTRATION 

10:40 

ARTICLE 1 
Position Classification Plan 
[Adopted as Art. 11 of the 1981 Bylaws; amended 4-27-2009 ATM,approved 10-1-2009] 

§ 50-100. Classification Plan, Salary Plan and Personnel PolicyGuide. 
Pursuant to MGL c. 41, § 108C, the Town Meeting shall adopt and mayamend from time to time a Classification Plan classifying into groups and classes all positions other than those filled by popular election and thoseunder control of the School Committee and shall in like manner adoptand may amend from time to time a Salary Plan and Personnel Policy Guide which applies to all positions except elected officials, employeeswith personal contracts, employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement, and employees of the School Department. 
10:41 

ARTICLE 2 
Revolving Funds
[Adopted 11-13-2017 STM, approved 2-27-20188] 


§ 50-200. Purpose. 
This article establishes and authorizes revolving funds for use by specified Town departments, boards, committees, agencies, or officers in connectionwith the operation of programs, or activities that generate fees, chargesor other receipts to support all or some of the expenses of those programs or activities. These revolving funds are established under and governed byMGL c. 44, § 53E½. 
§ 50-205. Expenditure limitations. 
The specified department or agency head, board, committee, or officer mayincur liabilities against and spend monies from a revolving fund establishedand authorized by this article without appropriation subject to the following limitations: 
A. 	Fringe benefits of full-time employees whose salaries or wages are paidfrom the fund shall also be paid from the fund. 
B. 	No liability shall be incurred in excess of the available balance of thefund. 
C. 	The total amount spent during a fiscal year shall not exceed the amount authorized by Town Meeting on or before July 1 of that fiscal year,or any increased amount of that authorization that is later approvedduring that fiscal year by the Board of Selectmen and Warrant Committee. 
§ 50-210. Interest. 
Interest earned on monies credited to a revolving fund established by this article shall be credited to the general fund. 
§ 50-215. Procedures and reports. 
Except as provided in MGL c. 44, § 53E½ and this bylaw, the laws, bylaws, rules, regulations, policies, or procedures that govern the receipt andcustody of Town monies and the expenditure and payment of Town fundsshall apply to the use of a revolving fund established and authorized by this article. The Town Accountant shall include a statement on the collections credited to each fund, the encumbrances and expenditures charged to thefund and the balance available for expenditure in the regular report the Town Accountant provides the department, board, committee, agency, orofficer on appropriations made for its use. 
8. Editor's Note: This article also changed the title of this Ch. 50 from "PositionClassification and Compensation Plan" to its current title. 
10:43 
§ 50-220 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 50-220 

§ 50-220. Authorized revolving funds. 

A. 
B. 
C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
G. 
H. 
Senior Programs Fund: funds derived from Council on Aging course and program fees, charges or other receipts to be expended by theCouncil on Aging to fund courses and programs for Fiscal Year 2018and subsequent years. 
Art Gallery Fund: funds derived from commissions on art sales, tobe expended by the Belmont Cultural Council for gallery exhibits andevent expenses, including administrative costs and part-time wages, for Fiscal Year 2018 and subsequent years. 
Rock Meadow Restoration and Maintenance Fund: funds derived from rental fees from garden plots, to be expended by the Conservation Commission for costs associated with the restoration and maintenance of the Rock Meadow conservation area, including part-time wages, forFiscal Year 2018 and subsequent years. 
Library Lost Book and Copying Fund: funds derived from lost bookfees and fees for printing and copying, to be expended by the Board ofLibrary Trustees for the replacement of lost books and for copier and printer supplies and maintenance for Fiscal Year 2018 and subsequent years. 
Stormwater Improvement Fund: funds derived from payments made in lieu of on-site stormwater facilities, under the Stormwater Managementand Erosion Control Bylaw, to be expended by the Director of the Officeof Community Development for design, construction, and maintenance of public or shared stormwater facilities, for Fiscal Year 2018 and subsequent years. 
Martin Luther King Day Breakfast Fund: funds derived from ticket sales for the annual Martin Luther King Day Breakfast, to be expended by theHuman Rights Commission for event expenses for Fiscal Year 2018 andsubsequent years. 
Non-School Property Maintenance Fund: funds derived from the rentalof Town properties not under the control of the School Department, tobe expended by the Board of Selectmen for the maintenance and repair of such properties. 
Stormwater Consulting Fund: funds derived from consultant fees paidby applicants for stormwater permits, to be expended by the Director of the Office of Community Development for peer review consultantservices for Fiscal Year 2018 and subsequent years. 
10:44 

Chapter 60 

PUBLIC HEALTH, SAFETY, WELFARE AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROTECTION 

10:45 

ARTICLE 1 
Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms 
[Adopted as §§ 20.8, 20.9, 20.10, 20.14 and 20.15 of the 1981
Bylaws] 


§ 60-100. Alcoholic beverages. 
A. 	No person shall drink or have in his or her possession an openedcontainer of any alcoholic beverage as defined in MGL c. 138, § 1, whileupon any public way or upon any way to which the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees or any park or playground or privateland or place without consent of the owner or person in control thereof. 
B. 	All alcoholic beverages being used in violation of Subsection A shall be seized and safely held until final adjudication of the charge against theperson or persons arrested or summoned before the court, at whichtime they shall be returned to the person entitled to original possession. 
§ 60-105. Tobacco products. [Amended 11-8-2010 ATM, approved2-10-2011; 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
No person shall smoke or otherwise use a tobacco product on any public school playground or athletic field nor any Recreation Departmentplayground or athletic field. For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
SMOKING — Inhaling, exhaling, or burning any tobacco product. 
TOBACCO PRODUCT — Cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco or tobacco in anyof its forms. 
§ 60-107. Marijuana establishments. [Added 5-2-2018 STM,approved 7-9-20189] 
A. 	Consistent with MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), all types of marijuana establishments, except for marijuana retailers, both as defined in MGL
c. 94G, § 1, shall be prohibited within the Town of Belmont; provided,however, that a Registered Marijuana Dispensary shall not be deemed to be a marijuana establishment. 
B. 	Consistent with MGL c. 94G, § 3(a)(2), the number of MarijuanaRetailers in Belmont shall not exceed a number that is equal to 20% of the number of licenses issued within the Town of Belmont for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages not to be drunk on the premises wheresold under MGL c. 138, § 15, as implemented in Belmont pursuant to Chapter 16 of the Acts of 2014, as amended by Chapter 147 of the Actsof 2017, and, if that number is not a whole number, it shall be rounded up to the next higher whole number. 
9. Editor's Note: This article was also approved at the 9-25-2018 Special Town Election. 
10:47 
§ 60-110 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-115 

§ 60-110. Discharge of firearms. 
No person, except in the performance of some legal duty or in the lawful defense of a person or property, shall discharge any firearm within theTown. 
§ 60-115. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-8-2010 ATM,approved 2-10-2011] 
In addition to the provisions for enforcement described above, the provisions of §§ 60-100A and 60-105 of this article and any regulations promulgated thereunder may also be enforced by noncriminal dispositionas provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). The penalty for such violationshall be $300 for each offense. Each day or part thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
A. 	"Enforcing person" as used in this section shall mean any police officerof the Town, the Director of Public Works and any other Town employee designated by the Board of Selectmen as an enforcing person. 
B. 	An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of § 60-100A or60-105 or any rule or regulation adopted thereunder shall give the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the DistrictCourt having jurisdiction thereof for the noncriminal disposition thereofin accordance with the provisions of § 21D. The provisions of § 21D are incorporated herein by this reference. 
10:48 

ARTICLE 2 
Animals 
[Adopted as § 20.11 and Art. 28 of the 1981 Bylaws; amended in itsentirety 5-5-2014 ATM, approved 9-21-2014] 

§ 60-200. Pets and other animals. 
A. 	Licensing of dogs and cats. No person shall own or keep a dog or cat,six months of age or older, within the Town unless a license for suchdog or cat is obtained from the Town Clerk. The license period shall be from January 1 through December 31; provided, however, that allapplications for license renewals shall be submitted by March 15 ofeach year, or the licensee may be subject to late fees. Nonrefundable license and late fees shall be established from time to time by theTown Clerk, unless Town Meeting approval is required pursuant toMGL c. 140, § 139, or other applicable law. License fees for dogs and cats owned or kept by residents who are age 60 or older shall be ata discounted rate of at least 25% less than the established fee. All license fees shall be waived for dogs and cats that serve as service animals as defined by the Americans with Disabilities Act or regulationspromulgated thereunder. Not more than three dogs over three monthsof age shall be kept in any household without complying with the kennel licensing provisions set forth in § 60-205. All dogs and cats are requiredto wear their license tags at all times. 
(1) 	
No dog or cat six months of age or older shall be licensed unless a valid rabies vaccination certificate is presented to the Town Clerkat the time of licensing. 

(2) 	
No dog or cat six months of age or older shall be licensed unless there is presented to the Town Clerk at the time of licensing either: 

(a) 	
Proof that the dog or cat has been spayed or neutered; 

(b) 	
A statement signed by a veterinarian stating why spaying or neutering has been delayed; or 

(c) 	
A statement signed by the owner or keeper of the dog or catthat a decision has been made not to spay or neuter the dog or cat. 



(3) 	
A special breeder's license shall be obtained for any dog or cat withrespect to which a statement is presented that a decision has been made not to spay or neuter pursuant to § 60-200A(2)(c). 


B. 	The owner of any dog or cat that is sold or given away, or whose custodyis otherwise transferred, to any other resident of the Town shall obtain from the Town Clerk and furnish to such other resident a copy of thissection of the General Bylaws or a summary thereof. 
C. No person who owns, keeps or controls a dog shall allow the dog to run free when not restricted to the premises of said person, except as 
10:49 

§ 60-200 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-200 

D. 

E. 
F. 
G. 
permitted by the Board of Health. Except as otherwise provided in thissection, such dogs shall be leashed and curbed when off such premises. 
Removal of feces. 
(1) 	
Each person who owns, keeps or controls a dog within the Townshall remove and dispose of any feces left by such dog on any sidewalk, street, park or other public area or on any privateproperty that is not owned or lawfully occupied by such person. 

(2) 	
No person who owns, keeps or controls a dog within the Town shall permit such dog to be on any sidewalk, street, park or other publicarea unless such dog is accompanied by a person carrying a devicethat is suitable for picking up and containing feces, unexposed to such person and to the general public. 

(3) 	
For purposes of this subsection, feces may be disposed of only ata place suitable and regularly reserved for the disposal of human feces or otherwise designated as appropriate by the Board of Health. 

(4) 	
Subsection D(1), (2) and (3) of this subsection shall not apply to a dog accompanying any person who, by reason of a handicap, isphysically unable to comply with their requirements. [Amended5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-2015] 


No person within the Town shall possess, maintain, propagate, cultivateor deal in wild or exotic animals within the meaning of MGL c. 131,§ 23, unless notice thereof has been filed with the Board of Health and all permits required by said § 23 or otherwise have been obtained. 
No person within the Town shall feed any wild animals, including,without limitation, ducks, geese and raccoons, or any homeless dogs or cats, except birds through freestanding bird feeders or bird feedersattached to a private residence. Persons feeding their own domesticanimals shall do so only in a sheltered space inaccessible to wild or roaming animals. This subsection shall not apply to the feeding ofhomeless dogs or cats if done in a sheltered place inaccessible to wildor roaming animals with the express purpose of befriending the dog or cat in order later to have it vaccinated, spayed or neutered, andultimately adopted. 
Nuisance or dangerous dogs or other animals. 
(1) 	
No person shall permit any dog, cat or other household pet thatby biting, barking, howling, scratching or crying, or in any other manner, disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood, destroys private property, endangers the safety of any person, orotherwise acts as a nuisance or dangerous dog as defined by MGL

c. 140, § 136A. 
10:50 

(2) 	
The Animal Control Officer, or any other Town officer tasked withthe enforcement of this section, shall respond to complaints and reports of a violation of Subsection G(1). 

(3) 	
All bites by dogs, cats, other domestic animals or wild or exoticanimals shall be reported to the Board of Health and the Animal Control Officer by the person bitten or by the owner or keeper ofthe animal, as soon as possible after the incident. 

(4) 	
Any person, including the Animal Control Officer, may make a complaint to the Board of Health, the Town's Hearing Authoritypursuant to MGL c. 140, concerning a nuisance or a dangerousdog as defined by MGL c. 140, § 136A. Upon the receipt of such a complaint, the Board of Health shall conduct a public hearingto gather evidence and testimony with respect to the allegationmade in the complaint. At the close of the public hearing and after deliberation, the Board of Health may dismiss the complaint, ordeem the dog a nuisance or dangerous dog. If the Board of Healthdeems the dog a nuisance or a dangerous dog, it may order any of the remedies available to it under MGL c. 140, § 157. 



H. 	
The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures or kills a dog orcat within the Town shall report such incident to the owner or keeper of such dog or cat or to a police officer of the Town. 

I. 	
Except as the Board of Health may otherwise permit, no dogs, exceptthose dogs that serve as service animals as defined by regulations issued pursuant to the Americans with Disabilities Act, 28 CFR 35.104,will be allowed in the following areas of the Town: all cemetery land,all public school playgrounds and athletic fields and all Recreation Department playgrounds and athletic fields. Nor may any dog beallowed inside food establishments, retail businesses or public buildings. [Amended 5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-2015] 

J. 	
Violations of this section shall be disposed of, in the discretion ofthe Board of Health, either in the manner provided in § 40-220E or, if applicable, pursuant to the provisions of MGL c. 140, § 173A. Forall violations of this section other than violations of the licensingsubsections, a noncriminal citation will be issued on the following schedule: first offense, written warning; second offense, $25; thirdoffense and each succeeding offense occurring within a twelve-monthperiod, $50. Any violation of the licensing subsections shall result in a fine of $50 per such violation and, for violations continuing 30 days pastlicensing deadlines, an additional fine of $100 per such violation. Thefines specified in this subsection shall be in lieu of the schedule of fines specified in MGL c. 140, § 173A. 


§ 60-205. Kennels. 
A. 	Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and terms have the following meanings: 
10:51 

§ 60-205 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-205 

KENNEL — A pack or collection of dogs on a single property, includinga commercial boarding or training kennel, commercial breeder kennel, domestic charitable corporation kennel, personal kennel, or veterinarykennel, as defined in MGL c. 140, § 136A. 
KENNEL INSPECTOR — The Town's Animal Control Officer, the Police Chief, or such other qualified party as may be designated by the Boardof Selectmen. 
KENNEL LICENSE — An annual license permitting a kennel to operate within the Town, issued to a kennel that has demonstrated compliancewith the requirements of this section. 
LICENSE PERIOD — The time between January 1 and the following December 31, both dates inclusive. 
B. 	Licenses; fees; requirements; violations. 
(1) 	
No person shall operate a kennel within the Town without first obtaining a kennel license from the Town Clerk in accordance withthe provisions of this section. Possession of a kennel license shallnot demonstrate compliance with any other provision of the bylaws of the Town of Belmont. 

(2) 	
The Town Clerk shall determine the amount of the nonrefundable fee for a kennel license for each license period. The Town Clerk may charge an increased fee for applications for kennel licenserenewals received after March 15 for that license period. 

(3) 	
The location and operation of any kennel shall be appropriate for housing the number of dogs allowable under the terms of its kennellicense and may not be detrimental to the health and safety of dogs or persons. 

(4) 	
All kennels shall be operated in a safe, sanitary, and humane condition, as provided in MGL c. 140, § 137C. 

(5) 	
No kennel that provides overnight boarding of dogs may keep more than 25 dogs for overnight stays on the premises. Dogs that are onthe premises for medical or surgical treatment or observation shallnot be counted in this number. 

(6) 	
No kennel may contract with security dog firms or other businessesto board protection or security dogs, or dogs in training to beprotection or security dogs on the premises. A security dog kept on the premises for the kennel's own security purposes is permitted. 

(7) 	
Kennel operations, including the exercising of dogs, shall be in anindoor enclosed area, except that individual dogs may be exercised one at a time in a prescribed outdoor area. 

(8) 	
Every kennel shall at all times keep and maintain accurate recordsof the number and identities of all dogs kept on the premises, and the identities of persons who have purchased dogs from the kennel. 

10:52 

C. 


D. 

E. 


(9) 	In addition to the requirements of this section, the provisions of§ 60-200C and Article 6 of this chapter shall apply to all kennels. 
(10)Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any violation ofthis section shall result in a fine of $50 per such violation and,for violations continuing 30 days past licensing deadlines, an additional fine of $100 per such violation. A person maintaining akennel after the kennel license therefor has been revoked, or while such kennel license is suspended, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $250. Violations shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 140, § 173A. 
Application process; license issuance; renewals. 
(1) 	
Any person or entity seeking a kennel license or renewal or reinstatement thereof shall complete and submit to the Town Clerka kennel license application, in a form prescribed by the Town Clerk. The application shall include a statement that the applicantacknowledges receipt of a copy of the provisions of this section andagrees to comply with all applicable provisions. 

(2) 	
Upon receipt of a completed application, the Town Clerk shall so notify the kennel inspector who shall forthwith conduct an inspection of the applicant's kennel as provided in Subsection D. The Town Clerk shall also give notice of the application to directabutters to the proposed kennel location and provide such abutters14 days to submit written comments on the application. 

(3) 	
The Town Clerk shall review the completed application, all comments received within 14 days of the notice to abutters givenpursuant to Subsection D(2), and the kennel inspector's report. The Town Clerk shall determine whether the proposed kennel is incompliance with the requirements of this section and MGL c. 140,§§ 137C and 137D, and, if so, shall issue a kennel license to the applicant. If the Town Clerk finds that the proposed kennel is notin compliance with such requirements, the Town Clerk shall deny the application and state the reasons for such denial. [Amended5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-2015] 

(4) 	
Any application for renewal of a kennel license shall be submittedto the Town Clerk on or before March 15 for that license period. 


Inspections. The kennel inspector, the Police Chief, the Board of Selectmen, or the Town's Animal Control Officer may at any time inspect a kennel or cause the inspection of a kennel to ascertain whether the kennel complies with the requirements of this section andapplicable state statutes. 
Suspension or revocation of kennel license; reinspections. 
(1) 	If the Town Clerk denies a kennel license application or renewalapplication, the applicant or kennel license holder may request 
10:53 

§ 60-205 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-205 

a reinspection of the proposed kennel after reasonablydemonstrating to the kennel inspector that the proposed kennel has been brought into compliance with the requirements of thissection and applicable state statutes. The kennel inspector shallthereafter, as soon as is practicable, reinspect the proposed kennel and make a report to the Town Clerk, who shall, within a reasonable time, review the application in accordance with Subsection C. The Town Clerk may set fees for reinspections performed pursuant to this subsection. 
(2) 	
If the kennel inspector, Police Chief, Board of Selectmen, or theTown's Animal Control Officer inspects or causes to be inspected a kennel and, in the judgment of the person or entity that performedthe inspection, the kennel operator is not maintaining the kennelin compliance with this section and applicable state statutes, then the kennel inspector, Police Chief, Board of Selectmen, or the Town's Animal Control Officer shall, by order, revoke or suspendthe kennel license, in accordance with MGL c. 140, § 137C. 

(3) 	
If a kennel license is suspended, the kennel license holder mayapply for reinstatement by requesting a reinspection of the kennelafter reasonably demonstrating to the kennel inspector that the kennel has been brought into compliance with this section andapplicable state statutes, and that the license holder has satisfiedthe terms of the suspension order. The kennel inspector shall thereafter, as soon as is practicable, reinspect the kennel and makea report to the Town Clerk who shall, within a reasonable time,review the application in accordance with Subsection C. The Town Clerk may set fees for reinspections performed pursuant to thissubsection. 

(4) 	
If a kennel license is revoked, the kennel license holder may apply for a new kennel license in accordance with Subsection C. The Town Clerk may set fees for reinspections performed pursuant tothis subsection. 


F. 	Petitions to declare a kennel a nuisance. Any group of 25 citizens mayfile a petition with the Board of Selectmen setting forth that they areaggrieved, or annoyed to an unreasonable extent, by one or more dogs maintained in the Town due to excessive barking or other conditionsconnected with a kennel constituting a nuisance, as provided in MGL
c. 140, § 137C. The Board of Selectmen shall request that the kennel inspector investigate and provide a report for the parties' review priorto the public hearing provided in MGL c. 140, § 137C. 
10:54 

ARTICLE 3 
Buildings and Construction10 
[Adopted as §§ 20.13 and 20.15 and Arts. 24 and 32 of the 1981
Bylaws] 


§ 60-300. Alarms. [Amended 4-26-2004 ATM, approved 8-19-2004] 
A. 	Preamble. It is determined that the number of false alarms being madeto the Police and Fire Departments hinders the efficiency of thoseDepartments, lowers the morale of Department personnel, constitutes a danger to the general public in the streets during responses tofalse alarms, and jeopardizes the response of volunteers, and that theadoption of this bylaw will reduce the number of false alarms and promote the responsible use of alarm devices in the Town of Belmont. 
B. 	Definitions. For the purpose of this bylaw the following definitions shallapply: 
ALARM DEVICE — Any device which when activated by a criminal act, fire or other emergency calling for Police or Fire Departmentresponse transmits a signal to the Town of Belmont's Public Safety Communications Center, transmits a signal to a person who relaysinformation to the Town of Belmont's Public Safety CommunicationsCenter, or produces an audible or visible signal to which the Police or Fire Department is likely to respond. Excluded from this definition andthe scope of this bylaw are devices which are designated to alert orsignal only persons within the premises in which the device is installed. 
ALARM USER — The owner of any premises on which an alarm deviceis used, provided that an occupant who expressly accepts responsibilityfor an alarm device by registration pursuant to Subsection E shall be deemed the alarm user. 
AUTOMATIC DIAL ALARM — A telephone or device or attachmentthat mechanically or electronically selects a telephone line to the Town of Belmont's Public Safety Communications Center and reproducesa prerecorded voice message to report a criminal act, fire or otheremergency calling for Police or Fire Department response. Excluded from this definition are devices which relay a digital-coded signal to theTown of Belmont's Public Safety Communications Center. 
CONTRACTOR — Any firm or corporation in the business of supplying and installing alarm devices or servicing the same. 
FALSE ALARM — Any activation of an alarm device to which the Policeor Fire Department responds and which is not caused by a criminal act, fire or other emergency, except an activation caused by malfunctionof telephone company equipment or lines as verified by monitoringfacilities at the Town of Belmont's Public Safety Communications Center, power failure as verified by the administrator, or an actual 
10.Editor's Note: See also Art. 6, Noise, of this chapter. 
10:55 
§ 60-300 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-300 

C. 
D. 
E. 
F. 
water flow or release from a fire suppression system. A series of suchactivations attributable to the same cause and occurring under circumstances beyond the control of the responsible alarm user shallbe deemed a single false alarm. 
MASTER BOX — A device either wired or wireless designed to transmit a signal to the Town of Belmont Public Safety Communications Centervia municipal alarm circuits or radio receiving equipment. 
MUNICIPAL MASTER BOX — A master box owned by the Town of Belmont, Belmont public schools, Belmont Municipal Light Departmentor facilities owned or operated by the Belmont Housing Authority. 
Administrator. 
(1) 	
There shall be in the Town an administrator for alarm devices who shall have the power and duties granted under this bylaw. 

(2) 	
The Police Chief or his designee shall be the administrator under the direction and control of the Board of Selectmen which is authorized to adopt regulations for the administration of this bylaw.




[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
Alarm Appeal Board. 
(1) 	
There shall be in the Town an Alarm Appeal Board which shall havethe powers and duties granted to it under this bylaw. 

(2) 	
The Alarm Appeal Board shall consist of the Board of Selectmen. 


Registration required. Each alarm user shall register his alarm deviceor devices with the administrator prior to use and annually as described below. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
Registration procedure. 
(1) 	
The administrator will provide a registration form which statesthe terms of use of alarm devices in Belmont. A person wishingto use an alarm device is required to agree to these terms. The registration form will include the user's name, the name of theuser's alarm contractor, if any, and any reasonable informationrequired by the administrator. Alarm devices in use on the effective date of this bylaw must be registered within 60 days of that date.New alarm devices must be registered before use. Alarm devicesmust be registered each year by June 5 for the year beginning the following July 1. The administrator will provide registrantsevidence of proper registration. 

(2) 	
It shall be the responsibility of each alarm user to notify the administrator in writing of changes in registration information.11 


11.Editor's Note: Original § 24.6.3, which immediately followed this subsection and providedregistration fees, was repealed 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013. 
10:56 G. 
H. 
I. 
J. 
K. 
L. 
Confidential information. All information in the possession of theadministrator, the Police Department or the Fire Department concerning particular alarm users and particular alarm devices shall beconfidential and shall not be divulged without the written consent of thealarm user or users concerned. 
Automatic dial alarm; interconnection to Town of Belmont's Public Safety Communications Center. 
(1) 	
No automatic dial alarm may be installed without the prior approval of the administrator. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 

(2) 	
Within six months after the effective date of this bylaw, all automatic dial alarms presently in use shall be reprogrammed todial a designated number within the Town of Belmont's PublicSafety Communications Center. The automatic dial alarm shall be regulated so as not to repeat the message more than two times.Service for having automatic dial alarms reprogrammed and regulated shall be at the user's expense. 

Exterior audible devices. 

(1) 	
Unless required by law, no alarm device which produces an exterioraudible signal shall be installed unless its operation is automatically restricted to a maximum of 20 minutes. Any alarmdevice in use as of the effective date of this bylaw must comply withthis subsection within 180 days of such date. 

(2) 	
Where an audible alarm continues beyond the maximum period orits activation is triggered repeatedly within a short time, the officerin charge of the Police Department may order the audible alarm to be silenced if it causes a disturbance of the peace unless the alarmuser can correct the problem immediately. Reasonable efforts shallbe made to notify the alarm user before taking this action. 


Discontinuing alarm response. Where false alarm activations occur repeatedly at an address in the course of a day, the officer in chargeof the Fire Department, for fire alarms, or the officer in charge of the Police Department, for other alarms, may order that police or fire response to the location in response to alarm activations be discontinued temporarily. When responses to alarm activations are discontinued, the police or fire officer in charge giving the order shallmake reasonable efforts to inform the alarm user of this action so the alarm user may take corrective measures immediately. 
Reporting of false alarms. The Police Department and Fire Departmentshall determine false alarms and report false alarms to the administrator. 
Alarm charges. 
10:57 

§ 60-300 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-300 

(1) 	
When the administrator receives notice that the Police Department or Fire Department has responded to a false alarm, the administrator shall impose a charge on the responsible alarm useraccording to the following schedule: 

(a) 	
For the first false alarm within the Town's fiscal year: no charge; 

(b) 	
For the second such alarm: $10; 

(c) 	
For the third such alarm: $25; and 

(d) 	
For the fourth and subsequent such alarms: $50. 



(2) 	
In addition to the provisions of Subsection L(1), there shall be nocharge for the first false alarm occurring within one month after installation of an alarm device, and such false alarms shall not be considered in determining charges in accordance with the scheduleset forth in Subsection L(1). 

(3) 	
Where the administrator determines that the Police Departmentor Fire Department has responded to an unregistered alarm, theadministrator shall impose a charge of $25 on the alarm user in addition to any false alarm charges that may be appropriate. 


M. 	Notification and appeal. 
(1) 	
False alarm charges. 

(a) 	
The administrator shall notify the responsible alarm user ofany false alarm charge by mail. Within 30 days after mailingof such notice, the alarm user may file with the administrator information to show that the alarm was not a false alarm within the meaning of this bylaw; 

(b) 	
The administrator shall consider such information, reaffirm or rescind the false alarm charge, and notify the alarm user ofhis decision by mail. Within 30 days after the mailing of suchnotice, the alarm user may file with the Alarm Appeal Board an appeal in writing; and 

(c) 	
In addition, for good cause shown, the administrator mayreduce to one charge multiple charges that are due because of alarm activations occurring during a twenty-four-hour period. 



(2) 	
Appeal to the Alarm Appeal Board. Upon receipt of a timely appealfrom a false alarm charge, the Alarm Appeal Board shall hold a hearing to consider it and shall mail notice of the time and placeof said hearing to the alarm user taking the appeal at his lastknown address at least 15 days before the hearing. On the basis of information provided by the alarm user and other informationintroduced at the hearing, the Board shall affirm the charge if it 

10:58 


N. 

O. 

P. 


finds that the charge was properly imposed or rescind the charge ifthe charge was not properly imposed. 
(3) 	Notice to include instructions. Each notice of a false alarm chargeor the reaffirmation of such a charge by the administrator shallrefer to and provide instruction concerning the alarm user's right to further recourse by filing information with the administrator oran appeal with the Alarm Appeal Board, as the case may be.12 
Charges and fees paid into general fund. Charges for false alarms, registration fees and appeal fees will be collected by the administratorand deposited in the general fund. 
Town assumes no responsibility for alarm devices. Notwithstanding the provisions of this bylaw, the Town, its departments, officers, agentsand employees shall be under no obligation whatsoever concerningthe adequacy, operation or maintenance of any alarm device or of the alarm monitoring facilities at the Town of Belmont's Public SafetyCommunications Center. No liability whatsoever is assumed for thefailure of such alarm devices or monitoring facilities, or for failure to respond to alarms or for any other act or omission in connection withsuch alarm devices. Each alarm user shall be deemed to hold and save harmless the Town, its departments, officers, agents and employees from liability in connection with the alarm user's alarm device. 
Penalty for certain violations. Any person who performs or causes tobe performed any one of the following acts shall be subject to a fine of $100 for each such act: [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
(1) 	
Intentional causing of a false alarm; 

(2) 	
Failure to register an alarm device or give notice of changes inregistration information as required by this section; each day ofsuch failure shall constitute a separate violation; 

(3) 	
Use of automatic dial alarm or an exterior audible alarm device in violation of the provisions of this bylaw; each day of such use shallconstitute a separate violation; and 

(4) 	
Failure to pay a charge levied by the administrator acting underSubsection L within 30 days after the mailing of a notice of chargeunless reconsideration is sought pursuant to Subsection M(1)(a); if reconsideration is denied, failure to pay such charge within 30days of the administrator's decision on reconsideration unless anappeal is sought pursuant to Subsection M(1)(b); and if an appeal is denied, failure to pay such charge within 15 days of the AlarmAppeal Board's mailing of its decision affirming the charge. 


12.Editor's Note: Original § 24.14, Appeal fees, which immediately followed this subsection,was repealed 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013. 
10:59 
§ 60-300 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-305 

Q. Enforcement of this bylaw. 

(1) 	
The Town, at the election of the administrator, may institute civil or criminal proceedings to enforce the provision of this bylaw. 

(2) 	
The administrator may order that response to alarm activations ata location be discontinued when an alarm user fails after notice to register an alarm device and fails to appear in response to criminalor civil action taken against the alarm user; an alarm user failsto pay a charge or charges due and fails to appear in response to civil or criminal action taken against the alarm user; or the alarmuser repeatedly fails, after notice from the alarm administrator, tocorrect defects in the alarm device or mistakes made in the use of an alarm device and the administrator determines that the purposeof this bylaw as set forth in Subsection A will be best served bydiscontinuing response. 

(3) 	
The administrator may order that a master box be disconnectedfrom the Town's municipal wires or removed from receivingequipment when an alarm user fails after notice to register an alarm device and fails to appear in response to criminal or civilaction taken against the alarm user; an alarm user fails to paya charge or charges due and fails to appear in response to civil or criminal action taken against the alarm user; the alarm userrepeatedly fails, after notice from the alarm administrator, to correct defects in the alarm device or mistakes made in the use of an alarm device; or where the alarm user's master box or equipment causes interference with other users and the administrator determines that the purpose of this bylaw as set forth in Subsection A will be best served by disconnecting the masterbox. 

(4) 	
The administrator shall take reasonable steps to inform the alarm user in advance that responses will be discontinued or the masterbox will be disconnected and the actions that the alarm user must take in order to prevent alarm response from being discontinued or the master box from being disconnected. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 


R. 	Exceptions. The provisions of this bylaw shall not apply to alarm devices on premises owned or controlled by the Town, nor to alarm devicesinstalled in a motor vehicle or trailer. 
S. 	Severability. The invalidity of any part or parts of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the remaining parts. 
§ 60-305. Emergency personnel communication facilitation.[Amended 4-26-2010 ATM, approved 9-30-2010] 
The Board of Selectmen may promulgate regulations relative to the construction or substantial renovation of buildings to facilitate the 
10:60 

operation of communications equipment by emergency personnel. Single-family and two-family residences shall not be subject to these regulations. 
§ 60-310. Stretch Energy Code. [Added 4-25-2011 ATM, approved6-22-2011] 
A. 	Definitions. 
INTERNATIONAL ENERGY CONSERVATION CODE (IECC) 2009 — TheInternational Energy Conservation Code (IECC) is a building energycode created by the International Code Council. It is a model code adopted by many state and municipal governments in the United Statesfor the establishment of minimum design and construction requirements for energy and is updated on a three-year cycle. Since July 1, 2010, the baseline energy conservation requirements of theMassachusetts State Building Code defaulted to the latest publishededition, the IECC 2009 with Massachusetts's amendments as approved by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards. 
STRETCH ENERGY CODE — Codified by the Board of BuildingRegulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA of the 8th edition Massachusetts Building Code, the Stretch Energy Code is anappendix to the Massachusetts Building Code, based on further amendments to the International Energy Conservation Code (IECC) to improve the energy efficiency of buildings built to this code. 
B. 	Purpose. The purpose of 780 CMR 115.AA is to provide a more energy-efficient alternative to the base energy code applicable to the relevant sections of the Building Code for both new construction and existingbuildings. 
C. 	Applicability. The Stretch Energy Code applies to residential and commercial buildings. Buildings not included in this scope shall complywith 780 CMR 13 or 34, 61 or 93, as applicable. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
D. 	Authority. 
(1) 	
A municipality seeking to ensure that construction within its boundaries is designed and built above the energy efficiency requirements of 780 CMR may mandate adherence to this appendix. 

(2) 	
780 CMR 115.AA may be adopted or rescinded by any municipality in the commonwealth in the manner prescribed by law. 


E. 	Incorporation and enforcement. 
(1) 	The Stretch Energy Code, as codified by the Board of Building Regulations and Standards as 780 CMR Appendix 115.AA, including any future editions, amendments or modifications, is herein incorporated by reference into this section. [Amended5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
10:61 

§ 60-310 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-320 

(2) 	The Stretch Energy Code is enforceable by the Inspector of Buildings. 
§ 60-315. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-8-2010 ATM,approved 2-10-2011] 
In addition to the provisions for enforcement described above, the provisions of § 60-305 of this article and any regulations promulgatedthereunder may also be enforced by noncriminal disposition as provided inMGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). The penalty for such violation shall be $300 for each offense. Each day or part thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
A. 	"Enforcing person" as used in this section shall mean any police officerof the Town, the Director of Public Works and any other Town employee designated by the Board of Selectmen as an enforcing person. 
B. 	An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of § 60-305 orany rule or regulation adopted thereunder shall give the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the District Court havingjurisdiction thereof for the noncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 21D. The provisions of § 21D are incorporated herein by this reference. 
§ 60-320. Demolition delay. [Added 11-4-2013 STM, approved1-30-2014; amended 5-2-2016 ATM, approved 7-21-2016; 5-1-2017ATM, approved 9-20-2017] 
A. 	Intent and purpose. This section is adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting significant buildings within the Town of Belmont that constitute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural, cultural, economic, political, or social history of the Town;and to limit the detrimental effect of demolition on the character of the Town. Through this section, owners of preferably preserved buildingsare encouraged to seek out and consider alternative options that willpreserve, rehabilitate or restore such buildings; and residents of the Town are alerted to impending demolitions of significant buildings. Bypreserving and protecting significant buildings, this section promotesthe public welfare by making the Town a more attractive and desirable place in which to live and work. To achieve these purposes, the BelmontHistoric District Commission is authorized to advise the Inspector ofBuildings with respect to demolition permit applications. 
B. 	Time limitation. The provisions of this section shall be null and void andof no force and effect on and after December 31, 2022. 
C. 	Definitions. For the purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following definitions: 
APPLICANT — Any person or entity that files an application for a demolition permit. 
APPLICATION — An application for a demolition permit. 
10:62 

BUILDING — A roofed structure enclosing useful space. 
COMMISSION — The Belmont Historic District Commission. 
DEMOLISH — To engage in demolition of a building. 
DEMOLITION — The removal or dismantling of a building in whole orsubstantial part, with or without the intent to replace the construction so affected. 
DEMOLITION PERMIT — The permit required by the Inspector ofBuildings for demolition of a building. 
INSPECTOR OF BUILDINGS — The person authorized by law to issuedemolition permits within the Town of Belmont. 
LIST — A list of buildings, entitled Belmont's Significant Historic Buildings Subject to Demolition Delay Bylaw, prepared by the Commission and filed with the Town Clerk, on March 30, 2017, as it may be modified pursuant to Subsection D. 
PREFERABLY PRESERVED BUILDING — Any significant building thatthe Commission determines, following a public hearing, should bepreserved or rehabilitated rather than demolished. 
SIGNIFICANT BUILDING — A building that is listed on the list. 
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected, the use of whichrequires fixed location on the ground. 
D. 	The list of buildings. 
(1) 	Upon the effective date of the 2017 amendments to this section,the Commission shall notify the owner of record of any building identified on the list, of the owner's right to appeal to the Boardof Selectmen within 60 days of such notice to have the buildingremoved from the list. The basis for this appeal shall be limited to a factual demonstration that the building does not qualify to be asignificant building, based upon the following considerations: 
(a) 	
Whether the building is associated with events that have made a significant contribution to our history; 

(b) 	
Whether the building is associated with the lives of personshistorically significant in our past; 

(c) 	
Whether the building embodies distinctive characteristics of atype, period, or method of construction; represents the workof a master; possesses high artistic value; or represents a significant and distinguishable entity whose components maylack individual distinction; 

(d) 	
Whether the building has recognized national, state, or local level historical significance; 

(e) 	
The historic context of the building; and, 


10:63 

§ 60-320 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-320 

(f) 	The integrity of the building. 
(2) 	
Additional buildings shall not be added to the list. 

(3) 	
Buildings that are located within the McLean Hospital NationalHistoric District, the Common Street Historic District, the Pleasant Street Historic District and the Richardson Farm Historic District, as well as the Belmont Center Fire Station and Waverley SquareFire Station and all municipal buildings shall be ineligible forinclusion on the list. 

(4) 	
The demolition of a significant building following the issuance of ademolition permit shall automatically result in the removal of suchbuilding from the list. Demolition permits issued for significant buildings shall expire six months after their issuance, and a significant building that is not demolished within such period shallremain on the list, and shall be subject to the review procedure set forth in Subsection F. 


E. 	Exclusions. Subsection F shall not apply to: 
(1) 	
The removal of a building to another site within the Town of Belmont; 

(2) 	
Routine maintenance of a building; 

(3) 	
Interior renovations of a building; 

(4) 	
Removal, replacement, renovation, or construction of a building'sporches, entryways, entry platforms and accompanying roofs,decks, dormers, or other architectural elements; 

(5) 	
Removal or replacement of a building's roofing materials, siding,railings, or windows; or 

(6) 	
Removal or destruction of a substantial addition to a significant building that, in the determination of the Commission, does notcontribute to the historic character of the building. 


F. 	Review procedure. 
(1) 	
No demolition permit for a significant building shall be issued untilthe provisions of this subsection have been satisfied. 

(2) 	
An applicant proposing to demolish a significant building shall file with the Inspector of Buildings an application containing thefollowing information: 

(a) 	
The address of the building to be demolished; 

(b) 	
The owner's name, address, relevant contact information and telephone number; 

(c) 	
A description of the building; and 




10:64 

(d) 	Photographs of the building and of neighboring properties. 
If the applicant is not the owner of the building, theapplication shall demonstrate the owner's assent to the filing of the application. 
(3) 	
The Inspector of Buildings shall, within seven days of receipt ofsuch application, forward a copy thereof to the Commission. 

(4) 	
Within 35 days of receipt of a copy of the application from the Inspector of Buildings, the Commission shall hold a public hearingto determine if it is in the public interest for a significant buildingto be preserved or rehabilitated rather than demolished and, based on such determination, whether the significant building is a preferably preserved building. Public notice of the time, place andpurpose of the hearing shall be posted in the same manner as meeting notices posted in Belmont under the Open Meeting Law,MGL c. 30A, § 20, for a period of not less than seven days prior tothe hearing date. The Inspector of Buildings, the applicant and the owner of the significant building (if different from the applicant)shall be notified in writing of the meeting time and place no lessthan 14 days prior to the hearing date. 

(5) 	
Within 10 days of the first date of such public hearing, theCommission shall provide written notification to the Inspector ofBuildings and the applicant of its determination as to whether the significant building is a preferably preserved building. If agreed toin writing by the applicant, the determination of the Commissionand notification to the Inspector of Buildings may be postponed to a specified date. If the Commission does not provide writtennotification to the Inspector of Buildings and the applicant of itsdetermination in writing by such deadline, then the Inspector of Buildings may issue the demolition permit. 

(6) 	
If the Commission determines that the significant building is not apreferably preserved building, the Commission shall so notify the Inspector of Buildings and applicant in writing. The Inspector ofBuildings may then issue the demolition permit. 

(7) 	
If the Commission determines that the significant building is a preferably preserved building, a demolition permit may thereafterbe issued no sooner than 12 months after the date that the application was filed with the Inspector of Buildings, unless a shorter time is otherwise authorized by the Commission based onits finding that the intent and purpose of this section, as providedin Subsection A hereof, will be adequately served. 


G. 	Responsibility of owners and applicants. 
(1) 	The owner of a significant building for which a demolition permit isbeing sought shall: 
10:65 

§ 60-320 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-320 

(a) 	
Provide such information as is reasonably requested by theCommission in connection with its consideration of whether the significant building is a preferably preserved building; 

(b) 	
Allow exterior access to the property on which the significantbuilding is located, as reasonably requested by the Commission; and 

(c) 	
Secure the significant building, if vacant, to the satisfaction ofthe Inspector of Buildings until a demolition permit is issued. 


(2) 	
An applicant who has applied for a demolition permit for a preferably preserved building shall: 

(a) 	
Participate in the investigation of preservation options for the preferably preserved building; and 

(b) 	
Reasonably cooperate with the Commission and any interestedparties in seeking alternatives to the demolition of the preferably preserved building. 



(3) 	
If the owner of a significant building fails to secure the buildingto the satisfaction of the Inspector of Buildings, the subsequent destruction of the building through any cause shall be considered avoluntary demolition in violation of this section if such destructioncould have been prevented by the required security measures. 


H. 	Emergency demolition. 
(1) 	
Nothing in this section shall restrict the Inspector of Buildings fromordering the immediate demolition, in accordance with applicable law, of any building in the event of imminent danger to the safety ofthe public. In the event that the Inspector of Buildings is informedthat a significant building is dangerous to life or limb, or otherwise may be subject to a removal order, the Commission shall be notifiedand, where practicable, the Commission or its designee shall beallowed to accompany the Inspector of Buildings during the inspection of the building. 

(2) 	
As soon as practicable after the Inspector of Buildings has issuedan emergency demolition order for a significant building, a copy of such order shall be provided to the Commission, together withcopies of all documentation relevant thereto. 


I. 	Administration, enforcement and remedies. 
(1) 	
The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as are necessary to administer the provisions of this section, but may notincrease the length of the delay period stated herein. 

(2) 	
In computing any period of time prescribed in this section, theday of the act, event, or default after which the designated periodbegins to run shall not be included. The last day of the period so 


10:66 

computed shall be included, unless it is a Saturday, a Sunday or alegal holiday, in which event the period runs until the end of the next business day. 
(3) 	
The Commission and the Inspector of Buildings are each specifically authorized to institute any and all actions and proceedings, in law or equity, as either of them may deem necessary and appropriate to obtain compliance with the requirements of this section or to prevent a threatened violation thereof. 

(4) 	
Any owner of a significant building that is demolished without firstobtaining a demolition permit in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be subject to a penalty of $300. Each day thatsuch violation exists until a faithful restoration of the demolished significant building or other remediation or remediation plan has been approved by the Commission shall constitute a separateoffense. The Inspector of Buildings may enforce this section bynoncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. 

(5) 	
If a significant building is voluntarily demolished without firstobtaining a demolition permit in accordance with the provisions ofthis section, no building permit authorizing construction on the lot on which the building was located or on any adjoining lot undercommon ownership therewith shall be issued for a period of twoyears from the date of the demolition, unless agreed to by the Commission. 


§ 60-325. Stormwater management and erosion control. [Added5-8-2013 ATM, approved 10-9-2013 (Art. 34 of the 1981 Bylaws)] 
A. 	Purposes. The purposes of this bylaw are: 
(1) 	
To prevent pollutants from entering the Town of Belmont's Municipal Separate Storm Sewer System (MS4); 

(2) 	
To prohibit illicit connections and unauthorized discharges to theMS4 and to require the removal of all such illicit connections; 

(3) 	
To comply with state and federal statutes and regulations relating to stormwater discharges; 

(4) 	
To establish the legal authority to ensure compliance with the provisions of this bylaw through permitting, inspection, monitoring, and enforcement; 

(5) 	
To control runoff and prevent soil erosion and sedimentationresulting from construction site stormwater runoff; 

(6) 	
To promote infiltration and the recharge of groundwater; 


10:67 

§ 60-325 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-325 

(7) 	
To protect, maintain and enhance the public safety, environment,health, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to manage stormwater runoff; and 

(8) 	
To ensure that soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and stormwater runoff control practices are incorporated into the site planning and design process and are implemented and maintained. 


B. 	Definitions. For the purposes of this bylaw, the following definitionsshall apply: 
ALTERATION — Any activity that will change the ability of a groundsurface area to absorb water or will change existing surface drainagepatterns. Examples include, but are not limited to, construction of new structures, earthmoving, paving, and modification of existingvegetation. 
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Structural, nonstructural, and managerial techniques that are recognized to be the most effectiveand practical means to prevent or minimize increases in stormwatervolumes and flows, reduce point source and nonpoint source pollution, and promote stormwater quality and protection of the environment. 
CLEAN WATER ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33
U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.) as it may hereafter be amended. 
CONSTRUCTION SITE — Any site where activity is proposed or occursthat involves the alteration of more than 2,500 square feet of land. 
DEVELOPMENT — The alteration of land to accommodate a new use or an expansion or modification of an existing use. 
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material that, because of its quantity,concentration, chemical, corrosive, flammable, reactive, toxic, infectious or radioactive characteristics, either separately or in combination with any substance or substances, constitutes a present orpotential threat to human health, safety, welfare, or to the environment. Hazardous materials include any synthetic organic chemical, petroleumproduct, heavy metal, radioactive or infectious material, acid and alkali,and any substance defined as toxic or hazardous under MGL c. 21C and 
c. 21E, or the regulations at 310 CMR 30.000 or 310 CMR 40.0000. 
ILLICIT CONNECTION — A surface or subsurface drain or conveyancethat allows an illicit discharge into the MS4, including any connection from an indoor drain, sinks, toilet, or laundry facility, regardless ofwhether the connection was previously allowed, permitted, or approvedbefore the effective date of this bylaw. 
ILLICIT DISCHARGE — Any direct or indirect discharge to the MS4or the waters of the commonwealth that is not composed entirely ofstormwater, including, without limitation, any discharge of a pollutant, sewage, process wastewater, or wash water, except as exempted inSubsection E(3). The term does not include a discharge in compliance 
10:68 

with an NPDES stormwater discharge permit or a surface water discharge permit. 
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Any material or structure on, above or below the ground that prevents water from infiltrating through to theunderlying soil. Impervious surfaces may include, without limitation: paved surfaces, parking lots, sidewalks, driveways, rooftops and swimming pools. 
MS4 (MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM) — The system of conveyances, owned or operated by the Town of Belmont, that isdesigned or used for collecting or conveying stormwater, including anyroad with a drainage system, street, gutter, curb, inlet, piped storm drain, pumping facility, retention or detention basin, natural or man-made or altered drainage channel, swale, culvert, channel, catch basin,outfall, outlet, reservoir, or other drainage structure. 
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) STORMWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — A permit issued bythe United States Environmental Protection Agency or jointly with the state that authorizes the discharge of stormwater containing pollutantsinto waters of the United States. 
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Any water pollution having a source that is not a point source. 
NONSTORMWATER DISCHARGE — A discharge into the MS4 that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
OCD — Town of Belmont Office of Community Development. 
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN — A plan setting the functional, financial and organizational mechanisms for the ongoing operation and maintenance of a stormwater management system toensure that it continues to function as designed. 
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, firm, company, trust, corporation, agency, authority, department or politicalsubdivision of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts or the federal government, to the extent permitted by law, and any officer, employee, or agent of such person. 
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,including, without limitation, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well, discrete fissure, container, rolling stock, concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or other floating craft, from which pollutants are or may be discharged. The term does not include agricultural stormwater discharges and return flows from irrigatedagriculture. 
POLLUTANT — Any element or characteristic of sewage, agricultural, industrial or commercial waste, runoff, leachate, heated effluent, or other matter, whether originating at a point or nonpoint source, thatis or may be introduced into Belmont's MS4 or waters of the commonwealth. Pollutants shall include, but are not limited to: 
10:69 

§ 60-325 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-325 

(1) 	
Paints, varnishes, and solvents; 

(2) 	
Oil and other automotive fluids; 

(3) 	
Nonhazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; 

(4) 	
Refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandonedobjects, ordnance, accumulations and floatables; 

(5) 	
Excess pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; 

(6) 	
Hazardous materials and wastes; 

(7) 	
Sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; 

(8) 	
Dissolved and particulate metals; 

(9) 	
Animal wastes; 


(10)Rock, sand, salt, silt, soils; 
(11)Construction wastes and residues; and 
(12)Noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
RECHARGE — The process by which groundwater is replenished by precipitation. 
RUNOFF — The water from rain, snowmelt or irrigation that flows overthe land surface and is not absorbed into the ground, instead flowing into the MS4 or streams or other surface waters or land depressions. 
SANITARY SEWER SYSTEM — A separate underground conveyancesystem specifically for transporting sanitary waste operated separately and independently from the MS4, to which storm, surface, and groundwaters are not lawfully admitted. 
STORMWATER — Stormwater runoff, snowmelt runoff, and surface water runoff and drainage. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — The use of structural or nonstructural practices that are designed to reduce and control stormwater runoff pollutant loads, discharge volumes or peak flowdischarge rates. "Stormwater management" includes the use of low-impact development (LID) management practices. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND EROSION CONTROL PERMIT — A permit issued by the Town of Belmont Office of CommunityDevelopment approving a system that is designed to protect the environment of the Town from the deleterious effects of uncontrolled and untreated stormwater runoff. 
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS — The Stormwater Management Standards and accompanying Stormwater Handbook(s)issued by the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protectionor any successor agency, as such standards and handbooks may be hereafter superseded or amended. 
10:70 

SUBSTANTIAL DEMOLITION — The demolition of at least 50% of an existing principal structure, measured by the area of the footprint of the structure on the lot.[Added 5-29-2013 ATM, approved 10-8-2013] 
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — All waters within the jurisdiction of the commonwealth, including, without limitation, rivers,streams, lakes, ponds, springs, impoundments, estuaries, wetlands,coastal waters, and groundwater. 
C. 	Administration. 
(1) 	
The Board of Selectmen shall adopt, and may periodically amend,rules and regulations relating to the requirements, procedures, administration and enforcement of this bylaw, after conducting apublic hearing to receive comments on any proposed rules andregulations. 

(2) 	
The OCD shall be responsible for the day-to-day administration ofthis bylaw and shall be the stormwater management and erosioncontrol permit granting authority. 

(3) 	
The Conservation Commission is hereby authorized, in conjunctionwith its administration of the Wetlands Protection Act, to imposesuch conditions regarding stormwater management and erosion control as are necessary to meet the design standards establishedby the Board of Selectmen pursuant to this section, to the extentthat those design standards are more stringent than required under the Wetlands Protection Act. [Added 5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-201513] 

(4) 	
The OCD shall have the authority to investigate suspected illicit discharges and to require the elimination of illicit discharges. 


D. 	Permit process. 
(1) 	
A completed application for a stormwater management and erosion control permit shall be filed with the OCD. A permit shall beobtained prior to the commencement of any work regulated by thisbylaw. 

(2) 	
Some permit applications may require the OCD to secure the services of a licensed professional engineer with expertise instormwater management and erosion control to assist with the administration of this bylaw. These services shall be paid for by theapplicant prior to the issuance of the stormwater management anderosion control permit. 

(3) 	
The OCD shall take final action on an application for a stormwatermanagement and erosion control permit within 30 days from thereceipt of a complete application. The OCD may approve the 


13.Editor's Note: This article also provided for the redesignation of former Subsection C(3)as Subsection C(4). 
10:71 
§ 60-325 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-325 

application; approve the application with conditions; or disapprovethe application. Failure by the OCD to take final action on an application within 30 days following the receipt of a completeapplication shall be deemed to be approval of the application,unless this timeframe is extended by mutual agreement of the OCD and applicant. 
(4) 	The applicant, or an agent thereof, shall obtain the approval of theOCD prior to any change or modification of an activity authorized in a stormwater management and erosion control permit. The OCDmay approve the request if it determines that the change or modification is consistent with the regulations promulgated pursuant to Subsection E of this bylaw, the Stormwater Management Standards and best management practices. The OCDhas the right to amend the existing permit and require additional stormwater runoff and erosion control measures prior to approvalof the change or modification. 
E. 	Illicit connection detection and elimination. 
(1) 	
Prohibited activities. 

(a) 	
Illicit discharges. No person shall cause or allow an illicit discharge into the MS4 or into the waters of the commonwealth. Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt stormwater discharges from regulation under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater program where applicable. 

(b) 	
Illicit connections. No person shall construct, use, allow, maintain or continue any illicit connection, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under applicable law,regulation or custom at the time of connection. 

(c) 	
Obstruction of municipal storm drain system. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the normal flow of stormwater into or out of the MS4 without prior written approval from the OCD. 



(2) 	
Regulated activities. No person shall connect a pipe or other appurtenance to the Town of Belmont sanitary sewer system or theMS4, or otherwise perform any modification, repair, rehabilitation, or replacement work on either system, without a stormwater management and erosion control permit. 

(3) 	
Exemptions. The following nonstormwater discharges are exemptfrom the requirements of Subsections D and E of this bylaw except if the OCD determines, after notice and an opportunity for hearing,that the source is a significant contributor of a pollutant to theMS4: 

(a) 
Waterline flushing; 





10:72 

(b) 	
Landscape irrigation; 

(c) 	
Diverted stream flows; 

(d) 	
Rising groundwaters; 

(e) 	
Uncontaminated groundwater infiltration [as defined at 40CFR 35.2005(20)]; 

(f) 	
Uncontaminated pumped groundwater; 

(g) 	
Discharges from potable water sources; 

(h) 	
Foundation drains; 

(i) 	
Air conditioning condensation; 

(j) 	
Irrigation water and springs; 

(k) 	
Water from crawl space pumps; 

(l) 	
Footing drains; 

(m) 	
Lawn watering; 

(n) 	
Car washing undertaken by individual residents at their homes; 

(o) 	
Flows from wetland resource areas; 

(p) 	
Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; 

(q) 	
Street wash water and residential building wash waters, without detergents; 

(r) 	
Discharges or flows from fire-fighting activities; 

(s) 	
Dye testing, if written approval is given by the OCD prior to thetime of the test; 

(t) 	
Nonstormwater discharges permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order administered under the authority of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,provided that the discharge is in full compliance with the requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and applicablelaws and regulations; and 

(u) 	
Discharges necessary to protect public health, safety, welfare or the environment, for which advanced written approval isreceived from the OCD. 


(4) 	
Emergency suspension of storm drain system access. The OCD may suspend MS4 access to any person or property without priorwritten notice when such suspension is determined to be necessary to prevent or terminate a threatened or actual discharge of pollutants that presents imminent risk of harm to the public health, 

10:73 

§ 60-325 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-325 

safety, welfare or the environment. In the event that any personfails to comply with an emergency suspension order issued pursuant to this subsection, the OCD may take all reasonable stepsto prevent or minimize harm to the public health, safety, welfare orthe environment. 
F. 	Stormwater management and erosion control. 
(1) 	
Regulated activities. A stormwater management and erosion control permit shall be required prior to undertaking any land disturbance that involves: 

(a) 	
An alteration that will result in land disturbances of 2,500 square feet of total area or more, or that is part of a common plan for development that will disturb 2,500 square feet or more; 

(b) 	
An alteration that will increase the amount of a lot's impervious surface area to more than 25% of the lot's total area; or 

(c) 	
Storage or permanent placement of more than 100 cubic yardsof excavated material, fill, snow or ice. 



(2) 	
Exempt activities. Alterations on lots with one, two or three dwelling units existing as of the effective date of this section shallbe exempt from Subsections D and F, except for alterations associated with the substantial demolition of such dwelling unit(s)and alterations thereafter on the same lot. In addition, the following activities shall be exempt from Subsection F: [Amended5-29-2013 ATM, approved 10-8-2013] 

(a) 	
Any work or projects for which all necessary approvals andpermits have been issued before the effective date of this bylaw; 

(b) 	
Use of land for the primary purpose of agriculture,horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture, or the use, expansion, or reconstruction of existing structures for the primarypurpose of agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, or viticulture,to the extent protected under the Zoning Act, MGL c. 40A, § 3; 

(c) 	
Customary cemetery management; 

(d) 	
Alterations for which all stormwater management has beenreviewed and approved as part of an order of conditions issued by the Conservation Commission; [Amended 5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-2015] 

(e) 	
Customary landscaping, gardening, and lawn care activities; 

(f) 	
Activities not expressly regulated by Subsection F(1). 

10:74 

(g) 	
Normal maintenance of Town-owned public land, ways, publicutilities and appurtenances; and 

(h) 	
Emergency activities necessary to protect public health or safety. 



(3) 	
General requirements. 

(a) 	
An operation and maintenance plan shall be submitted to theOCD for approval prior to the issuance of a stormwater management and erosion control permit. The operation and maintenance plan shall be designed to ensure compliance withthe stormwater management and erosion control permit, thisbylaw, and the Massachusetts Surface Water Quality Standards, 314 CMR 4.00, in all seasons and throughout thelife of the system. 

(b) 	
As-built drawings showing all stormwater management systems shall be submitted to the OCD at the completion of aproject. 

(c) 	
The OCD may require the applicant to contribute to the cost of design, construction, and maintenance of a public or sharedstormwater facility in lieu of an on-site stormwater facilitywhere the OCD determines that there are not sufficient site conditions for on-site best management practices that willsatisfy the design criteria set forth in Subsection F(4) of thisbylaw and the performance standards set forth in the regulations promulgated under this bylaw. Funds so contributed may be used to design, construct, and maintainstormwater projects that will improve the quality and quantity of surface waters in Belmont by treating and recharging stormwater from existing impervious surfaces that is now discharged to said waters with inadequate treatment or recharge. The amount of any required contribution to the fundshall be determined by the OCD pursuant to standards established in the regulations adopted pursuant to this bylaw. 



(4) 	
Design criteria. All development shall satisfy the following designcriteria: 




(a) 	Compliance with all applicable provisions of the Stormwater Management Standards, regardless of the proximity of thedevelopment to resource areas or their buffer zones, as definedby the Wetlands Protection Act, MGL c. 131, § 40, and its implementing regulations. The Board of Selectmen is herebyauthorized to require, by regulation, that the design stormsspecified in the Stormwater Management Standards be determined using (1) the relevant rainfall distribution from adata set compiled by the Northeast Regional Climate Center,or (2) the relevant rainfall distribution from a data set adopted 
10:75 

§ 60-325 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-325 

by a United States federal agency or a Massachusetts state agency. [Amended 5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-2015] 
(b) 	
Erosion and sediment controls must be implemented to prevent adverse impacts during disturbance and construction activities. 

(c) 	
There shall be no change to the existing conditions of abuttingproperties from any increase in volume of stormwater runoff or from erosion, silting, flooding, sedimentation or impacts towetlands, groundwater levels or wells. 

(d) 	
When any proposed discharge may have an impact upon streams, wetlands and/or storm sewers, the OCD may requireminimization or elimination of this impact based on site conditions and existing stormwater system capacity. 


G. 	Severability. If any provision of this section shall be found invalid forany reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall beconstrued as narrowly as possible, and the balance of the section shall be deemed to be amended to the minimum extent necessary, so as tosecure the purposes thereof, as set forth in Subsection A. 
H. 	Enforcement. The OCD shall enforce this bylaw, and any regulations, orders, violation notices, and enforcement orders made pursuant tothis bylaw, and may pursue all civil and criminal remedies for suchviolations. 
(1) 	
The OCD may issue a written order to enforce the provisions of thisbylaw or the regulations thereunder, which may include (but arenot limited to) an order to: 

(a) 	
Eliminate illicit connections or discharges to the MS4; 

(b) 	
Perform monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 

(c) 	
Cease and desist unlawful discharges, practices, or operations; and 

(d) 	
Remediate contamination in connection therewith. 



(2) 	
If the OCD determines that abatement or remediation of contamination is required, the order shall set forth a deadline bywhich such abatement or remediation must be completed. Saidorder shall further advise that, should the violator or property owner fail to abate or perform remediation within the specifieddeadline, the OCD may, at its option, authorize such work, and theexpenses thereof shall be charged to the violator in an amount not exceeding the penalty specified in Subsection H(5). 

(3) 	
If the OCD performs the work described in Subsection H(2), theviolator and the property owner shall be notified of the costs incurred by the OCD, including administrative costs, within 30 


10:76 

days after completing all measures necessary for the abatementor remediation. Within 30 days of receipt of such notification, the violator or property owner may file with the Town Administratora written protest objecting to the amount or basis of the costsincurred. Upon receipt of such a protest, the Town Administrator may adjust the amount of the costs to be charged to the violatorpursuant to Subsection H(2). 
(4) 	
If a person violates the provisions of this bylaw, or any regulation, permit, notice, or order issued thereunder, the OCD, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, may seek injunctive reliefin a court of competent jurisdiction to restrain such person from activities that would create further violations or to compel theperson to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 

(5) 	
As an alternative to criminal remedies set forth in this subsection, the OCD may elect to utilize noncriminal disposition procedures setforth in MGL c.40, § 21D. The penalty for the first violation shallbe $100. The penalty for the second violation shall be $200. The penalty for the third and subsequent violations shall be $300. Eachday or part thereof that such violation occurs or continues shallconstitute a separate offense. 

(6) 	
To the extent permitted by state law, or if authorized by the owneror other party in control of the property, the OCD, its agents,officers, and employees may enter upon privately owned property for the purpose of performing their duties under this section andregulation, and may make or cause to be made such examinations,surveys or sampling as the OCD deems reasonably necessary. 

(7) 	
The remedies set forth in this subsection are not intended to be exclusive of any other remedies available under applicable federal,state, or local law. 


10:77 

ARTICLE 4 
Door-to-Door Solicitation and Canvassing
[Adopted 4-25-2005 ATM, approved 6-8-2005 (Art. 30 of the 1981
Bylaws)] 


§ 60-400. Purpose. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
This article establishes registration requirements and specific operationalrequirements for persons intending to engage in door-to-door canvassingor solicitation in the Town of Belmont in order to protect its citizens from disruption of the peaceful enjoyment of their residences and from theperpetration of fraud or other crimes and to allow for reasonable access toresidents in their homes by persons or organizations who or which wish to communicate either commercial or noncommercial messages. 
§ 60-405. Definitions. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved10-8-2013] 
For the purpose of this bylaw, the following definitions shall apply: 
CANVASSING — Includes any one or more of the following door-to-door activities: 
A. 	Person-to-person distribution of literature, periodicals, or other printedmaterials for commercial purposes, but shall not include placing ordropping off printed materials on the premises; 
B. 	Seeking to enlist membership in any organization for commercialpurposes; and 
C. 	Seeking to present, in person, organizational information for commercial purposes. 
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION, PROFESSIONAL SOLICITOR and COMMERCIAL CO-VENTURER — Shall be defined as set forth in MGL c. 68, § 18. 
REGISTERED SOLICITOR — Any person who has obtained a valid certificate of registration from the Town as required by this bylaw. 
RESIDENCE — Includes every individual dwelling unit occupied for residential purposes by one or more persons. 
SOLICITING — Includes any one or more of the following door-to-door activities: 
A. 	Selling or seeking to obtain orders for the purchase of goods or services, including advertising in any type of publication, for any kind of consideration whatsoever; 
B. 	Selling or seeking to obtain prospective customers for application forpurchase of insurance of any kind; 
10:79 

§ 60-405 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-410 

C. 	Selling or seeking to sell subscriptions to books, magazines,periodicals, newspapers or any other type of publication; 
D. 	Seeking to obtain gifts or contributions of money or any valuable thingfor the support or benefit of any association, organization, corporation or project wholly or in part for commercial purposes or by a professional solicitor or commercial co-venturer for a charitable or other noncommercial organization; and 
E. 	Seeking to obtain information on the background, occupation, economic status, political affiliation, attitudes, viewpoints, or the like ofthe occupants of a residence for the purpose of selling or using suchdata, wholly or in part, for commercial purposes. 
§ 60-410. Registration. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved10-8-2013] 
Every person or organization intending to engage in soliciting or canvassing door to door in the Town of Belmont must file a registration applicationform with the Police Chief. Applications for individual registration shall befiled at least seven business days in advance. Applications for organizational registration shall be filed at least three business days in advance. 
A. 	Organization application forms shall include the following information: 
(1) 	
The name and address of the organization applying for registration, and the names and addresses of the organization's principal officers. If the organization is a charitable organization, a certification that the most recent annual registration statement required to be filed with the Attorney General's Division of PublicCharities has been so filed. If the organization is a professionalsolicitor or a commercial co-venturer for a charitable organization, a copy of the contract with the charitable organization must beprovided with this application. Failure to include a copy of the contract with the charitable organization under such circumstances will render the application incomplete and no actionwill be taken thereon; 

(2) 	
The name, title and phone number, IRS or social security (optional) number and valid driver's license or other government-issuedphoto identification of the persons filing the application form; 

(3) 	
The name and address of the person(s), if any, who will be directly supervising the solicitation or canvassing operation in the Town ofBelmont; 

(4) 	
A list of the names, addresses, and dates of birth of all individuals who will be employed in solicitation or canvassing by the applicant; 

(5) 	
Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed (note:no certificate may be granted for longer than a ninety-day period); 

10:80 

(6) 	
Names of the last three communities (if any) in which the organization has conducted a solicitation or canvassing operation, complete with the date of issue and expiration date of any permitor registration issued by those communities; and 

(7) 	
Insurance information and license, if applicable. 



B. 	
Individual registration forms shall be required for all individuals,including those who are affiliated with an organization registered underSubsection A hereof. Individual registration forms shall contain the following information: 

(1) 	
Name and address of the present place of residence and lengthof residence at that address; if less than three years' residence at present address, the address of residence(s) during the past three years; 

(2) 	
Date of birth; 

(3) 	
Name, address and telephone number of the person or organizationwhich the applicant represents and the length of time the applicanthas been associated with or employed by that person or organization. If the individual is a professional solicitor or a commercial co-venturer for a charitable organization, a copy of thecontract, if any, with the charitable organization must be provided with this application. Failure to include a copy of the contract withthe charitable organization under such circumstances will renderthe application incomplete and no action will be taken thereon; 

(4) 	
Period of time for which certificate of registration is needed (note:no certificate may be granted for longer than a ninety-day period); 

(5) 	
Name of the last three communities (if any) in which the applicant has solicited or canvassed door to door, complete with the date ofissue and expiration date of any permit or registration issued bythose communities; 

(6) 	
Valid driver's license or other government-issued photoidentification; and 

(7) 	
Make, model and registration number of any vehicle to be used by the applicant while soliciting or canvassing. 




§ 60-415. Registration fee. 
There shall be no application fee or charge for an individual registration card. Each organizational applicant for registration or reregistration shallpay to the Town an application fee of $25. 
§ 60-420. Registration cards. 
A. 	The Police Chief, after a review, but in no event more than seven business days after receipt of a fully completed application, shall 
10:81 

§ 60-420 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-430 

furnish each person with a registration card which shall contain thefollowing information: 
(1) 	
The name of the person; 

(2) 	
A recent photograph of the person; 

(3) 	
The name of the organization (if any) which the person represents; 

(4) 	
A statement that the individual has been registered with the Townof Belmont Police Department but that registration is not an endorsement of any individual or organization; and 

(5) 	
Specific dates or period of time covered by the registration. 


B. 	Persons engaged in solicitation or canvassing as defined in this bylawmust carry the registration card while soliciting or canvassing and present the card to any person solicited or upon the request of anypolice officer. 
C. 	Registration cards are valid only for the specific dates or time period specified thereon and in no case for longer than 90 days. 
D. 	The Police Chief shall routinely grant registrations without furtherinquiry but shall refuse registration to an organization or an individual whose registration has been revoked for violation of this bylaw withinthe previous two-year period or who has been convicted of murder/manslaughter, rape, robbery, arson, burglary/breaking and entering, felony assault, or larceny over $250, as such persons pose a substantialdegree of dangerousness to minors and other persons vulnerable tobecoming victims of the violent crimes so listed. The Police Chief shall also refuse to register a person who is a sex offender required toregister with the Sex Offender Registry Board and who is finallyclassified as Level 2 or Level 3 sex offender, as such persons have been found to have a moderate to high risk of re-offense and posea substantial degree of dangerousness to minors and other personsvulnerable to becoming victims of sex crimes. 
§ 60-425. Exceptions. 
A. 	Registration shall not be required for officers or employees of the Town,county, state or federal government when on official business. 
B. 	Individual registration shall not be required for minors under the age of
17. 
C. 	Nothing in this bylaw shall be construed to impose any registration requirement or otherwise restrict or in any way regulate any activityfor religious, political, newspaper distribution or public policy purposesor other noncommercial purposes, regardless of whether such activity includes acts that would otherwise constitute soliciting or canvassing. 
§ 60-430. Duties of persons going door to door. 

10:82 

A. 	Upon going into any residential premises in the Town of Belmont, every solicitor, canvasser or other person must first examine any notice that may be posted prohibiting solicitation or other activities. If such a notice is posted, the solicitor, canvasser or other person shallimmediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
B. 	Any solicitor, canvasser or other person who has gained entrance toany residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefullydepart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
C. 	Immediately upon gaining entrance to any residence, each solicitor orcanvasser as defined in this bylaw must do the following: 
(1) 	
Present his registration card for inspection by the occupant; 

(2) 	
Request that the occupant read the registration card; and 

(3) 	
Inform the occupant in clear language of the nature and purposeof his business and, if he is representing an organization, the name and nature of that organization. 


§ 60-435. Restrictions on methods of solicitation, canvassing orother door-to-door activities. 
It shall be unlawful for a solicitor, canvasser or other person to do any of thefollowing: 
A. 	Falsely represent, directly or by implication, that the solicitation, canvassing or other activity is being done on behalf of a governmentalorganization or on behalf of any municipal employee or elected official; 
B. 	Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence where there is a posted sign prohibiting the same, without express priorpermission of an occupant; 
C. 	Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence without express prior permission of an occupant, before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00p.m., where there is no sign posted otherwise limiting solicitation or the hours of solicitation or such other activities; [Added 10-24-2005 STM, approved 11-16-2005] 
D. 	Utilize any form of endorsement from any department head currentlyemployed or serving the Town of Belmont; and 
E. 	Solicit, canvass or conduct any other activity at any residence in anillegal fashion. 
§ 60-440. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM,approved 10-8-2013] 
A. 	Any person or organization who or which shall violate any of the provisions of this bylaw or any applicable state or federal laws 
10:83 

§ 60-440 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-450 

governing soliciting or canvassing, including but not limited to MGL c.68, shall be subject to a fine of $300 for each offense. 
B. 	Any person or organization who or which for himself, itself, or throughits agents, servants or employees is found after investigation by apolice officer to have violated any provision of § 60-430 or 60-435 of this bylaw, or any applicable state or federal laws governing solicitingor canvassing, including but not limited to MGL c. 68, or knowinglyprovided false information on the registration application shall have his, her or its registration revoked by the Police Chief by written noticedelivered to the holder of the registration in person or sent to theholder by certified mail at the address set forth in the application. 
§ 60-445. Appeals. 
Any person or organization who or which is denied registration or whoseregistration has been revoked may appeal by filing a written notice of appeal with the Board of Selectmen. Such appeal must be filed withinfive days after receipt of the notice of denial or revocation. The Board ofSelectmen shall hear the appeal at its next scheduled meeting after the filing of the written notice of appeal; provided, however, that if the Boardof Selectmen fails to make a determination within 30 days after the filingof the appeal, the registration shall be deemed granted or reinstated as the case may be. 
§ 60-450. Severability. 
Invalidity of any individual provision of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of the bylaw as a whole. 
10:84 

ARTICLE 5 
Flammable Fluids, Solids and Gases [Adopted as Art. 22 of the 1981 Bylaws] 
§ 60-500. License required. 
Pursuant to MGL c. 148, § 13, any person who wishes to keep, store, manufacture or sell flammable fluids, solids and gases within the Townin excess of the amounts prescribed by regulations of the Board of FirePrevention Regulations must first obtain a license from the Town Clerk. No such license shall be granted without a public hearing pursuant to said§ 13, nor unless the application for such license has endorsed thereon acertificate of approval by the Chief of the Fire Department. 
§ 60-505. Classification of flammable fluids. 
Flammable fluids are classified in the following manner: 
A. 	Class A (highly flammable fluids): any flammable fluid having a flash point below 100° F., to be ascertained by any standard closed-cupinstrument. 
(1) 	
Gasoline. 

(2) 	
Benzene. 

(3) 	
Methyl alcohol. 


B. 	Class B (less flammable fluids): any flammable fluid having a flash point of not less than 100° F. nor higher than 187° F., to be ascertained byany standard closed-cup instrument. 
(1) 	
Fuel oil. 

(2) 	
Diesel fuel. 

(3) 	
Kerosene. 

(4) 	
Naphtha, coal tar. 

(5) 	
Acetic acid. 


C. 	Class C (relatively safe flammable fluids): any flammable fluid having aflash point above 187° F., to be ascertained by any standard closed-cup instrument. 
(1) 	
Creosote. 

(2) 	
Pine oil. 

(3) 	
Phenol (carbolic acid).14 


14.Editor's Note: Original § 22.3, which immediately followed this section and provided a feeschedule, was repealed 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013. 
10:85 
§ 60-510 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-510 

§ 60-510. Annual registration. 
On or before April 30 of each year, each holder of a license shall file with the Town Clerk a certificate of registration setting forth the name and addressof the holder of such license. The fee for such registration shall be 1/2 ofthe fee for such a license. Failure to register annually will be grounds for revocation of the license. 
10:86 

ARTICLE 6 
Noise 
[Adopted as Art. 23 of the 1981 Bylaws; amended 4-22-2002 ATM,approved 8-30-2002] 

§ 60-600. Declaration of policy. 
In order to control unnecessary, excessive and annoying noise in the Townof Belmont, it is hereby declared to be the policy of the Town to prohibitsuch noise generated from or by all sources as specified in this bylaw. 
§ 60-605. Definitions. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved10-8-2013] 
Except as may be specified herein, acoustical terminology used throughout this bylaw is that approved as American National Standard Acoustical Terminology (ANSI S1.1-1994) by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). The following words, phrases and terms as used in this bylaw shall have the meanings as indicated below: 
BACKGROUND SOUND LEVEL — The sound level associated with a givenenvironment, being a composite of sounds from all sources excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which acomparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made. 
CONSTRUCTION — Those activities requiring a building permit, and shall also include any site preparation, cemetery burial and caretakingoperations, seismic surveys, grading, assembly, erection, substantial repair,alteration, or similar action, including demolition, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
dBA — The A-weighted sound-pressure level expressed in decibels andreferenced to 20 micropascals. 
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — Any vehicle operated in an effort to protect,provide or restore public safety, including but not limited to ambulances,police vehicles and fire vehicles. 
EMERGENCY WORK — Any work performed in an effort to protect, provideor restore public safety, or work by private or public utilities when restoringutility service. 
ENFORCING PERSON — Any police officer of the Town or any other Townemployee designated by the Selectmen for this purpose. For complaintsunder § 60-620, "enforcing person" shall also include any authorized employee of the Office of Community Development. 
IMPACT DEVICE — A construction device in which or by which a hammer,meaning a moving mass of hard solid material, is mechanically by means of a working fluid or compressed air caused to repetitively impact uponand transmit kinetic energy to a tool. The tool may be included as a partof the device, as in the case of a moil on a paving breaker or the drill steel of a jackhammer, or it may be a mass to which the impact device is 
10:87 

§ 60-605 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-615 

temporarily connected as in the case of a pile and pile driver. Examples ofimpact devices are pile drivers, paving breakers, power impact hammers, impact wrenches, riveters and stud drivers. 
INTRUDING NOISE — The total sound level created, caused, maintained by,or originating from an alleged offensive source at a specified location while the alleged offensive source is in operation. 
Leq EQUIVALENT SOUND LEVEL — The level of a constant sound which,in a given situation and time period, would convey the same sound energy as does the actual time-varying sound during the same period, as measuredwith a sound-level meter measuring Leq. 
PERSON — A person, firm, association, copartnership, joint venture, corporation or any entity recognized by applicable law, public or private in nature. 
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTY — A parcel of real property which under the Belmont Zoning Bylaw is in whole or in part in a Single Residence A, SingleResidence B, Single Residence C, Single Residence D, General Residence orApartment House District or Senior Living or Residential Subdistrict. 
SOUND LEVEL — The instantaneous A-weighted sound-pressure level, indecibels, as measured with a sound-level meter set to the "A" weightingscale, slow response. 
SOUND-LEVEL METER — An instrument meeting American National Standard Institute's Standard S1.4-1983 for Type 1 or Type 2 sound-level meters or an instrument and the associated recording and analyzing equipment which will provide equivalent data. 
§ 60-610. Designated noise zones. 
The properties hereinafter described are hereby assigned to the following noise zones: 
A. 	Noise Zone I: All residential properties and the grounds of any school,hospital or similar health care institution, house of worship or library while the same is in use, and any Cemetery or Open Space Subdistrict. 
B. 	Noise Zone II: All other properties. 
§ 60-615. Exterior noise standards. 
A. 	It shall be unlawful for any person at any location within the area ofthe Town to create any loud noise, or to allow the creation of any noise,on property owned, leased, occupied or otherwise controlled by such person, which causes the sound level when measured on any otherproperty to exceed the greater of: 
(1) 	
The maximum allowable exterior sound level outlined in Table I; or 

(2) 	
Five dB over the background sound level. 


10:88 


Table I, Maximum Allowable Exterior Sound Level Nighttime Level
Noise Zone  Daytime Level 7:00a.m. to 10:00 p.m.  10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.  
I  55 dBA  45 dBA  
II  65 dBA  60 dBA  

B. 	If the intruding noise source is continuous and cannot reasonably bediscontinued or stopped for a time period whereby the background sound level can be determined, the measured sound level obtained while the source is in operation shall be compared directly to themaximum allowable exterior sound level outlined in Table I. 
§ 60-620. Construction noise standards. 
A. 	Noise associated with construction is permitted between 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays provided the sound level from: 
(1) 	
Non-impact devices does not exceed 70 dBA as measured over a time interval of 10 minutes with a sound-level meter set to Leq located on any other property, but at least 50 feet from the construction activity; and 

(2) 	
Impact devices does not exceed 90 dBA as measured with a sound-level meter set to slow response located on any other property, but at least 50 feet from the construction activity. 


B. 	Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays andSaturday, and at any time on Sunday or a legal holiday, noise associated with construction shall be limited by the standards of § 60-615. 
§ 60-625. Maintenance noise standards. 
A. 	Noise associated with maintenance is permitted between 7:00 a.m. and 
8:00 p.m. on weekdays and Saturdays and between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on Sunday, provided the sound level does not exceed80 dBA as measured with a sound-level meter set to slow response on any other property, but at least 50 feet from the maintenance activity. 
B. 	If it is not possible to make an accurate sound-level measurement atthe specified distance of 50 feet, measurements made at an alternate distance can be used, if the level is recalculated for an equivalentexpected sound level at 50 feet. Calculations shall be made in accordance with established engineering practices for noise measurement and assessment, including those established or recommended by the United States Environmental Protection Agency(USEPA). 
C. Between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays andSaturday, and between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. on Sunday 
10:89 

§ 60-625 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-640 

or a legal holiday, noise associated with maintenance shall be limited bythe standards of § 60-615. 
§ 60-630. Exemptions. 
Noise associated with the following activities shall be exempted from theprovisions of this bylaw: 
A. 	Emergency work or emergency vehicles; 
B. 	The operation of any vehicular alarm, provided it terminates within 15minutes of the initially recorded complaint; 
C. 	Activities, other than construction, conducted in public parks andplaygrounds, and on public or private school grounds so long as authorized by the appropriate jurisdiction, including but not limited to school athletic and school entertainment events; 
D. 	Occasional outdoor gatherings, public dances, shows, and sporting andentertainment events, provided said events are conducted pursuant to a permit or license issued by the appropriate jurisdiction relative to thestaging of said events; 
E. 	Snow removal performed by snowblowers, snow throwers or snowplows when appropriately outfitted with a muffler; and 
F. 	Any activity to the extent regulation thereof has been preempted bystate or federal law. 
§ 60-635. Prima facie violation. 
Any measured noise exceeding the sound-level standards as specified in§§ 60-615, 60-620 and 60-625 shall be deemed to be prima facie evidence of a violation of the provisions of this bylaw. 
§ 60-640. Violations and penalties. 
A. 	Violations under this article, in the discretion of the enforcing person, may be enforced by noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40,§ 21D ("§ 21D"). 
B. 	The penalty for a violation under § 60-615 or 60-625 shall be $25 for a first offense next after the first warning, $100 for a second offense,$200 for a third offense, and $300 per offense, without limit, for eachsucceeding offense. Each day or part thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
C. 	The penalty for a violation under § 60-620 shall be $50 for a first offensenext after the first warning, $100 for a second offense, and $300 for a third offense and each succeeding offense. Each day or part thereofshall constitute a separate offense. Additionally under § 60-620, at thediscretion of the enforcing person, all construction activities may be 
10:90 

suspended following initial warning until the violation is cleared to thereasonable satisfaction of the enforcing person. 
D. 	An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of this articleor any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall give the offender awritten notice to appear before the Clerk of the District Court having jurisdiction thereof for the noncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with the provision of § 21D. The provisions of § 21D areincorporated by this reference. 
§ 60-645. Manner of enforcement. 
A. 	Violations of this article shall be prosecuted in the same manner asother violations of the Belmont General Bylaws; provided, however, that in the event of an initial violation of the provision of this article,a written notice shall be given the alleged violator which specifiesthe time by which the condition shall be corrected. No complaint or further action shall be taken in the event the cause of the violation has been removed or fully corrected within the time period specified in thewritten notice. 
B. 	In the event the alleged violator cannot be located in order to servethe notice of intention to prosecute, the notice as required herein shallbe deemed to be given upon mailing such notice by registered or certified mail to the alleged violator at his last known address or at theplace where the violation occurred, in which event the specified timeperiod for abating the violation shall commence at the date of the day following the mailing of such notice. Subsequent violations shall resultin the immediate filing of a complaint. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
§ 60-650. Severability. 
A. 	The invalidity of any section or provision of this bylaw shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof. 
B. 	Nothing in the bylaw shall preclude the Board of Selectmen andPlanning Board from establishing a construction plan for a particularlarge-scale development that is more stringent than the existing bylaw. 
10:91 

ARTICLE 7 
Recycling Program
[Adopted 4-24-1991 ATM, approved 7-3-1991 (Art. 26 of the 1981
Bylaws)] 


§ 60-700. Program established. 
There is hereby established a recycling program for certain solid wastepursuant to MGL c. 40, § 8H. 
§ 60-705. Purposes. 
The purposes of the program are to reduce the amount of solid wastegenerated in the Town that is disposed of by conventional means; to complywith state regulations concerning solid waste; to promote the recycling of materials that have economic value or beneficial use; to encourage theremarketing or other reuse of recyclable material; and to mitigate adverseenvironmental effects of consumption by returning solid waste materials to productive use. 
§ 60-710. Definition. 
As used in this article, the word "recyclables" shall mean solid waste materials designated from time to time by the Board of Selectmen as materials that are appropriate for inclusion in the program. Such materialsmay include, but are not limited to, paper, glass, metal, rubber, plastics, used tires and compostable waste. 
§ 60-715. Separation of recyclables for collection. 
All residents and occupants of buildings for which curbside collection of solid waste is provided by the Town shall separate all recyclables from othersolid wastes and shall place such recyclables at curbside for collection in amanner specified in rules and regulations adopted from time to time by the Board of Selectmen. 
§ 60-720. Failure to comply. 
The Town or a solid waste collector authorized by the Board of Selectmen may refuse to collect the solid waste of any person who fails to complywith § 60-715. In such case, such person shall remove such solid waste fromcurbside no later than 8:00 a.m. on the day following such refusal. Any person who fails so to remove such solid waste shall be subject to a finenot exceeding $50 for each offense. Each day or part thereof any violationcontinues shall constitute a separate offense. 
§ 60-725. Removal of recyclables placed at curbside. 
No person shall pick up, collect or procure any recyclables at curbsidewithin the Town except as specifically authorized in rules and regulations adopted by the Board of Selectmen. 
10:93 

§ 60-730 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-740 

§ 60-730. Rules and regulations. 
The Board of Selectmen may establish and from time to time amend rules and regulation for purposes of implementing the recycling program. 
§ 60-735. Enforcement. 
The noncriminal disposition of violations of this article or any rule or regulation of the Board of Selectmen adopted hereunder is herebyauthorized in accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). 
A. 	"Enforcing person" as used in this section shall mean any police officer of the Town, the Highway Superintendent, and any representative ofthe Highway Superintendent, and any other Town employee designatedby the Board of Selectmen as an enforcing person. 
B. 	An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of this article orany rule or regulation of the Board of Selectmen adopted hereundershall give the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the District Court having jurisdiction thereof for the noncriminaldisposition thereof in accordance with § 21D. The provisions of § 21Dare incorporated herein by reference. 
§ 60-740. Severability. 
The invalidity of any parts of this bylaw shall not affect the validity of theremaining parts. 
10:94 

ARTICLE 8 
Streets and Sidewalks 
[Adopted as §§ 20.1 to 20.7, 20.12 and 20.15 and Arts. 21 and 27 ofthe 1981 Bylaws] 

§ 60-800. Public ways, sidewalks and rights-of-way. 
A. 	No person, other than an authorized Town agent, shall place or throwor cause to be placed or thrown onto any public sidewalk, street, firehydrant, or highway or upon any of the common lands of the Town any snow, dirt, gravel or foreign substance, including excrement or noxiousor slippery liquids or material, or suffer the same to remain thereon after being notified by a police officer to remove the same. [Amended4-26-1999 ATM, approved 10-18-1999; 5-29-2013 STM, approved10-8-2013] 
B. 	Other than for official Town or conservation purposes, no person shallplace or cause to be placed on any public sidewalk, street or highway,or upon any of the common lands of the Town, any refuse containers to be collected for disposal of refuse by the Town or any other collectorof refuse and suffer the same to remain thereon for more than 24 hours prior to the time said containers are scheduled to be collected for disposal of refuse or for a period of time terminating at 8:00 a.m.on the day following the said collection. In connection with a projectfor construction, demolition or repair of any building or any other construction for which disposal of refuse cannot be effected in accordance with the preceding sentence, the owner of the propertyupon which such construction, demolition or repair is undertaken may apply to the Board of Selectmen or its designee for a written permitwhich the Board or its designee may in its discretion issue subjectto such terms and conditions, including a bond, as may be deemed necessary and appropriate to protect the public safety. [Amended4-23-1984 ATM, approved 7-30-1985] 
C. 	No person shall erect, set up or maintain any fence, portico, platform or doorstep extending into or on any public sidewalk or way. 
D. 	Obstructions. [Amended 4-28-2008 ATM, approved 12-23-2008] 
(1) 	
No person shall permit a tree, branch thereof, hedge, bush orshrubbery growing on his/her land to extend over or overhang any street, sidewalk or highway so as to interfere with the free and fulluse of such street, sidewalk or highway. 

(2) 	
No person, other than an authorized agent of the Town, may place or cause to be placed or maintained any permanent or temporary structure or any natural or man-made materials on any publicstreet, sidewalk or highway in such a manner as to obstruct or otherwise interfere with the free and full use of such public street,sidewalk or highway for the passage of vehicles or pedestrians,except upon written permit or authorization from the Board of 


10:95 

§ 60-800 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-800 

E. 
F. 
G. 
Selectmen or its designee, which the Board or its designee may inits discretion issue subject to such terms and conditions, including a bond, as may be deemed necessary and appropriate to protectthe public safety. 
(3) 	
In addition to other penalties applicable to violation of these bylaws, in the event the Town undertakes to remove anyobstructions described in Subsection D(1) and (2), the Town maycharge the landowner for the reasonable cost thereof. 

Authorization required for certain activities. [Amended 4-28-2008 ATM, approved 12-23-2008] 

(1) 	
No person, other than an authorized agent of the Town, shall break, dig up or construct any sidewalk; walk upon or otherwise alterlots or borders on cemetery grounds or areas of other municipalgrounds upon which hedges, shrubs or flowers are grown; in any way damage or write, paint, print, inscribe, display signs or distribute written matter upon any Town property; or conduct anyparade upon public ways, except upon written permit or authorization from the Board of Selectmen or its designee. 

(2) 	
No person, other than an authorized agent of the Town, shall break,remove, dig up, or install any pavement, ground, or curbing in or on any public street or highway for any purpose whatsoever, includingbut not limited to the creation or modification of a driveway curbcut, except upon written permit or authorization from the Board of Selectmen or its designee. 

(3) 	
Any written permits or authorization granted pursuant to Subsection E(1) and (2) above shall be in force for such time and subject to such conditions, including a bond, as the Boardof Selectmen or its designee may specify and shall set forth anyappropriate safety or security measures to be taken, the manner in which the permitted activity is to be performed or the condition ofthe affected municipal property upon completion of the authorizedactivity. 


No person shall throw stones, snowballs, sticks or other missiles, orkick a football or play at any game in which a ball is used, or fly kites orother objects, or shoot with or use an airgun, bow and arrow, slingshot, or other similar device in or across any public ways of the Town, exceptthat the Board of Selectman may authorize the use of a public way forrecreational purposes in the same manner as is provided for an activity pursuant to Subsection E. 
No person, other than an authorized agent of the Town, shall excavatea trench in a public way or otherwise dig below the surface of a public way, and no person shall excavate a trench on any private land, forany purpose, without first obtaining a written permit from the Board ofSelectman or its designated agent, and then only in accordance with 
10:96 

said Board's written regulations and with the applicable provisions ofMGL c. 82, §§ 40 through 40D, and MGL c. 82A; provided, however, that in the case of an emergency excavation made by a person engaged inthe transmission or distribution of a public utility, written permissionmay be obtained after commencement of such excavation, provided that the Board of Selectmen is satisfied that the perceived emergency was,in fact, a situation in which immediate action was necessary to maintain or restore an essential utility service to avoid imminent danger to the public health or safety. [Added 4-28-2008 ATM, approved 12-23-2008] 
(1) 	
Definitions. For purposes of this bylaw, the words "excavation" and "emergency" shall have the same meanings as defined in MGL c.82, § 40. The word "trench" shall have the same meaning as definedin MGL c. 82A, § 4. The word "person" shall include, without limitation, any individual or any entity such as a partnership, jointventure, trust, corporation, company, association, public utility, orgovernmental body or agency. 

(2) 	
Regulations. The Board of Selectmen may promulgate and, fromtime to time, amend rules and regulations for the excavation andrestoration of public ways and for the excavation of trenches on private land. Such rules and regulations may include, but shallnot be limited to, requirements for plans, insurance, notification ofpublic utilities, traffic control, protection of adjoining properties, cleanup, backfilling, testing, scheduling, workmanship quality,bonds, and permit fees. Such rules and regulations may alsodesignate a Town officer to act as the Board's agent in issuing permits hereunder. 


H. 	Any owner or owners of record and/or commercial tenant or tenantsof commercial property within commercial areas annually designated by the Selectmen shall be individually and jointly responsible for theremoval and shall remove all snow and ice on any abutting publicsidewalk in such designated areas to the extent practicable down to the sidewalk's natural surface and otherwise level and evenly cover thesame with sand, earth or ashes to prevent slipping. This responsibility shall be subject to the following terms and conditions: [Amended4-27-1987 ATM, approved 8-17-1987; 4-23-2001 ATM, approved8-24-2001] 
(1) 	
The removal and treatment of ice and snow shall be accomplishedwithin 12 hours after the same shall cease to fall or be formed on such sidewalks. 

(2) 	
Snow and ice shall be removed from all portions of such sidewalksexcluding no more than 1/2 of the width thereof nearest the curbor other lateral limit of the roadway. 

(3) 	
Notice of such commercial areas designated by the Selectmenshall be posted by November 1 of each year in the Town Hall and 


10:97 

§ 60-800 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-800 

published for two successive weeks in a newspaper, printed in theTown or circulated therein as a local paper, in October prior to the posting thereof. 
(4) 	
The Town may undertake to remove or treat such snow and ice inthe event any such owner or owners and/or commercial tenant or tenants shall have refused or neglected to remove the same and, inaddition to other penalties applicable to violation of these bylaws,such owner or owners and/or commercial tenant or tenants shall be liable to the Town for the cost and expense incurred by the Townfor the removal or treatment thereof. 

(5) 	
The Selectmen, or their designee, may establish regulations and fix charges for the removal and treatment of snow and ice on publicsidewalks within the designated commercial areas. 

(6) 	
The Selectmen, or their designee, may, on behalf of the Town, by prearrangement with any such record owner or owners and/orcommercial tenant or tenants, agree and undertake to remove ortreat snow and ice on such public sidewalks on a regular or annual basis upon terms and conditions which assure the prompt andtimely reimbursement by the owner or owners and/or commercial tenant or tenants thereof to the Town of the charges thereby incurred. 



I. 	Residential property snow removal. [Added 11-4-2013 STM, approved 1-30-2014; amended 5-2-2016, approved 7-21-2016] 
(1) 	
Purpose. Since pedestrians are safer when walking on sidewalksthan when walking in the streets used by vehicular traffic, thepurpose of this subsection is to encourage owners of residential property to remove the snow, slush, and ice from abuttingsidewalks so that sidewalks throughout the Town are safe for useduring the winter season, and so that the Town's local services and amenities are reasonably accessible by pedestrians via sidewalks,especially by elderly persons, persons using wheelchairs, personsusing carriages to transport children, and students walking to school. 

(2) 	
Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the following termsshall have the following definitions: 


OBLIGATED PERSON — The person responsible for compliancewith this subsection pursuant to Subsection I(4). 
SIDEWALK — A paved walkway (whether paved with brick, stone, cement, concrete, asphalt, or other impervious material) that islocated within the right-of-way of a street that abuts residential property. 
(3) Obligations. Snow, slush, and ice shall be removed from the sidewalk, in accordance with the deadlines set forth in Subsection 
10:98 

(4) 

(5) 


(6) 



I(5), to a width of at least 36 inches or, if the sidewalk is narrower,for the full width of the sidewalk. 
Obligated persons. The owner of record of a residential propertyabutting a right-of-way in which a sidewalk is located shall beobligated to comply with this subsection within that portion of the right-of-way to which the residential property abuts, unless theowner of record can demonstrate that this obligation has been dulydelegated to a responsible person, identified by name and address, by a written agreement signed by the person so delegated or by anexpress reference to the obligation in a written lease. 
Deadlines for removal and treatment. 
(a) 	
After the cessation of a weather event that has resulted in snow, slush, or ice on a sidewalk, the snow, slush, or ice shall be removed no later than 8:00 p.m. the following day, and the sidewalk shall be treated with melting compounds, sand, or other grit, as reasonably necessary to inhibit slipping.Regardless of this deadline, obligated persons are encouraged to remove snow, slush, and ice promptly from the full widthof the sidewalk in order to minimize the ice formed on the sidewalk when snow or ice melts and refreezes, so that neighbors and others can use the sidewalks as soon as possible. 

(b) 	
Treatment of ice that forms on sidewalks shall be accomplished no later than 8:00 p.m. on the day after the ice has formed,but obligated persons are encouraged to treat the ice promptlyso that neighbors and others can use the sidewalks as soon as possible. 

(c) 	
The deadlines set forth in this subsection shall be extended for obligated persons who are temporarily absent from the residential property for vacations, holidays, hospitalization,and unexpected absences; provided, however, that such obligated persons shall be required to complete their removal and treatment obligations by 8:00 p.m. on the day following theend of their temporary absence. 


Rules and regulations. The Board of Selectmen shall adopt rules and regulations further implementing this subsection, including,without limitation, provisions and hearing procedures for exemptions from the requirements of this subsection for obligated persons who are physically unable to perform the obligations themselves and have a bona fide financial hardship; provided,however, that exemptions granted to such obligated persons shall be void if the obligated person causes portions of the residentialproperty to be cleared of snow, slush, or ice for vehicular accessfrom the street. 
10:99 

§ 60-800 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-800 

(7) 	
Fines. Fines for violations of this subsection shall be on the following schedule: first offense: written warning; second offense: $50: third and successive offenses: $100 each, to a maximum of $350 per winter season (October 1 to April 30). In situations wherethere is more than one obligated person, such fines may be assessed jointly or individually. No more than one fine may be assessed with respect to any single weather event requiringremoval or treatment of snow, slush or ice. 

(8) 	
Enforcement. 

(a) 	
A person who is an enforcing person as defined in SubsectionJ shall take appropriate action with respect to observed or reported violations of this subsection. 

(b) 	
An enforcing person taking cognizance of such a violation shall promptly send the alleged offender a noncriminal written citation thereof by hand delivery or mail, postage prepaid,addressed to the owner of record. 

(c) 	
An owner of record who receives a citation pursuant to this subsection shall have 20 days thereafter to pay the applicablefine or to provide to the enforcing person a photocopy of thewritten agreement or lease used to delegate the obligation to comply with this subsection, in which case the owner of recordshall not be responsible for paying any applicable fine, and theenforcing person may dismiss or modify the citation or reissue the citation to the obligated person as is deemed appropriate. 

(d) 	
If a citation is not dismissed and the fine is not timely paid,the provisions of Subsection J, other than those establishing penalties, shall be applicable. 



(9) 	
Not evidence. Except as required by applicable law, violations ofthis subsection shall not be admissible as evidence of negligence in any civil proceeding brought by an injured third party against anobligated person, tenant, or owner of record. 


J. 	In addition to the provisions for enforcement described above, the provisions of Subsections A, B, D(2), E(2), G, H and I of this sectionand any regulations promulgated thereunder may also be enforced bynoncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). The penalty for such violation shall be $300 for each offense. Each day orpart thereof shall constitute a separate offense. [Amended 11-8-2010 ATM, approved 2-10-2011; 11-4-2013 STM] 
(1) 	"Enforcing person" as used in this subsection shall mean any policeofficer of the Town, the Director of Public Works and any otherTown employee designated by the Board of Selectmen as an enforcing person. 
10:100 

(2) 	An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of SubsectionA, B, D(2), E(2), G, H or I or any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall give the offender a written notice to appear beforethe Clerk of the District Court having jurisdiction thereof for thenoncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 21D. The provisions of § 21D are incorporated herein by thisreference. 
§ 60-805. Vehicles and parking. 
A. 	The word "vehicle" as used in this section shall include every deviceused for motorized transportation or other mechanical means of transportation or travel on land, as allowed or permitted by the laws of the commonwealth. No person shall operate or cause to be operatedany mechanical or motorized device on a public way or street which is not a vehicle within the meaning of this subsection. [Amended5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
B. 	No person shall allow any vehicle within his control to be parked or leftunattended within the limits of the traveled part of a public or private way furnishing means of access for fire apparatus to any buildingexcept as permitted by the following rules and regulations: 
(1) 	
Vehicles will be parked on the right-hand side of the traveled part of the roadway in the direction in which the vehicle is headed withwheels on the right side of the vehicle within 12 inches of the curbor edge of the roadway; 

(2) 	
Double parking is prohibited; 

(3) 	
Parking within 10 feet of a hydrant or 20 feet of an intersectionwith another way is prohibited; 

(4) 	
No vehicle will be parked so that it obstructs any driveway; 

(5) 	
No vehicle will be parked so that it fails to leave a clear andunobstructed lane at least 10 feet wide on the remaining traveled portion of the roadway for passing vehicles; 

(6) 	
No vehicle will be parked so that it interferes with the removal orplowing of snow or the removal of ice; and 

(7) 	
Parking for over one hour between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00


a.m. is prohibited. 
C. 	No person shall allow any motor vehicle within his control to be parked or left unattended between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. onany day exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays in the Town Hall
– Town Hall Annex Parking Area between Concord Avenue and Moore Street except the following: 
(1) 	Town employees; and 
10:101 

§ 60-805 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-805 

(2) 	Persons visiting the Town Hall, Town Hall Annex, Police Department or School Administration Building on official business up to a maximum time limit of one hour. 
D. 	No person shall permit a motor vehicle which is unregistered, disabled,dismantled or inoperative to remain ungaraged on his or her premises for more than 30 days unless such person is duly licensed under MGL
c. 140, § 59, for the sale of motor vehicles, or unless the Board ofSelectmen has granted a permit therefor. A permit granted hereunder shall be on such terms and conditions as the Selectmen determine, provided that the Selectmen shall hold a public hearing before grantinga permit hereunder which allows a motor vehicle to remain ungaraged for more than 90 days or allows more than one motor vehicle to remainungaraged on the same premises. Notice of a public hearing underthis subsection shall be given in the manner provided in the first two paragraphs of MGL c. 40A, § 11. [Added 4-24-1989 ATM, approved 7-24-1989] 

E. 	Handicapped parking. [Added 4-24-1995 ATM, approved 7-8-1995] 
(1) 	
Any person or body that has lawful control of a public or privateway or of improved or enclosed property used as off-street parking areas for business, shopping malls, theaters, auditoriums, sportingor recreational facilities, cultural centers, residential dwellings, or for any other place where the public has a right of access as invitees or licensees shall reserve parking spaces in said off-street parking areas for any vehicle owned and operated by adisabled veteran or handicapped person whose vehicle bears the distinguishing license plate authorized by MGL c. 90, § 2, or forany vehicle transporting a handicapped person and displaying thespecial identification plate authorized by said § 2 or for any vehicle bearing the official identification of a handicapped person issuedby any other state or any Canadian province, according to the following formula: [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved10-8-2013] 

If the number of parking spaces in any such area is more than 15but not more than 25, 1 parking space; more than 25 but not morethan 40, 5% of such spaces but not fewer than 2; more than 40 but not more than 100, 4% of such spaces but not fewer than 3; morethan 100 but not more than 200, 3% of such spaces but not fewerthan 4; more than 200 but not more than 500, 2% of such spaces but not fewer than 6. 

(2) 	
Parking spaces designated as reserved under the provisions ofSubsection E(1) shall be identified by the use of above-grade signs with white lettering against a blue background and shall bear the words "Handicapped Parking: Special Plate Required.Unauthorized Vehicles May be Removed at Owner's Expense"; shall be as near as possible to a building entrance or walkway; shall beadjacent to curb ramps or other unobstructed methods permitting 


10:102 

sidewalk access to a handicapped person; and shall be at leasteight feet wide, not including the cross hatch access aisle as defined by the Architectural Access Board established in MGL c.22, § 13A. The cross hatch access aisle abutting a handicappedparking space shall be considered part of the handicapped parking space to which it abuts to provide individuals who use wheelchairsor other mobility aids with sufficient space to enter and exit their vehicles. No person shall park in the cross hatched access aisle.


[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
(3) 	
No unauthorized vehicle may be left within parking spacesdesignated for use by disabled veterans or handicapped persons or in such a manner as to obstruct a curb ramp designated for use byhandicapped persons as a means of egress to a street or public way. 

(4) 	
Violations of Subsection E(3) shall be punished by a fine of $100; in addition thereto, any vehicle which is in violation may be removedin accordance with the provisions of MGL c. 266, § 120D. 



[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
F. 	Snow emergency parking ban. [Added 4-24-1995 ATM, approved 7-8-1995] 
(1) 	
No person shall allow any vehicle to remain in or within a street or way when a snow emergency parking ban has been declared by theChair of the Board of Selectmen or, in the absence of the Chair, bya Selectman. 

(2) 	
A snow emergency parking ban may be declared by the Chair of theBoard of Selectmen or, in the absence of the Chair, by a Selectmanwhenever there are indications that the threat of substantial snow is imminent, whenever there has been a substantial snow and snow removal operations are underway or are about to commence,or whenever a substantial snow creates conditions that require a vehicular driving or parking ban throughout the Town. Upon thedeclaration of a snow emergency parking ban, notice thereof shallbe given to the Town Clerk's office, the Police Department, the Fire Department and the Highway Department. Reasonable action shallalso be taken to notify and warn the Inhabitants of the Town of theban. 


G. 	In addition to the provisions for enforcement described above, theprovisions of this section may also be enforced by noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). The penalty for such violation shall be $50 for each offense, except that the penalty fora violation of Subsection E(3) shall be $100 for each offense. Each day or part thereof shall constitute a separate offense. [Added 4-24-1995ATM, approved 7-8-1995; amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved10-8-2013] 
10:103 

§ 60-805 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-810 

(1) 	
"Enforcing person" as used in this subsection shall mean any policeofficer of the Town and any other Town employee designated by the Board of Selectmen as an enforcing person. 

(2) 	
An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of this sectionor any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall give the offender a written notice to appear before the Clerk of the District Courthaving jurisdiction thereof for the noncriminal disposition thereofin accordance with the provisions of § 21D. The provisions of § 21D are incorporated herein by this reference. 


§ 60-810. Newsracks. [Added 4-23-2001 ATM, approved 8-24-2001] 
A. 	It has been determined that the proliferation of newsracks in Belmont has impeded access to and otherwise obstructed sidewalks, crosswalks,handicapped ramps, bus stops, loading zones, utility poles, fire lanes,fire hydrants, mailboxes and other areas utilized by the general public. The purpose of this bylaw is to regulate but not to prohibit the use ofsuch newsracks within the Town of Belmont. 
B. 	For the purpose of this bylaw, the following definitions shall apply: 
ADMINISTRATOR — The person in the Town who shall have the powerand the duties granted under this bylaw. The Director of CommunityDevelopment or his/her designee shall be the administrator under the direction and control of the Board of Selectmen which is authorized to adopt regulations for the administration of this bylaw. 
CROSSWALK CURB RETURN — The point at which the crosswalk pavement markings meet the sidewalk. 
NEWSRACK — Any container, box, bin, vending machine, display, stand,rack or other device used for the purpose of dispensing printed matter with or without cost to the consumer. 
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, society, association, partnership, organization or other entity circulating printed matter. 
PRINTED MATTER — Any newspaper, directory, handbill, advertisingmatter, magazine, circular, flyer, book, pamphlet, catalogue or otherpublication. 
PUBLIC WAY — The entire width between property lines of every streetor highway that is open to the public for purposes of travel. 
ROADWAY — That portion of a public way that is intended for the use of motor vehicles or bicycles. 
SIDEWALK — That portion of a public way that is set aside for pedestrian travel. 
C. 	Permit. 
(1) 	Any person who places a newsrack or causes a newsrack to beplaced upon any sidewalk or public way in the Town or upon 
10:104 

(2) 
(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 


any other Town-owned property prior to August 24, 2001, andwho wishes to maintain said newsrack on and after said date shall, within 60 days after said date, apply for a permit fromthe administrator in accordance with the provisions of this bylaw.

[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
On or after August 24, 2001, no person shall place a newsrackor cause a newsrack to be placed upon a sidewalk or public wayin the Town or upon any other Town-owned property without first obtaining a permit from the administrator in accordance with theprovisions of this bylaw. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
The administrator shall provide a permit application form whichshall be completed by every person who places or maintains anewsrack upon a sidewalk or public way in the Town or upon any other Town-owned property. The form shall require the applicant toprovide the following information: 
(a) 	
A description sufficient to show the precise address and location of each newsrack and whether or not it is attached to Town-owned property; 

(b) 	
The name, address and telephone number of the owner of each newsrack and the name, address and telephone number of aperson responsible for the maintenance and operation of thenewsrack who may be contacted; and 

(c) 	
A certification that the specified location and the newsrackcomply with the provisions of this bylaw. 


Each applicant for a permit or renewal of a permit shall prepare a single application form upon which all newsracks owned by thatperson and located upon a public way, sidewalk or other Town-owned property in the Town shall be listed. 
Permits shall be valid for a period of one year from the date of issueand, upon application, may be renewed by the administrator on anannual basis. Proof of permit shall be attached to the newsrack so it can be seen. 
Each person granted a permit or renewal thereof under this bylawshall thereafter give notice to the administrator of any change in the location of a newsrack or the installation of a newsrack in a location not previously listed on a permit by the submissionof a quarterly amendment application to the administrator. Upon receipt by the administrator, the amendment application shallconstitute an amendment to the permit, subject, however, to allother applicable provisions of this bylaw. The administrator shall specify on the permit the dates for receipt of such quarterlyamendment applications, provided that they occur at intervals of 
10:105 

§ 60-810 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-810 

not less than 90 days commencing on the date the permit wasissued. 
(7) 	
The Board of Selectmen is authorized to establish reasonable fees for original permit applications, annual renewal applications andamendment applications, provided that such fees do not exceed the actual cost of administering this bylaw. Newsracks owned by theTown of Belmont shall be exempt from fees. [Amended 4-28-2003 ATM, approved 10-16-2003] 

(8) 	
Within 14 days after receipt of an application for a permit or renewal of a permit under this bylaw, the administrator shall eitherissue or renew the permit or deny the application by giving written notice and a statement of reasons to the applicant. A denial shallbe based upon the failure of the applicant to satisfy requirementsset forth in this bylaw. 

(9) 	
If the administrator has not acted on a permit application within14 days of receipt thereof, pursuant to Subsection C(8), the permitwill be deemed issued or renewed, subject, however, to all other applicable provisions of this bylaw. 


(10)If the administrator denies an application, in whole or in part, theapplicant may appeal the administrator's decision to the Board of Selectmen by giving written notice to the Board within 10 daysafter receipt of notice of the administrator's decision. 
(11)The Board of Selectmen shall hold a public hearing on the appeal no later than 30 days after receipt of said notice by the Boardand shall, within 14 days after a public hearing, issue an orderaffirming, reversing or modifying the administrator's decision. If an order has not been issued by the Board within 14 days after thehearing, the administrator's decision shall be deemed affirmed. 
(12)During the pendency of an appeal, the newsrack(s) may remain in place subject to the removal provisions in Subsection E(4) and (5). 
D. 	Location. 
(1) 	No person shall place, cause to be placed or maintain a newsrack on a sidewalk or public way in the Town or upon any other Town-owned property: 
(a) 	
Within five feet of a handicapped access ramp; 

(b) 	
Within or overhanging the roadway; 

(c) 	
Within six inches of a curb; 

(d) 	
Within five feet of the curb return of any marked crosswalk; 

(e) 	
Within 10 feet of any fire hydrant or fire hose connection; 

10:106 

(f) 	
Within three feet of any manhole, service gate, valve cover,sewer grate or other access panel or cover located in a public way or sidewalk; 

(g) 	
Within six feet of a driveway; 

(h) 	
Immediately adjacent to a designated loading zone, a handicapped parking space or a zone reserved for emergencyvehicles; 

(i) 	
So as to reduce the width of a sidewalk to less than four feet for the passage of travelers unless the width of the sidewalk isotherwise reduced to less than four feet, as determined by theadministrator, in which case the newsrack may be installed so as to avoid further reducing the width of the sidewalk; 

(j) 	
So as to impede egress from legally parked motor vehicles; 

(k) 	
So as to impede the operation of standard sidewalk snowplows in use by the Town of Belmont except where said sidewalksnowplows would be otherwise impeded, as determined by theadministrator; 

(l) 	
Within four feet of the door of any building measured in a lineperpendicular from the horizontal line made by the door whenclosed; 

(m) 
So as to create an imminent danger of harm to persons orproperty as demonstrated by specific facts; 

(n) 	
Directly abutting a public flowerbed, memorial or sculpture; 

(o) 	
If it is attached to a Town-owned tree, traffic control signaldevice, or police or fire call box; 

(p) 	
Directly in front of and on the same side of the street as any parcel zoned solely for residential use as defined in the Townof Belmont Zoning Bylaw. This restriction shall not apply toparcels zoned for a mixed residential and business use; 

(q) 	
Within a public transportation shelter; and 

(r) 	
In a manner that violates any provision of state or federal law. 



(2) 	
Newsracks may be secured to one another, provided that they are no more than six inches apart and provided that the newsracks arealigned in a row that is parallel to the nearest curbline. Individualnewsracks shall be installed parallel to the nearest curbline. Newsracks may be clustered back to back to form two rows,provided that the rows are parallel to the nearest curbline andfurther provided that the newsracks otherwise comply with the provisions of this bylaw. 


10:107 

§ 60-810 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-810 

(3) 	
Newsracks may only be attached or secured to Town-owned property with the express permission of the administrator, and then only if the newsrack is otherwise in compliance with the provisionof this bylaw. 

(4) 	
Newsracks shall not exceed the following dimensional requirements: height, 4 1/2 feet from the ground; width, two feet;length, two feet. Newsracks shall be erected and maintained sothat they do not constitute a hazard or safety problem for travelers and others using the sidewalks and public ways. They shall bemaintained in good repair and clean and safe condition and shallbe removed if their use is discontinued. 

(5) 	
No newsrack shall bear any advertising other than that directlyrelating to the printed matter dispensed by the newsrack. Anewsrack may dispense more than one publication (printed matter) if it is published by the owner of the newsrack or an affiliate thereof, and the newsrack may bear advertising directly related toeach publication dispensed by the newsrack. 


E. 	Enforcement. 
(1) 	No person shall place, cause to be placed or maintain a newsrackupon any sidewalk or public way in the Town or upon any other Town-owned property in violation of the provisions of this bylaw. Inthe event that a newsrack is determined to be in violation of any ofthe provisions of this bylaw, the administrator shall provide written and/or telephone notice to the owner or the owner's agent that thenewsrack is in violation of this bylaw. 
(a) 	
Such notice shall state the substance of the violation and shall set a date for compliance which shall not be less than 10business days after the date notice is given; 

(b) 	
If the administrator determines that the violation has not been corrected by the date for compliance, the administrator mayinitiate removal proceedings in accordance with the provisionsof Subsection E(2) and may assess a fine in accordance with provisions of Subsection F; and [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 

(c) 	
Notice in writing will be deemed to have been given if actually received by the owner or owner's agent or if mailed to theowner or owner's agent at the address indicated on the latestpermit application form or latest amendment application form on file with the administrator, provided that, if notice is givenby mail, the effective date of notice will be two business daysafter the date of mailing. If, notwithstanding this bylaw, no permit application shall have been filed with the administrator,then notice may be given by attaching the notice to the 

10:108 

(2) 


(3) 


(4) 

(5) 


newsrack determined to be in violation of this bylaw in suchmanner as the administrator determines. 
Except as provided in Subsection E(4) and (5), the administratormay remove and store at the owner's expense any newsrack thatremains in violation for more than 30 days after the date for compliance specified in Subsection E(1), provided that the administrator shall give written notice of removal to the ownerstating the date the newsrack was removed, the reasons for removal, the storage location, and the procedure for claiming themachine. 
Except as provided in Subsection E(4) and (5), the owner of any newsrack may avoid removal of the newsrack by: 
(a) 	
Correcting the violation and so informing the administrator; or 

(b) 	
Making a written request for a hearing on the violation before the administrator prior to the date set for compliance, in which case the newsrack may remain in place pending the administrator's decision on the matter. Said hearing shall be held no later than 10 days after receipt of a written requestfor a hearing and a decision shall be rendered within 10 daysthereafter. 


Notwithstanding any other provisions of this bylaw, if the administrator or a public safety official determines that a newsrackconstitutes an imminent danger of harm to persons or property, the administrator or a public safety official may remove the newsrack,provided that the owner of the newsrack shall be notified of suchremoval and provided that the newsrack shall be stored for a reasonable period of time so that the owner can retrieve it. 
If maintenance, repair, or construction of a public way, sidewalkor public or private property in or adjacent to the public way cannot be accomplished without the removal of a newsrack, theadministrator shall give written and/or telephone notice to thenewsrack's owner ordering removal of the newsrack, provided that said notice shall specify the reason for the removal and the datefor compliance, which shall not be less than 10 days after the dateof notice. If the administrator determines that delay would cause an unreasonable risk of harm to persons or property or wouldcause a delay in the maintenance, repair or construction work, theadministrator may remove the newsrack, provided that the owner of the newsrack shall be notified of the removal, that the newsrack shall be stored for a reasonable period of time so that the ownercan retrieve it, and further provided that the owner may replace the newsrack when said maintenance, repair or construction iscompleted. 
(6) The administrator, with the approval of the Board of Selectmen, is authorized to establish fees for the removal and storage of 
10:109 

§ 60-810 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-810 

newsracks that are removed at the direction of the administrator or public safety officials in accordance with provisions of this bylaw, provided that said fees do not exceed the actual cost of removaland storage. 
(7) 	If a newsrack remains unclaimed for more than 60 days after notice of removal is sent to the owner or for more than 60 days after thenewsrack is removed if the owner is unknown, then possession ofthe newsrack shall be transferred to the Police Department and the newsrack shall be disposed of as unclaimed property in accordancewith applicable law. 
F. 	Violations and penalties. 
(1) 	
In the event that a newsrack is not in compliance with any of theprovisions of this bylaw as of the date set for compliance underSubsection E(1) of this bylaw, then the owner of such newsrack shall be subject to a fine of $25 per day for each day of noncompliance until the date the violations are corrected or thenewsrack is removed. 

(2) 	
The noncriminal disposition of violations of this section or anyrule or regulation of the Board of Selectmen adopted hereunderis hereby authorized in accordance with the provisions of MGL 

c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 

(3) 	
"Enforcing person" as used in this section shall mean any police officer of the Town, the administrator and any representative ordesignee of the administrator and any other Town employee designated by the Board of Selectmen as an enforcing person.


[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
(4) 	An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of this section or any rule or regulation of the Board of Selectmen adopted hereunder shall give the offender a written notice to appear beforethe Clerk of the District Court having jurisdiction thereof for thenoncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with § 21D. The provisions of § 21D are incorporated herein by reference. 
[Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 
G. 	The provisions of this bylaw are severable. If any provision of this bylaw is held to be invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other provisionsof this bylaw which shall remain valid. 
10:110 

ARTICLE 9 
Licenses, Permits and Registrations[Adopted as §§ 4.9.1 to 4.9.6 of the 1981 Bylaws] 
§ 60-900. Business licenses issued by Board of Selectmen.[Amended 4-28-1986 ATM, approved 7-23-1986] 
A. 	The Selectmen shall make such rules, orders, and regulations for thelicensing and operation of hackney carriages, taxicabs and vehicles forhire operated within the Town of Belmont and relative to the licensing of the operators thereof, including the imposition of penalties forviolations thereof, as the Selectmen deem necessary and advisable fromtime to time. Such rules, orders and regulations shall be printed in a form made available to applicants for such licenses. Notice thereofand of changes therein shall be duly published in a newspaper, all asprescribed by MGL c. 40, § 22. 
B. 	The Selectmen may license suitable persons to set up and use joband express wagons for the transportation for hire of goods, wares,furniture or rubbish within the Town. No person shall engage in the business of transporting for hire goods, wares, furniture or rubbishwithout obtaining a license or licenses therefor. 
C. 	The Selectmen may from time to time grant licenses to suitable persons to be hawkers of fruit and vegetables within the Town. 
D. 	The Selectmen may license suitable persons as junk collectors to collect, by purchase or otherwise, junk, old metals and secondhand articles from place to place in the Town, and no person shall engage inthe business of collecting such without a license. 
E. 	The Selectmen may license suitable persons to be dealers in and keepers of shops for the purchase, sale and barter of junk, old metaland secondhand articles, and no person shall be a dealer in or keeperof such a shop without such a license. 
F. 	No place of business for the retail sale of food, goods or services shallbe open for the transaction of business between the hours of 11:00
p.m. and 6:00 a.m. without a license from the Board of Selectmen. This subsection shall not apply to a professional office (e.g., a physician,dentist or attorney at law) or to an undertaking establishment. 
(1) 	
Any license granted pursuant to this subsection shall expire on June 30 of each year and may be revoked or suspended at any timeby the Board of Selectmen for any violation of any rules, orders, orregulations adopted hereunder by the Board of Selectmen. 

(2) 	
Any person violating any provision of this subsection or any rule,order, or regulation adopted under Subsection F(1) shall be punished by a fine of $200 for each offense. [Amended 5-29-2013 STM, approved 10-8-2013] 


10:111 

§ 60-905 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-905 

§ 60-905. Criminal history checks for certain licenses, permits andregistrations. [Added 5-6-2013 ATM, approved 10-9-2013 (Art. 36 ofthe 1981 Bylaws)] 
A. 
B. 
C. 
Purpose. Certain occupations for which the Town has the authority toissue licenses, permits, or registrations carry with them an unusual risk of criminal abuse of members of the public. This section is adoptedpursuant to MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2, to provide for a criminal historycheck for persons seeking to receive from the Town licenses or permits to pursue these occupations. 
Definitions. As used in this section, the following words or phrases shallhave these meanings: 
CRIMINAL HISTORY CHECK — The fingerprint-based criminal historycheck authorized by MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2, for the purpose of conducting a state and national criminal history records check pursuant to MGL c. 6, §§ 168 and 172, and 28 U.S.C. § 534 based upon a full setof fingerprints submitted by the applicant to the Police Department. 
LICENSE — Any permission granted by a licensing authority to pursue an occupation, including a license, permit, or registration. 
LICENSING AUTHORITY — The Town or any of its officers, departments, boards, committees, or other authorities which are authorized to issue licenses, permits, or registrations by the Massachusetts General Laws, the General Bylaws, or a local rule orregulation. 
Occupations subject to a criminal history check. 
(1) 	
Prior to being issued an original license and prior to being allowed to renew a license, a person who seeks to pursue one of the following occupations within the Town shall be required to submitto a criminal history check: 

(a) 	
Dealer in Secondhand Articles (§ 60-900E, issued by the Board of Selectmen). 

(b) 	
Registered Solicitor (Chapter 60, Article 4, issued by the PoliceChief). 

(c) 	
Taxicab Driver (§ 60-900A, issued by the Board of Selectmen orits designee). 

(d) 	
Ice Cream Truck Vendor (MGL c. 270, § 25, issued by the Police Chief). 

(e) 	
Pawnbroker (MGL c. 140, § 70, issued by the Board of Selectmen). 



(2) 	
The requirement of a criminal history check in this bylaw shall bein addition to any other qualification required by state law or theTown's bylaws or regulations. 

10:112 


D. 
Initial processing of criminal history check by Police Department. 


(1) 	
The Police Chief shall by rule or regulation establish a criminal history check process and assign an officer or officers to providethis service for applicants. 

(2) 	
A person who applies to the Town or one of its officers for a license to pursue one of the occupations listed in Subsection C(1) shallappear at the police station. 

(3) 	
The applicant shall tender a nonrefundable fee for the criminal history check, which fee shall be in addition to any other feerequired for the application for the license. 

(4) 	
The applicant shall submit such personal information as may be required for the criminal history check and a full set of fingerprints. 

(5) 	
Upon receipt of the fee established for this check and the set offingerprints, the officer will transmit the applicant's fingerprints to the Massachusetts State Police Identification Unit through theDepartment of Criminal Justice Information Services (DCJIS). TheState Police will compare the applicant's fingerprints against its criminal files and then transmit the fingerprints to the FederalBureau of Investigation for comparison against records kept by theFBI. The FBI will transmit its results to the State Police which shall disseminate the Massachusetts and federal results to the Police Department. 

(6) 	
The Town authorizes the Massachusetts State Police, DCJIS, and the FBI, and their successors, as may be applicable, to conductfingerprint-based state and national criminal record backgroundchecks, including checking FBI records, consistent with this bylaw. 

(7) 	
Information received from the Massachusetts State Police, DCJIS, and the FBI pursuant to a criminal history check will not bedisseminated to unauthorized persons or entities. 



E. 	
Recommendation of fitness for issuance of license. 

(1) 	
Upon receipt of the records, the officer shall make a preliminarydetermination as to whether the applicant will be recommended to the licensing authority as fit or unfit for issue of the license. 

(2) 	
In determining whether to recommend the applicant as fit for thelicense, the officer shall consider whether any entry in the records constitutes an automatic disqualification from the occupation. Theofficer shall also consider how the following convictions or pendingcriminal cases bear specifically upon the applicant's fitness or ability to serve in the occupation for which he or she is seeking alicense: (a) any felony, (b) any offense related to unlawful sexualconduct, (c) the distribution or possession with intent to distribute a controlled substance, (d) any misdemeanor involving as an 




10:113 

§ 60-905 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-905 

element the use or threatened use of force, (e) any misdemeanorinvolving the unlawful taking or receipt of property, or attempts to do so, and (f) any other relevant crime. In addition, the officerconducting the check shall consider whether the person is registered as a sex offender. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM, approved 9-21-2014] 
(3) 	
Prior to transmitting the results and the criminal history record to the licensing authority, the officer shall communicate the preliminary recommendation to the applicant. 

(4) 	
If the applicant wishes, the officer shall provide the applicant witha copy of the criminal history record. 

(5) 	
If the officer's preliminary recommendation is that the applicant isunfit, the officer will: 

(a) 	
Indicate to the applicant which record or records appear to make the applicant unfit. 

(b) 	
Allow the applicant to challenge the accuracy of records andprovide additional information. 

(c) 	
Provide the applicant with information regarding proceduresfor changing, correcting, or updating of a criminal record, which information will include the DCJIS guide and 28 CFR Part 16.34. 

(d) 	
Allow the applicant a reasonable time to dispute the accuracyof criminal record with the agencies responsible for creating or keeping the record. 



(6) 	
The Police Department will transmit the recommendation as to theapplicant's fitness and the result of the criminal history check only if the officer reasonably believes the record to be complete and accurate. 


F. 	Licensing authority action. 
(1) 	
The licensing authority shall use the results of the criminal historycheck and the Police Department's recommendation solely for thepurpose of determining the applicant's fitness for a license. 

(2) 	
If requested by the applicant, the licensing authority will afford theapplicant with an opportunity to provide information in mitigationof his or her criminal record or to suspend the application process until the applicant has had the opportunity to correct or completethe criminal record. 

(3) 	
The licensing authority will consider the information provided pursuant to this section and other information relevant to theapplicant's fitness. [Amended 5-5-2014 ATM, approved9-21-2014] 

10:114 

(4) 	
The licensing authority is authorized to act upon information itreceives pursuant to this bylaw to deny any application for a license, or to revoke or suspend any license, or to deny a renewalor transfers of a license. 

(5) 	
Neither the Police Department's recommendation as to fitness nor the information received from the Massachusetts State Police, DCJIS, and the FBI pursuant to a criminal history check will bedisseminated to unauthorized persons or entities. 



G. 	
Collection and disbursement of fee. The fee for the criminal historycheck is $100. A portion of the fee collected from the applicant shall bedeposited into the Firearms Fingerprint Identity Verification Trust fund as directed in MGL c. 6, § 172B 1/2. The remainder shall be retained bythe Police Department for costs associated with the administration ofthe criminal history checks. 

H. 	
Severability. If any provision of this section shall be found invalid forany reason, such invalidity shall be construed as narrowly as possible,and the balance of the section shall be deemed to be amended to the minimum extent necessary, so as to secure the purposes thereof, as setforth in Subsection A. 


§ 60-910. Private sales. [Added 5-5-2014 ATM, approved 9-21-2014] 
A. 	Purpose. The purpose of this section is to continue to allow privatecitizens, civic groups and neighborhood groups to conduct private saleevents known variously as garage sales, yard sales, tag sales, driveway sales, and moving sales (collectively referred to herein as "privatesales"), so long as they are carried out in conformity with the Town'sbylaws and are respectful of neighbors. Neighboring residents' willingness to tolerate these sales cheerfully can be expected only ifthey take place infrequently. 
B. 	Application. 
(1) 	
Any person or group intending to hold a private sale shall obtain apermit therefor from the Town Clerk. No more than three permitsper calendar year may be issued for private sales at a single address. Copies of the issued permit shall be sent by the TownClerk to the Police Department. 

(2) 	
Any person or group holding a private sale shall take appropriate steps to avoid creating traffic congestion, unsafe parkingconditions, unreasonable noise or other neighborhood nuisance. 

(3) 	
A single private sale may be held over the course of a Saturday and Sunday in a single weekend. Sale hours shall not commence before


8:30 a.m. and shall end each day by 5:30 p.m. All unsold items orobjects from the sale shall be stored out of public view by 6:00 p.m. 
10:115 

§ 60-910 	BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-910 

(4) 	
All signs erected or posted in connection with a private sale shallbe promptly removed at the end of the sale. 

(5) 	
If it is substantiated that a person or group is holding a private salewithout a permit issued pursuant to this section the Belmont Policeare authorized to order the sale to cease immediately. Thereafter, any person or group attempting to reestablish a private sale at thesame address during the calendar year without a permit shall besubject to a fine of $300 for each violation. 

(6) 	
The Belmont Police are authorized to enforce this section by issuingnoncriminal citations as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D. The penaltyfor any violation of this section shall be $50 for each offense. 


10:116 

ARTICLE 10 
Use of Town Property[Adopted 5-5-2014 ATM, approved 9-21-2014] 
§ 60-1000. Lone Tree Hill Conservation Land. 
A. 	Intent and purpose. This section is adopted for the purpose of preserving and protecting the portion of the Lone Tree Hill property(the "property"), formerly known as The McLean Open Space, currentlyowned by the Inhabitants of the Town of Belmont and managed by the Town of Belmont Land Management Committee (the "Committee")pursuant to a quitclaim deed from The McLean Hospital Corporation tothe Inhabitants of the Town of Belmont, and Conservation Restrictions B-1 and B-2, each on file with the Middlesex County South Registryof Deeds at Book 45478, Page 283 (deed), and Book 45375, Page258 (Conservation Restriction B-1), and Book 45375, Page 275 (Conservation Restriction B-2). By preserving and protecting the property, this section promotes the public welfare by ensuring thesafety of visitors, protecting the land and resident wildlife, and preserving passive recreation spaces within the Town consistent withthe above-referenced documents. This section shall be interpreted infurtherance of the intents and purposes described in this subsection. 
B. 	Permitted uses. 
(1) 	
Hours. The public shall be permitted to use the property for passiverecreation on designated trails from dawn until dusk. The public shall observe seasonal closings and other restrictions as established by the Committee. 

(2) 	
Dogs. The public shall be permitted to bring dogs onto the property, provided that those dogs remain on leashes measuring six feet orless. Members of the public shall remove all feces created by theirdogs on the property. 

(3) 	
Bicycles. The public shall be permitted to ride bicycles on theproperty, provided however those bicyclists shall: 

(a) 	
Use only trails designated by the Committee as "shared use"; 

(b) 	
Permit pedestrians to have the right-of-way; and 

(c) 	
Use appropriate caution and speed on trails to promote safe use. 



(4) 	
Other uses permitted by the Committee. The Committee maypermit the public to use the property in other ways with priorCommittee permission. 


C. 	Prohibited uses. 
(1) 	Trails. The public shall not deviate from trails on the property. 
10:117 

§ 60-1000 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-1000 

(2) 	
Animals and natural materials. The public shall not physicallydisturb animals, vegetation, or natural materials on the property in any manner. 

(3) 	
Trash. The public shall not litter on the property and shall removeall items brought onto the property upon departure. 

(4) 	
Other prohibited uses. The public shall not engage in any of thefollowing activities on the property: 

(a) 	
Use of motorized vehicles; 

(b) 	
Dumping of trash or other refuse; 

(c) 	
Use or creation of fires; 

(d) 	
Smoking; 

(e) 	
Possession or use of alcohol; 

(f) 	
Camping or use of a tent; 

(g) 	
Creation or construction of any temporary or other structure;




[Amended 5-4-2015 ATM, approved 8-2-2015] 
(h) 	
Hunting; 

(i) 	
Ball playing or other active recreation, including, but not limited to, baseball, soccer, football, or Frisbee; 

(j) 	
Throwing of stones, snowballs, sticks, or other missiles; 

(k) 	
Flying kites or other objects; or 

(l) 	
Possession, shooting or use of an airgun, bow and arrow, slingshot or other similar device. 


D. 	Enforcement. Violations of this section shall be punishable by a fine of $50 for each offense. In addition to the provisions for enforcement setforth elsewhere in this section, the provisions of this section may alsobe enforced by noncriminal disposition as provided in MGL c. 40, § 21D ("§ 21D"). The penalty for such violation shall be $50 for each offense.Each day or part thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
(1) 	
An enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of this section may, as an alternative to instituting criminal proceedings, give theoffender written notice to appear before the Clerk of the DistrictCourt having jurisdiction thereof for the noncriminal disposition thereof in accordance with the provisions of § 21D. The provisionsof § 21D are incorporated herein by this reference. 

(2) 	
"Enforcing person" as used in this subsection shall mean any police officer of the Town or any other Town employee designated by theBoard of Selectmen as an enforcing person. 


10:118 

ARTICLE 11 
Plastic Bags
[Adopted 4-30-2018 ATM, approved 7-16-2018] 

§ 60-1100. Findings and purpose. 
Plastic check-out bags have a significant impact on the marine and terrestrial environmental, including but not limited to: (1) harming marineand terrestrial animals through ingestion and entanglement; (2) pollutingand degrading the terrestrial and marine environment; (3) clogging storm drainage systems; (4) creating a burden for solid waste disposal andrecycling facilities; (5) requiring the use of non-renewable fossil fuel intheir composition. Studies have shown that alternative "compostable" or "biodegradable" bags require very specific and controlled conditions inorder to biodegrade, and have potentially negative environmental effectssimilar to conventional plastic bags. Such bags should therefore be subject to the same restrictions as conventional plastic check-out bags. The purposeof this article is to protect the Town's unique natural beauty and irreplaceable natural resources by reducing the number of single-use plastic check-out bags that are distributed in the Town of Belmont and topromote the use of reusable bags. 
§ 60-1105. Definitions. 
The following words shall, unless the context requires otherwise, have thefollowing meanings: 
CHECK-OUT BAG — A bag provided by a store to a customer at the point of sale. Check-out bags shall not include bags, whether plastic or not, in whichloose produce or products are placed by the consumer to deliver such itemsto the point of sale or check-out area of the store. 
DEPARTMENT — The Belmont Department of Public Works. 
NET FLOOR AREA — The actual occupied area not including unoccupied accessory areas such as corridors, stairways, ramps, toilet rooms, mechanical rooms, and closets. 
RECYCLABLE PAPER BAG — A paper bag that is 100% recyclable andcontains at least 40% post-consumer recycled content, and displays in a visible manner on the outside of the bag (1) the word "recyclable" or asymbol identifying the bag as recyclable and (2) a label identifying the bagas being made from post-consumer and the percentage of post-consumer recycled content in the bag. 
RECYCLING COORDINATOR — The Recycling Coordinator for the BelmontDepartment of Public Works or a designee thereof. 
RETAIL ESTABLISHMENT — Any business facility that sells goods directlyto the consumer, whether for or not for profit, including, but not limitedto, retail stores, restaurants, pharmacies, convenience and grocery stores, liquor stores, seasonal and temporary business jewelry stores, household 
10:119 

§ 60-1105 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § 60-1120 

goods stores, professional offices, food banks, farmers markets and anyother enterprise that offers the sale and display of merchandise. 
REUSABLE CHECK-OUT BAG — A sewn bag with stitched handles that isspecifically designed for multiple reuse and that (1) can carry 25 poundsover a distance of 300 feet; (2) is machine washable or is made of a material that can be cleaned or disinfected more than 125 times; (3) is either (a)made of natural fibers (such as cotton or linen) or (b) made of durable, non­toxic plastic (other than polyethylene or polyvinyl chloride) that is generally considered a food-grade material and that is more than 4.0 mils thick. 
THIN-FILM PLASTIC CHECK-OUT BAGS — Those bags typically with handles, constructed of high-density polyethylene (HDPE), low-density polyethylene (LDPE), linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE), polyvinylchloride (PVC), polyethylene terephthalate (PET), or polypropylene (otherthan woven and non-woven polypropylene fabric), if said film is equal to or less than 4.0 mils in thickness. 
§ 60-1110. Regulated conduct. 
A. 	No Retail Establishment in the Town of Belmont shall provide Thin-Film Plastic Check-Out Bags to customers. 
B. 	If a Retail Establishment provides or sells Check-Out Bags to customers, the bag must be one the following: 
(1) 	
Recyclable Paper Bag; or 

(2) 	
Reusable Check-Out Bag. 


§ 60-1115. Exemption. 
Thin-film plastic bags with or without handles that are used to containlaundry or dry cleaning, newspapers, produce, meat, bulk foods, wet items,and other similar merchandise are not prohibited under this article. 
§ 60-1120. Penalties and enforcement. 
A. 	The Department of Public Works and its Recycling Coordinator shallhave the authority to administer and enforce this article. As an alternative to any other means of enforcement, the provisions of thisarticle and any regulations adopted pursuant thereto may be enforcedby noncriminal disposition in accordance with the provision of MGL c. 40, § 21D. 
B. 	For the first violation, the enforcing authority, upon a determinationthat a violation has occurred, shall issue a written warning notice to the Retail Establishment specifying the violation. 
C. 	The following penalties shall apply: 
(1) 	First offense: warning - written warning notice. 
10:120 

(2) 	
Second offense: A penalty of $50 shall apply for the next violationfollowing the issuance of a written warning notice. 

(3) 	
Third and subsequent offense: A penalty of $200 shall apply for thethird violation and each additional violation of this article. 

(4) 	
Penalties shall be cumulative and each day on which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. 


§ 60-1125. Effective date. 
This article shall take effect six months following satisfaction of the posting and publication requirements set forth in MGL c. 40, § 32, or on November1, 2018, whichever is later, for Retail Establishments with net floor area equal to or exceeding 30,000 square feet or with at least two locations under the same name within the Town of Belmont that total 30,000 squarefeet or more net floor area, or those Retail Establishments that are subjectto a similar regulation in any other city or town in Massachusetts. This article shall take effect nine months following satisfaction of the postingand publication requirements set forth in MGL c. 40, § 32, or on February1, 2019, whichever is later, for any other Retail Establishments less than 30,000 square feet net floor area. The Director of the Department of PublicWorks or a designee thereof may exempt a Retail Establishment from therequirements of this article for a period of up to an additional three months upon a finding by the Director of Public Works or designee that (1) therequirements of this article would cause undue hardship; or (2) a RetailEstablishment requires additional time in order to draw down an existing inventory of Thin-Film Plastic Check-Out Bags; provided, however, that anyRetail Establishment receiving an exemption shall file with the Departmentof Public Works monthly reports of inventory reduction and remaining stocks. 
§ 60-1130. Regulations. 
The Board of Selectmen may adopt and amend rules and regulations to effectuate the purposes of this article. 
§ 60-1135. Severability. 
If any provision of this article shall be found invalid for any reason in a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall be construed as narrowly aspossible, and the balance of the article shall be deemed to be affected tothe minimum extent necessary, so as to secure the purposes thereof, as set forth in § 60-1100. 
10:121 

§ 60-1135 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A200-100 

The following table lists the penalties prescribed in the General Bylaws ofthe Town of Belmont. This list is provided for reference purposes only. 
Chapter A200 PENALTIES § A200-100. Summary of penalties. 

Section  Subject  Penalty  
10-120  Violation of General Bylawswhere no other penalty isprovided  $100  
40-325H(1)  Violation of park rules andregulations  $100; $50 under noncriminal disposition  
60-115  Violation of § 60-100A (alcoholic beverages) or§ 60-105 (tobacco products) $300  
60-200J  Violation of § 60-200 (petsand other animals)  Violation of licensingsubsections: $50 per suchviolation and, for violations  
continuing 30 days pastlicensing deadlines, anadditional fine of $100 per such violation. Violation of  
other subsections: first  
offense, written warning; second offense, $25; third  
offense and each succeedingoffense occurring within a 12-month period, $50  
60-205B(10)  Violation of § 60-205(kennels)  Violation of section: $50 persuch violation and, for violations continuing 30 days past licensing deadlines, anadditional fine of $100 persuch violation; maintaining a kennel after the license has  
been revoked or suspended:not more than $250  
60-300L(1)  False alarms  First: no charge; second:$10; third: $25; fourth and  
each subsequent: $50  
60-300L(3)  Unregistered alarm  $25  
60-300P  Other violations related to  $100  
alarms  

10:122 

Section 	Subject 
60-315 	Violation of § 60-305(emergency personnel communication) 
60-320H(4) 	Violation of § 60-320 (demolition delay) 
60-325H(5) 	Violation of § 60-325(stormwater managementand erosion control) 
60-440A 	Violation of Article 4, Door-to-Door Solicitation and Canvassing 
60-640B 	Violation of § 60-615(exterior noise standards) or§ 60-625 (maintenance noise standards) 
60-640C 	Violation of § 60-620(construction noise standards) 
60-720 	Failure to remove uncollected solid waste 
60-800I(8) 	Violation of § 60-800I (residential property snowremoval) 
60-800J 	Violation of § 60-800A, B, D(2), E(2), G, H or I (publicways, sidewalks and rights­of-way) 
60-805E(4) 	Handicapped parkingviolation 
60-805G 	Violation of § 60-805 (vehicles and parking) 
60-810F(1) 	Violation of § 60-810(newsracks) 
Penalty 
$300 
$300 
First violation: $100; second violation: $200; third and subsequent violations: $300 
$300 
$25 for a first offense next after the first warning; $100for a second offense; $200 for a third offense; and $300 per offense, without limit, foreach succeeding offense 
$50 for a first offense next after the first warning; $100 for a second offense; $300 for a third offense and each succeeding offense 
Not exceeding $50 
First offense: written warning; second offense:$50: third and successive offenses: $100 each, to a maximum of $350 per winterseason (October 1 to April30) 
$300 
$100 
$50, except $100 for violation of § 60-805E(3)(handicapped parking) 
$25 per day 
10:123 

§ A200-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Section  Subject  Penalty  
60-900F(2)  Violation of § 60-900F (retailsale of food, goods or services) $200  
60-910B(5) and (6)  Violation of § 60-710 (private sales)  $50; reestablishing a private sale without a permit: $300  

60-1000D 	Violation of § 60-1000 (Lone$50 Tree Hill Conservation Land) 
Chapter A201 
REPRESENTATIVE TOWN MEETING ACT 
Chapter A202 
LEGISLATIVE ACTS ACCEPTED BY TOWN 
§ A202-100. Special acts and Massachusetts General Laws. 
The following list includes acts accepted by or directly applicable to theTown of Belmont which are still in effect. Acts that have been repealed or superseded, acts that are generally applicable to towns whether or notaccepted and acts that clearly have no present effect on the Town have beenomitted. Certain acts accepted before 1920 which have been codified in the Massachusetts General Laws have been included, but with the presentstatutory reference. 
A. Special acts. 
Year Chapter 	Subject Date of Acceptance 
1859 109 	Act incorporating theMarch 28, 1859 
Town of Belmont 

1861 11 	Fixes Town — 
boundaries 

1862 34 	Fixes Town — 
boundaries 

1885 296 	Providing for a public September 23, 1885 water supply forBelmont 
1903 141 	Establishes Board of December 17, 1902 Survey 
1906 246 	Watercourses and — 
drainage in Belmont 

1925 148 	Sewer assessments March 1, 1926 
A201:124 

Year  Chapter  Subject  Date of Acceptance  
1926  302  Representative TownMeeting  June 8, 1926  
1938  27  Civil service for Chief of Fire Department  March 7, 1938 (acceptance revoked on April 5, 1982)  
1938  371  Fixes boundary withArlington  October 3, 1938  
1947  212  Division of Precinct 1 into 2 precincts  March 1, 1948  
1951  43  5-day work week forBelmont police officers  March 5, 1951  
1955  513  Authorizes Commissioner of  October 10, 1955  
Mental Health to sell  
certain land to  
Belmont and  
establishes  
continuing conditions  
1956  401  Indemnification for civil defense  March 10, 1958  
volunteers  
1959  42  Authorizes lease of Town land to  March 9, 1959  
Waverley Post No. 1272, VFW  
1966  117  Increase in amount of annual pension forcertain retired Police  March 13, 1967  
and Fire Departmentmembers  
1968  474  Authorize use of Concord Avenue parkland for school  March 11, 1968  
purposes  
1969  710  Modification of procedures forelecting Town Meeting Members  March 10, 1969  

A201:125 

§ A202-100  BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS  § A202-100  
Year 1972 1974  Chapter 621 381  Subject Date of Acceptance Civil service for Assistant Superintendent ofHighways andHighway and Incinerator Foreman in the HighwayDepartment April 6, 1972 (Repealedby Chapter 370, Acts of 1981, effective September 2, 1981, butincumbents as of that date retain their civil service status. Persons newly employed in the positions after that dateare not subject to thecivil service laws.) Allows Belmont to establish rates of compensation for itsFire and Police Chiefs April 7, 1975  
1984 1986  136 73 § 4  Increase in fees for dog licenses and payment of doglicense fees into Town treasury April 25, 1984 Allows Board of Assessors to increase exemptions by up to100% provided thatno taxpayer pays less than previous year's taxes April 23, 2001  
1990 1993  291 71, § 83  Enhanced 911 Teacher earlyretirement  April 22, 1991 April 27, 1994  
1994 1995  235 15  Certain firefightersand police officers, terminated then reinstated, are credited with active service for termination period Establishes a CapitalEndowment Fund  April 24, 1995 April 27, 1994  
1995 1995  16 227  Notice of adjournedTown Meetings Amends CapitalEndowment Fund Act  April 27, 1994 April 24, 1995  

A201:126 

Year  Chapter  
1996  71  
1997  128  
1998  194, § 288  
1999  126  
2000  306  
2000  364  
2000  411  
2001  129  

Subject 
Certain Town employees can get retirement credit for 
U.S. armed service time 
Authorizes Selectmen to grant licenses for the sale of beer and wine in certain restaurants 
Retiree can receive a higher pension ifspouse predeceasesthe retiree 
Establishes a nonprofit housing corporation for theTown of Belmont 
Relative to the exemption from taxation of certain property owned byMcLean Hospital Corporation 
Authorizes Selectmen to grant licenses forthe sale of alcoholic beverages to be drunk on the premises of clubshaving an 18-hole regulation golf course 
Allows noncontributoryveteran retirees whose spousespredecease them tochange retirement allowance to higheroption 
Authorizes Town to establish a Senior Center Furnishings and Accessories and Operations Fund 
Date of Acceptance 
October 28, 1996 
May 7, 1997 April 6, 1998 
April 26, 1999 
May 24, 1999 
May 24, 1999 
April 24, 2000 November 27, 2000 April 2, 2001 
April 23, 2001 
April 23, 2001 

A201:127 

§ A202-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Year  Chapter  Subject  
2004  14  Authorizes Selectmen  
to grant up to 3 licenses for sale of all  
alcoholic beveragesin restaurants having at least 130 and not  
more than 250 seats  
2004  21  Establishes a  
consolidated  
Department of Public Works  
2004  42  Authorizes tax bills to  
include a place forvoluntary contributions to the  
Town's general fund  
2004  106  Agreement relative tothe taxation of  
certain property in the Town  
2004  195  Authorizingmodification of the  
form of quarterly property tax billing inthe Town  
2005  18  Town MeetingMembers at large  
2005  157, § 2  Additional yearlyretirement allowance  
for certain accidental  
disability retireeswho are veterans, retroactive to the  
veteran's date of  
retirement  
2006  395  Authorizes Selectmen  
to grant 1 license for sale of all alcoholic  
beverages not to bedrunk on premises  

Date of Acceptance 
May 5, 2003 April 5, 2004 
April 28, 2003 
May 5, 2003 
May 28, 2002 
April 28, 2003 
April 26, 2004 
April 24, 2006 
April 24, 2006 April 2, 2007 
A201:128 

Year  Chapter  Subject  
2006  396  Authorizes Selectmen  
to grant not more than 2 licenses for sale of wine and malt beverages not to be drunk on premises  
2006  397  Authorizes Selectmen to grant special 1-daylicenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages  
2007  97  Authorizes the Town to establish an Other Post-Employment Benefits Trust Fund  
2010  367  Revokes Chapter 195 of the Acts of 2004 (quarterly tax billing)  
2010  376  Police Chief to be appointed by Selectmen  
2010  381  Recall of elected persons holdingTown-wide offices  
2010  382  Modifies the Belmont Other Post-Employment BenefitsTrust Fund established in Chapter 97 of theActs of 2007  
2010  388  Allows Selectmen to license sale of all alcoholic beverages  
2012  345  Authorizes delivery of Town Meetingwarrant by anymethod determined by Town  

Date of Acceptance 
April 24, 2006 April 2, 2007 
April 24, 2006 
April 24, 2006 August 29, 2007 
April 26, 2010 November 2, 2010 April 26, 2010 November 23, 2010 April 26, 2010 December 1, 2010 April 26, 2010 December 1, 2010 
April 26, 2010 December 16, 2010 December 12, 2012 
A201:129 

§ A202-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Year Chapter 
2014 11 
2014 15 
2014 16 
2014 17 
Subject 
Authorizes Massachusetts Commissioner of Capital AssetManagement and Maintenance to convey certain landto Belmont for recreation, publicworks or other municipal purposes 
Authorizes Selectmen to grant up to 16 licenses for the sale of wines and malt beverages to be drunk on premises 
Authorizes Selectmen to grant up to 4licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages not to bedrunk on premises 
Establishes the position of Town Administrator 
B. Massachusetts General Laws. 

Chapter 164 114  Section 36 22 to 26  Subject Establishes a municipal lightingplant Establishes a Board of CemeteryCommissioners  
82  37  Establishment of building lines  
82 39  34 20  Reserved spaces in public ways Precinct voting atTown Election  
31  48  Civil service for police forces  

Date of Acceptance 
January 23, 2014 
January 30, 2014 
January 30, 2014 
January 30, 2014 
Date of Acceptance 
August 20, 1896 
June 30, 1898 
March 6, 1899 December 4, 1912 October 16, 1900 
June 9, 1904 
May 18, 1911 
A201:130 

Chapter  Section  Subject  
32  77(a)  Pensioning certainlaborers  
152  68 to 75  Workers'  
compensation  
48  36  Appointment of call firemen to permanentforce  
31  48  Civil service for  
Police Chief  
166  32  Appointment ofInspector of Wires by Selectmen  
41  111  Vacation for certain  
Town employees  
31  48  Civil service for  
police and fire forces  
32  85  Pensions for  
members of Police  
and Fire  
Departments  
32  52 to 55  Relative to  
retirement of certain  
veterans  
149  30  8-hour day and48-hour week for  
certain employees  
48  58  Tenure of office for  
Fire Chief  
41  70  Establishes a  
Planning Board  
48  59  Division of Fire  
Department into 2 platoons  
48  42 to 44  Establishes a Fire  
Department under aChief appointed bythe Selectmen  

Date of Acceptance 
November 5, 1912 
November 4, 1913 March 2, 1914 March 19, 1929 
March 2, 1914 
March 9, 1914 March 8, 1915 March 9, 1914 
March 9, 1914 March 8, 1915 March 8, 1915 
June 27, 1916 
March 5, 1917 
March 4, 1918 March 27, 1922 November 7, 1922 
March 5, 1923 
A201:131 

§ A202-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Chapter  Section Subject  Date of Acceptance  
41  72 Relative to care and  March 3, 1924  
45  1 to 9, 14, 15, 16, 18 control of public parks andplaygrounds(Playground or Recreation  
Commission  
established)  
140  47 Licensing of coffee ortea houses  March 17, 1924  
40  42A to 42F Unpaid water rates a lien on real estate  April 11, 1927  
40  6B Authorizes Town to  March 29, 1932  
appropriate money topurchase police andfire uniforms  
147  13A Authorizes reserve police force  April 4, 1932  
41  55 Authorizes Selectmen  March 11, 1935  
to appoint a TownAccountant  
32  1 to 28 Contributoryretirement system for employees  November 3, 1936  
147  16B 1 day off in every 6 for members of Police  March 11, 1940  
Department  
48  58A Hours of duty for FireDepartment  March 9, 1942  
85  11A Registration ofbicycles  March 8, 1943  
129  15 Board of Health  March 8, 1943  
appoints Inspector ofAnimals  
32  85E Retirement for  March 10, 1947  
certain Police and  
Fire Department members  
121B  3 Declaration of need  June 28, 1948  
for a HousingAuthority  

A201:132 

Chapter  Section  
41  110A  
31  47  

147 17A 32B 10 
32B 9A 
32B 11B 
90 18A 
40 8C 
32 85J 
40 8D 
Subject 
Authorizes closing ofTown offices on all Saturdays 
Civil service for labor service 
Holiday pay for policeofficers 
Authorizes Town to provide contributory group life and healthinsurance 
Town may assume 1/2of the premium of retired employees forgroup life and healthinsurance 
Extends contributorygroup life and health insurance to certain elderly retirees 
Selectmen may adoptrules on use of ways by pedestrians 
Establishes Conservation Commission 
Allows certain members of Police and Fire Departments tochoose the manner of payment of theirpensions 
Establishes Historical Commission 
Date of Acceptance 
March 21, 1949 
March 5, 1955 (Acceptance revoked onApril 6, 1981, butemployees as of that date retain all rightsunder the law. Persons employed after that date are not subject to thelaw.) 
March 12, 1956 
March 7, 1966 
March 7, 1966 
March 7, 1966 
March 14, 1966 
March 13, 1967 
March 11, 1968 
March 11, 1968 
A201:133 

§ A202-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Chapter 32  Section 90A  Subject Increases retirement allowance of former employees retired onaccount of accidental disability  
32  90C  Increases retirement allowance of certain superannuatedemployees  
40  22D  Permits rules for towing of illegally parked vehicles  
90  20C  Authorizes police officers to place tagsupon illegally parkedmotor vehicles  
71  16 to 16I  Establishes Minuteman RegionalVocational Technical School District  
41  108L  Career incentive payprogram for Police Department  
40  8E  Establishes Youth Commission  
59  21A  Additional compensation forAssessors and Assistant Assessors who are awarded certain certificates  
40C  —  Establishes Historic District Commission to succeed to powersand duties of Belmont Historical Commission  
32  95A  Provides annuity tospouse and childrenof deceased Town employees retiredunder noncontributory retirement law  

Date of Acceptance 
March 9, 1970 
March 9, 1970 
March 16, 1970 
March 16, 1970 
March 1, 1971 
March 15, 1971 
March 20, 1972 March 27, 1972 
April 3, 1972 
March 19, 1972 
A201:134 

Chapter  Section  Subject  
152  69  Extends workers' compensation to all Town employeesexcept police and fire  
44  53C  Permits separatefund for payment ofoff-duty police work  
32B  9D  Town to pay 1/2 of the premium forhealth insurance of surviving spouse of employee or retiredemployee  
32B  11A  Additional group lifeand health insurance for employees with no premiumcontribution by theTown  
41  100B  Indemnification of retired police officersand firefighters forcertain hospital expenses  
32  99  Advance payment of retirement allowance of certain employees  
40  8B  Establishes a Council on Aging  
71  71E  Authorizes revolvingfund for moneys received for certain school programs  
164A  —  Authorizes MunicipalLight Department to participate in NewEngland Power Pool  
258  13  Indemnification of municipal officers  

Date of Acceptance 
March 19, 1972 
March 19, 1972 
April 1, 1974 
April 1, 1974 
May 20, 1974 
May 20, 1974 
April 28, 1975 April 26, 1978 
June 18, 1979 
April 6, 1981 
83 
16A to 16F Authorizes lien on October 5, 1981 real estate for unpaid sewer use charges 
A201:135 

§ A202-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Chapter Section 
90 20A 1/2 
148 26C 
40 4G 
148 26E 
60A 1 71 71F 
44 53F 1/2 
32 7(2)(a)(iii) 
59 5(41C) 
41 106 

Subject 
Authorizes Selectmen to appoint a Parking Clerk and to establish a schedule of fines for parking violations 
Installation of automatic smoke or heat detectors in certain publicaccommodations 
Advertising for proposals forpurchase ofequipment, supplies or materials costing$4,000 or more 
Installation of approved smokedetectors in all residential buildings 
POW plates 
Establishes special account for tuition payments andreimbursements received by theSchool Committee 
Establishes an enterprise fund for transportation andrelated purposes 
Increase supplementaldependency allowance for accidental disabilityretirees 
Real estate tax exemption of $500for over age eligible taxpayers 
Tree Warden to be appointed by the Selectmen 
Date of Acceptance 
October 5, 1981 
April 28, 1982 
April 25, 1984 
April 25, 1984 
April 28, 1986 
April 29, 1987 

June 17, 1987 

May 2, 1988 

May 2, 1988 

June 13, 1988 

A201:136 

Chapter  Section  
148  26H  
140  147A  
32  22(1)(b 1/2)  
40  13A  
40  13C  
32  90G 3/4  
270  16  
59  5(17D)  
59  5(37A)  
59  5(41A)  

Subject 
Requires automaticsprinklers in lodging or boarding houses 
Authorizes the Town to enact bylawsregulating dogs 
Removes restriction of $30,000 on the amount of regularpay used forcalculation of retirement allowances 
Insurance fund for workers' compensation claims 
Reserve to pay workers' compensation claimsif the Town self-insures 
Allows Town employees to accruecreditable service after the age of 70 years 
Designate HealthDirector as enforcingofficer 
Provides exemptionfrom real estate tax for certain eligible taxpayers 
Provides exemptionfrom real estate tax for certain eligibletaxpayers who areblind 
Increases maximum receipts for eligible applicants for taxdeferral 
Date of Acceptance 
April 23, 1990 
April 23, 1990 
April 22, 1991 
April 22, 1991 
April 22, 1991 
April 24, 1991 
April 24, 1991 
April 27, 1992 
April 27, 1992 
April 27, 1992 
A201:137 

§ A202-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Chapter  Section  Subject  
32  22D  Establishes a  
retirement system funding schedule  
40  8J  Establishes a  
Commission on  
Disability  
44  53D  Establishes a  
recreation program revolving fund  
41  69B  Establishes water  
special revenue fund  
148  26G  Sprinklers in certainnonresidential  
buildings  
40  57  Authorization to denyor revoke local  
licenses or permitsfor nonpayment of taxes  
60  3C  Authorizes the Town  
to provide a checkoffon tax bills for a  
Town scholarship fund  
32  20(6)  Stipend for ex officio members of  
Retirement Board  
59  21A 1/2  Extra compensationfor Assessors who  
complete certain  
courses  
40  8G  Allows mutual aid  
agreements withother police departments  
32  103  Continuation of  
annual cost of livingadjustments for eligible retired Townemployees  
32  103(h)  Equalizes cost ofliving adjustments fornoncontributory and contributory retirees  

Date of Acceptance 
April 26, 1993 
April 26, 1993 
June 7, 1993 
April 25, 1994 April 25, 1994 
April 26, 1994 
April 24, 1995 
April 22, 1996 
April 22, 1996 
October 28, 1996 
April 27, 1998 
April 26, 1999 
A201:138 

Chapter  Section  
32  103(i)  
40  22F  
41  108P  
148  261  
31  58A  
44  53F 1/2  
44  53F 1/2  
59  5(41C)  
32B  18  

Subject 
Allows Retirement Board to pay greater cost of living increase 
Allows Town boards or officers to fix reasonable fees and charges 
Provides for $1,000 additional compensation to theTown Treasurer 
Requires automaticsprinkler systems in new or substantiallyrehabilitated structures 
Maximum age for appointment toposition of firefighteror police officer 
Establishes enterprise fund for water service 
Establishes enterprise fund forsewer and stormwater service 
Adjusts certain property taxexemptions andrequirements for eligible seniorcitizens 
Requires all retirees,their spouses or dependents enrolledor eligible to enroll inMedicare Part A to enroll in a Medicare extension planoffered by the Town 
Date of Acceptance 
April 24, 2000 
April 24, 2000 
April 24, 2000 
April 24, 2000 
April 28, 2003 
April 28, 2003 
April 28, 2003 
April 28, 2003 
April 26, 2004 
A201:139 

§ A202-100 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § A202-100 

Chapter Section 
59 5K 
32  7(2)(e)  
32  9(2)(d)(ii)  
39  23D  
59  5(56)  
71  37M  
40  4J  
40  4K  

Subject 
Raises the reduction of tax liability from $500 to $750 for volunteer services bypersons over age 60 
Additional yearlyretirement allowance for certain accidental disability retireeswho are veterans 
Increase in accidental death benefit for survivingchildren 
Voting by members ofa local board who miss a single sessionof an adjudicatoryhearing before their board 
Authorizes Assessors to grant abatement toNational Guard and reservists on active duty 
Authorizes Selectmen and School Committee to consolidate facilitymaintenance functions 
Allows Town to create a framework for mutual aid in case of a public safety incident 
Accepts the provisions of theStatewide Public Works Municipal Mutual Aid Law 
Date of Acceptance 
April 25, 2005 
April 24, 2006 
April 23, 2007 
April 23, 2007 
November 8, 2010 
April 25, 2011 
May 2, 2011 (acceptance by Board ofSelectmen, not by TownMeeting) 
May 2, 2011 (acceptance by Board ofSelectmen, not by TownMeeting) 
A201:140 

Chapter  Section  Subject  Date of Acceptance  
48  59A  Accepts theprovisions of the Statewide Fire Mutual Aid Agreement  May 2, 2011(acceptance by Board of Selectmen, not by TownMeeting)  
59  5K  Increase to Senior Tax Work Off  May 8, 2013  
Program to up to$1,000  
90  17C  Speed limits  May 1, 2017  
Chapter DT  

DERIVATION TABLE 
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1981 General Bylaws to 2014 GeneralBylaws. 
Location in 2014 Article/Title From 1981 General Bylaws General Bylaws 
Art. 1, General Provisions Ch. 10, Art. 1 Art. 2, Town Meetings Ch. 30 Art. 3, Boards, Committees and Commissions Ch. 40, Art. 1 Art. 4, Board of Selectmen Ch. 40, Art. 2; Ch. 60, Art. 
9 Art. 5, Town Clerk Ch. 20, Art. 2 Art. 6, Town Treasurer Ch. 20, Art. 3 Art. 7, Water Advisory Board Ch. 40, Art. 3 Art. 8, Board of Health Ch. 40, Art. 2 Art. 9, Trustees of the Public Library Ch. 40, Art. 2 Art. 10, Board of Cemetery Commissioners Ch. 40, Art. 2 Art. 11, Position Classification and Ch. 50 
Compensation Plan 
Art. 12, Permanent Building AdvisoryCh. 40, Art. 4 Committee Art. 13, Capital Budget Committee Ch. 40, Art. 4 Art. 14, Council on Aging Ch. 40, Art. 3 Art. 15, Historic District Commission Ch. 40, Art. 3 Art. 16, Permanent Audit Committee Ch. 40, Art. 4 Art. 17, Planning Board Ch. 40, Art. 3 
A201:141 

§ DT-1 BELMONT GENERAL BYLAWS § DL-1 

Location in 2014 Article/Title From 1981 General Bylaws General Bylaws 
Art. 18, Recreation Commission Ch. 40, Art. 3 Art. 19, Warrant Committee Ch. 40, Art. 4 Art. 20, Public Safety and Property §§ 20.1 to 20.7 and 20.12 Ch. 60, Art. 8 §§ 20.8, 20.9, 20.10 and 20.14 Ch. 60, Art. 1 § 20.11 Ch. 60, Art. 2 § 20.13 Ch. 60, Art. 3 § 20.15 Ch. 60, Arts. 1, 3 and 8 Art. 21, Vehicles and Parking Ch. 60, Art. 8 Art. 22, Flammable Fluids, Solid and Gases Ch. 60, Art. 5 Art. 23, Belmont Noise Bylaw Ch. 60, Art. 6 Art. 24, Alarm Bylaw Ch. 60, Art. 3 Art. 25, Bylaw Review Committee Ch. 40, Art. 4 Art. 26, Recycling Program Ch. 60, Art. 7 Art. 27, Newsracks Ch. 60, Art. 8 Art. 28, Kennel Regulations Ch. 60, Art. 2 Art. 29, Conservation Commission Ch. 40, Art. 3 Art. 30, Door-to-Door Solicitation and Ch. 60, Art. 4 Canvassing Art. 31, Disability Access Commission Ch. 40, Art. 3 Art. 32, Stretch Energy Code Ch. 60, Art. 3 Art. 33, Community Preservation Committee Ch. 40, Art. 4 Art. 34, Stormwater Management and ErosionCh. 60, Art. 3 Control Art. 36, Criminal History Checks for CertainCh. 60, Art. 9 Licenses, Permits, and Registrations 
Chapter DL 
DISPOSITION LIST 
A201:142 

§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation. 

EnactmentAdoptionDate  Subject  Disposition  
ATM, Art. 3 5-4-2015  Public health, safety,welfare and environmental  Ch. 60, Art. 3  
protection: buildings andconstruction amendment  
ATM, Art. 4 5-4-2015  General provisions:construction and general penalty amendment  Ch. 10, Art. 1  
ATM, Art. 5 5-4-2015  Public health, safety, welfare and environmental  Ch. 60, Art. 2; Ch. 60, Art. 10  
protection: animalsamendment; use of Town  
property amendment  
ATM, Art. 4 5-2-2016  Public health, safety,welfare and environmental  Ch. 60, Art. 3  
protection: buildings and construction amendment  
ATM, Art. 5 5-2-2016  Public health, safety, welfare and environmental  Ch. 60, Art. 8  
protection: streets andsidewalks amendment  
ATM, Art. 3 5-1-2017  General Law acceptance  Ch. A202  
ATM, Art. 4 5-1-2017  Public health, safety, welfare and environmental  Ch. 60, Art. 3  
protection: buildings andconstruction amendment  
STM, Art. 11-13-2017  Town Administration:  Ch. 50, Art. 2  
2  Revolving Funds  
ATM, Art. 4-30-2018  Boards, Commissions and  Ch. 40, Art. 3  
3  Committees: Boards and  
Commissions Appointed bythe Board of Selectmen  
Amendment  
ATM, Art. 7 4-30-2018  Public Health, Safety,Welfare and Environmental  Ch. 60, Art. 11  
Protection: Plastic Bags  
STM, Art. 1 5-2-2018  Public Health, Safety,Welfare and Environmental  Ch. 60, Art. 1  
Protection: Alcohol,  
Tobacco and Firearms  
Amendment  

A201:143 

SECTION 1. GENERAL 

1.1 Title and Authority 
This By-Law shall be known and may be cited as the “Zoning By-Law of the Town of Belmont, Massachusetts” and is adopted in accordance with and pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, as amended by Chapter 808 of the Acts of 1975 as amended. 
1.2 Purposes 
The purposes of this By-Law include, but are not limited to, the following: 
• 	
to lessen congestion in the streets; 

• 	
to conserve health; 

• 	
to secure safety from fire, flood, panic and other dangers; 

• 	
to provide adequate light and air; 

• 	
to prevent overcrowding of land; 

• 	
to avoid undue concentration of population; 

• 	
to encourage water supply, drainage, sewerage, schools, parks, open space and other public requirements; 

• 	
to conserve the value of land and buildings, including the conservation of natural 
resources and the prevention of blight and pollution of the environment; 


• 	
to encourage the most appropriate use of land throughout the Town, including consideration of the recommendations of the comprehensive plan, if any, adopted by the Planning Board and the comprehensive plan, if any, of the regional planning agency; and 

• 	
to preserve and increase amenities by the promulgation of regulations to fulfill these purposes under the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A. 


Regulations adopted pursuant to these purposes may include, but are not limited to, restricting, prohibiting, permitting or regulating the use, alteration, height, area and location of buildings and structures and the use of premises in the Town of Belmont. 
1.3 Basic Requirements 
Any building or structure hereinafter erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, or moved or any use of premises hereinafter established, altered or expanded in the Town of Belmont shall be in conformity with the provisions of this By-Law, with the following exceptions: 
• 	
certain nonconforming buildings, as provided in Section 1.5; 

• 	
certain aspects of agricultural, educational, and religious uses, as provided in 
Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, Section 3. 



Any use not specifically or generically enumerated in a district herein shall be deemed prohibited. 
1.4 Definitions and Abbreviations 
In this By-Law, the following terms shall have the following meanings, unless a contrary meaning is required by the context or is specifically prescribed. 
Accessory Building -A building devoted exclusively to an accessory use as herein defined, and not attached to a principal building by any roofed structure. 
Accessory Dwelling Unit – A dwelling unit which is incidental to the use of the principal structure on the same lot and located in a Historic Accessory Building pursuant to a Special Permit issued under Section 6.11 of this By-Law. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 32 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting. 
Accessory Use -An activity incidental to and located on the same premises as a principal use conducted by the same person or his agent. No use (other than parking) shall be considered “accessory” unless functionally dependent on and occupying less land area than the principal use, except for institutional (religious or educational uses) parking lots used by others, with owner’s consent, not conducting business within such institution. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 30 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting. 
Age-Restricted Housing Development -A facility intended for persons of age 55 or over within the meaning of MGL c.151B, §4, and in accordance therewith each of the dwelling units shall be owned and occupied or rented and occupied by at least one person 55 years of age or older per dwelling unit and such development shall be operated and maintained in all other respects in compliance with the requirements of such statutes and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, and the same are currently in effect and as the same may be amended. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 3 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
Apartment House -A dwelling containing no fewer than five dwelling units. 
Assisted Living Facility -Any firm or legal entity, however organized, that meets all of the following criteria: 
a) 	Provides room and board; 
b) 	Provides, directly by its employees or through arrangements with another organization that the entity may or may not control or own, personal care services for three or more adults who are not related by consanguinity or affinity to their care provider; and 
c) 	Collects payments or third-party reimbursements from or on behalf of residents of the facility to pay for the provision of assistance with the activities of daily living (dressing, washing, eating, walking, etc.), or arranges for the same. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 3 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
Arterial Street -Any State-numbered highway, any other street segment with right-of-way width of 60 feet or more, and the following named streets: 
Belmont Street Leonard Street 
Blanchard Road Lexington Street 
Bright Road Mill Street 
Brighton Street (east of Pleasant Street) Trapelo Road 
Cross Street Winter Street 
Lake Street 

Basement -A portion of a building partially underground, but having less than 60% of its clear height below grade (see cellar). 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 18 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
Block -An area of land of one or more lots, bounded by streets or ways, but with no streets or ways within the area. 
Building -A roofed structure enclosing useful space. 
Catering Service -An establishment that prepares, serves, and supplies food in large quantities to be delivered and consumed off premises.  Deliveries of food products occur on a regular basis. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. 
Cellar -A portion of a building partially underground, having 60% or more of its clear height below grade (see basement). 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 18 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
Child Care, Large Family -A private residence which, on a regular basis, receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the day, children under seven years of age or children under 16 years of age if such children have special needs, and receives for temporary custody and care for a limited number of hours, children of school age in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Office of Child Care Services; provided however, that the number of children under the age of sixteen in a large family child care home shall not exceed ten, including participating children living in the residence. A large family child care home shall have at least one additional approved care giver present when the total number of children participating in such child care exceeds six.  Large family child care shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefor. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 5 at the 1999 Second Special Town Meeting. 
CMR -Code of Massachusetts Regulations. 
Commercial Vehicle -A vehicle that has ladders, tools, stock or supplies, lettering or advertising that covers an area greater than 18 by 24 inches on either side visible from the outside, or any vehicle with a GVW of 10,000 lbs. or more.  Use of a tarpaulin or like cover shall not exempt a vehicle from this definition. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 26 at the 2001 Annual Town Meeting. 
Day Care Center -Any facility operated on a regular basis whether known as a day nursery, nursery school, kindergarten, child play school, progressive school, child development center, or preschool, or known under any other name, which receives children not of common parentage under seven years of age, or under 16 years of age if such children have special needs, for nonresidential custody and care during part or all of the day separate from their parents.  Day care center shall not include: any part of a public school system; any part of a private, organized educational system unless the services of such system are primarily limited to kindergarten, nursery or related preschool services; a Sunday School conducted by a religious institution; a facility operated by a religious organization where children are cared for during short periods of time while persons responsible for such children are attending religious services; a family day care home; an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives; or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefore provided, in the last two instances, such arrangement or care shall not be for more than five children including participating children living in the residence. 
DEP -Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 26 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
Development -Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations. 
Driveway, Shared – A driveway shared by adjacent property owners and privately owned and maintained. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 11 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Dwelling -A building containing one or more dwelling units separated by side yards from any other structure or structures except accessory buildings. 
Dwelling, Single-Family – A single residential building designed for occupancy by one family. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Dwelling, Two-Family – A single residential building designed for occupancy by two families: 
• 	
Traditional, Two-Family (Horizontal Style) – 

• 	
Each unit is completely separated by a common horizontal element (i.e., interior floor-ceiling assembly), and 

• 	
At least 75% of one dwelling unit must be directly above or below the other, or 

• 	
Duplex (Vertical Style) – 

• 	
A structure containing two dwelling units that share a common vertical wall and roof, and 

• 	
Each unit has direct access to the outside. 


Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Dwelling Unit -A building or portion of a building intended as living quarters for a single family, having a single set of kitchen facilities (a stove plus either or both refrigerator and sink) not shared with any other unit; or quarters for up to five persons in a dormitory, congregate dwelling, or similar group dwelling. 
EPA -U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
Facade-Mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facility -A Wireless Telecommunications Facility, other than a Roof-Mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facility, mounted on, erected on or supported in whole or in part by an existing building or structure, occupied or used primarily for purposes other than wireless telecommunication. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 25 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
Family -One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit; provided that if five or more persons of the group occupying said dwelling are not kindred to each other, as defined by civil law, they shall not be deemed to constitute a family. 
Family Day Care Home -Any private residence which, on a regular basis, receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the day, children under seven years of age or children under 16 years of age if such children have special needs; provided however, in either case, that the total number of children under 16 in a family day care home shall not exceed six, including participating children living in the residence. Family day care home shall not mean a private residence used for an informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefor. 
Floodplain -The area of land susceptible to flooding or inundation from a particular body of water, including a pond, a river or a stream during a Base Flood. 
Floor Area, Gross -The sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of all buildings on the same lot, measured from the exterior face of exterior walls, including basements and any interior parking and loading areas, but not including cellars or areas having less than six feet floor-to­ceiling height. 
Floor Area Ratio -The ratio of gross floor area to lot area of the premises. In determining gross floor area for these purposes only, any building area having floor-to-ceiling height in excess of 15 feet shall be counted twice. 
Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility -A Wireless Telecommunications Facility mounted on, erected on or supported by any freestanding monopole, lattice tower, or similar freestanding structure. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 25 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
G.L. -Massachusetts General Law. 
Grade -The average of the ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls based upon the existing contour lines. Contour lines shall be illustrated on a plan and shall be established prior to any filling or earth moving/removal activities. The grade shall not be raised more than 12 inches to allow for proper drainage. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 6 at the 2016 Annual Town Meeting. §1.4 was amended by Article 18 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
Ground Floor -The floor which is nearest to the average grade of the sidewalk or ground adjoining the building. 
Height, Building -The vertical distance from the grade to: 
• 	
the highest point of the roof or parapet for flat or shed roofs; 

• 	
the midpoint between the lowest and highest points of the roof for gable, hip and gambrel roofs (upper roof pitch 4” per foot or greater); or 

• 	
the point of change in roof slope for mansard roofs (upper roof pitch under 4” per foot). 


Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. 
§1.4 was amended by Article 18 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
§1.4 was amended by Article 31 at the 1991 Annual Town Meeting. 
Kennel -A pack or collection of dogs on a single premise, including a commercial boarding or training kennel, commercial breeder kennel, domestic charitable corporation kennel, personal kennel or veterinary kennel. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Kennel, Commercial Boarding or Training -An establishment used for boarding, holding, day care, overnight stays or training of animals that are not the property of the owner of the establishment, at which such services are rendered in exchange for consideration and in the absence of the owner of any such animal; provided, however, that “commercial boarding or training kennel” shall not include an animal shelter or animal control facility, a pet shop licensed under Section 39A of Chapter 129, a grooming facility operated solely for the purpose of grooming and not for overnight boarding or an individual who temporarily, and not in the normal course of business, boards or cares for animals owned by others. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Kennel, Commercial Breeder – An establishment, other than a personal kennel, engaged in the business of breeding animals for sale or exchange to wholesalers, brokers or pet shops in return for consideration. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Kennel, Domestic Charitable Corporation – A facility operated, owned or maintained by a domestic charitable corporation registered with the Department of Agricultural Resources or an animal welfare society or other nonprofit organization incorporated for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals, including a veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a licensed veterinarian, which operates consistent with such purposes while providing veterinary treatment and care. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Kennel, Personal – A pack or collection of more than 4 but no greater than 8 dogs, 3 months old or older, owned or kept under single ownership, for private personal use; provided, however, that breeding of personally owned dogs may take place for the purpose of improving, exhibiting or showing the breed or for use in legal sporting activity or for other personal reasons; provided further, that selling, trading, bartering or distributing such breeding from a personal kennel shall be to other breeders or individuals by private sale only and not to wholesalers, brokers or pet shops; provided further, that a personal kennel shall not sell, trade, barter or distribute a dog not bred from its personally-owned dog; and provided further, that dogs temporarily housed at a personal kennel, in conjunction with an animal shelter or rescue registered with the Department of Agricultural Resources, may be sold, traded, bartered or distributed if the transfer is not for profit. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Kennel, Veterinary – A veterinary hospital or clinic that boards dogs for reasons in addition to medical treatment or care; provided, however, that “veterinary kennel” shall not include a hospital or clinic used solely to house dogs that have undergone veterinary treatment or observation or will do so only for the period of time necessary to accomplish that veterinary care. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Interior Wireless Telecommunications Facility -A Wireless Telecommunications Facility mounted inside, erected inside or supported entirely within an existing building or structure, occupied or used primarily for other purposes, and not visible from any public way or adjoining property. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 25 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
Lodging and Boarding -Rental of not more than three rooms without separate cooking facilities, as an accessory use within a dwelling, if not resulting in more than four unrelated persons being accommodated on the premises. 
Lot -The whole area of a single parcel of land under one ownership. Whenever such a parcel is divided on a plan which has been placed on file at the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds at Cambridge, the term lot as used in this By-Law shall mean a lot as shown on such plan. 
Lot Area -The horizontal area of a lot exclusive of any area in a street or recorded way open to public use. At least 90% of the lot area required for compliance shall also be exclusive of areas subject to protection under the Wetlands Protection Act, Section 40, Chapter 131, Massachusetts General Law, for reasons other than being subject to flooding. If the distance between any two points on lot lines is less than 50 feet, as measured in a straight line, the smaller portion of the lot as divided by that line shall not be included in lot area unless the two points are separated by less than 150 feet measured along lot lines. 
LOT AREA 

Lot Coverage -Percentage of total lot area covered by structures or roofed. 
Lot Frontage -The boundary of a lot on land coinciding with a street line if there are both rights of access and potential vehicular access across that boundary to a potential building site. Measured continuously along one street line between side lot lines. In the case of corner lots, measured on the street designated by the owner or, failing that, by the Building Inspector as the frontage street, between the side lot line and the midpoint of the corner radius. 
Marijuana, Adult Use Establishment (AUME) -Collectively Marijuana Cultivator, Marijuana Independent Testing Laboratory, Marijuana Product Manufacturer, and Marijuana Retailer or any other type of licensed marijuana-related businesses.1 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
Marijuana Cultivator -An entity licensed to cultivate, process, and package marijuana, to deliver marijuana to marijuana establishments, and to transfer marijuana to other marijuana establishments, but not to consumers.1 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
Marijuana Independent Testing Laboratory -A laboratory that is licensed by the Cannabis Control Commission (Commission) and is: (i) accredited to the most current version of the International Organization for Standardization 17025 by a third-party accrediting body that is signatory of the International Laboratory Accreditation Accrediting Cooperation with a mutual recognition arrangement, or that is otherwise approved by the Commission; (ii) independent financially from any medical marijuana treatment center or any licensee or marijuana establishment for which it conducts a test; and (iii) qualified to test marijuana in compliance with regulations promulgated by the Commission pursuant to MGL c. 94G.1 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
Marijuana Product Manufacturer -An entity licensed to obtain, manufacture, process, and package marijuana and marijuana products, to deliver marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments, and to transfer marijuana and marijuana products to other marijuana establishments, but not consumers.1 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
Marijuana Products -Products that have been manufactured and contain marijuana or an extract of marijuana, including concentrated forms of marijuana and products composed of marijuana and other ingredients that are intended for use or consumption, including without limitation edible products, beverages, topical products, ointments, oils, and tinctures.1 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
Marijuana Retailer -An entity licensed to purchase and deliver marijuana and marijuana products from marijuana establishments and to deliver, sell, or otherwise transfer marijuana and marijuana products to marijuana establishments and to consumers.1 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
1 These definitions are based on the definitions as provided in MGL c. 94G, §1, and the regulations thereunder, as they may be amended from time to time. 
Motor Vehicle Service Station -Premises devoted primarily to retail sale of fuels and lubricants and/or washing of motor vehicles, with any repair services or other sales or services of secondary importance. 
NPDES -National Pollution Discharge Elimination System. 
Open Space -An open area on a lot, unbuilt on, containing landscape materials, pedestrian walks, patios, recreational facilities, but excluding driveways and parking spaces. 
Other Retail Sales and Services -An establishment primarily engaged in the retail sale of goods, services and/or products (including baked products, ice cream, and/or candy for consumption off site with no seating provided on site).  Such uses may include incidental food service. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. 
Outdoor Seasonal Seating – Outdoor seating that is provided on a seasonal basis in an area contiguous to a restaurant to which the seating is associated. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 25 at the 2010 Annual Town Meeting. 
Parking Space -An area in a building or on a lot available for parking one automobile, exclusive of passageways and driveways appurtenant thereto, and having free and unimpeded access to a street over unobstructed passageways or driveways. 
Patio -A paved recreational area, not elevated above adjacent existing grade, separated by plant material or structures from all driveways and not itself to be used for parking. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 19 at the 2000 Annual Town Meeting. 
Premises -A lot together with all structures, buildings, and uses thereon and including any water bodies and watercourses or parts thereof. 
Registered Marijuana Dispensary (or “RMD”) -also known as a Medical Marijuana Treatment Center, means a not-for-profit entity properly registered with the Massachusetts Department of Public Health under 105 CMR 725.100, that acquires, cultivates, possesses, processes (including development of related products such as edible marijuana-infused products, tinctures, aerosols, oils, or ointments), transfers, transports, sells, distributes, dispenses, or administers marijuana, products containing marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials to registered qualifying patients or their personal caregivers. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 12 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Restaurant -An establishment at which the principal activity is the preparation, service, and sales of food for consumption on the premises. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. 
Restaurant, Fast Food -An establishment whose primary business is the sale of food for consumption on the premises which is: (a) primarily intended for immediate consumption rather than for use as an ingredient or component of meals; (b) available upon a short waiting time; (c) packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold; (d) which, because of the nature of the operation sells large volumes of food; but not including drive-up windows. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. 
Restaurant, Take Out -An establishment whose primary business is the sale of food for consumption off the premises which is: (a) primarily intended for immediate consumption rather than for use as an ingredient or component of meals; (b) available upon a short waiting time; (c) packaged or presented in such a manner that it can be readily eaten outside the premises where it is sold; (d) which, because of the nature of the operation sells large volumes of food; (e) commonly generates a large volume of vehicular traffic, but not including drive-up windows. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 9 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. 
Roof-Mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facility -A Wireless Telecommunications Facility mounted on, erected on or supported in whole or in part by the roof of an existing building or structure, occupied or used primarily for purposes other than wireless telecommunication. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 25 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
Satellite Antenna -A device or instrument, other than a Wireless Telecommunications Facility, for the transmittal or reception of television or other electronic communications. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 26 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. §1.4 was amended by Article 24 at the 1996 Annual Town Meeting. 
School-Aged Child Care Home -Any private residence which, on a regular basis, receives for temporary custody and care during part or all of the day, school-aged children, when such children are not required to attend school; provided, however, that the total number of children in a school-aged child care home during the portion of the year when school is in session shall not exceed eight, and during the summer months when school is not in session shall not exceed six, including in each case participating children living in the residence. School-aged child care home shall not mean a private residence used for informal cooperative arrangement among neighbors or relatives, or the occasional care of children with or without compensation therefor. The phrase ‘school-aged children’ shall mean children age 7 and older, not to exceed 14 years of age; however, special needs children shall qualify if not more than 16 years of age. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 39 at the 1994 Annual Town Meeting. 
Setback -An area open to the sky, located between a street or other property line and any structure or element thereof other than a fence, wall, or other customary yard accessory. Setback is measured perpendicular to the street or property line. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. 
SETBACK 

Setback, Front -A setback taken from a street line. Typically, corner and through lots must provide two front setbacks. 
Setback, Rear -A setback taken from a rear property line, that is, typically a line or set of lines approximately parallel to the street frontage, and separating lots whose frontage is established on different streets. Setbacks on irregularly shaped lots where “side” versus “rear” is indeterminate shall be construed as rear setbacks. 
Setback, Side -A setback taken from a side property line, typically a line or set of lines which intersect a street line, separating lots whose frontage is established on the same street. Corner lots commonly have one side setback and one rear setback. 
Sign -Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of persons not on the premises on which the device is located, including any building surfaces other than windows which are internally illuminated or decorated with gaseous tube or other lights. The following, however, shall not be considered signs within the context of this By-Law: 
a) 	flags and insignia of any government except when displayed in connection with 
commercial promotion; 

b) 	legal notices, or informational signs erected or required by government bodies; 
c) 	temporary signs inside display windows illuminated by building illumination only; 
d) 	standard gasoline pumps bearing thereon in usual size and form the name, type, and price of gasoline; 
e) 	carved or other integral devices identifying the building name or date of erection, but not identifying occupants, and not illuminated; or 
f) 	on-premises devices not exceeding four square feet, guiding traffic and parking, but bearing no advertising matter. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 5 at the 2017 Annual Town Meeting. 
Sign, Accessory -Any sign that advertises, or indicates the person occupying the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained, or the business transacted thereon, or advertises the property itself or any part thereof as for sale or rent, and which contains no other matter. A sign on the exterior of a structure which advertises a product or service on more than 25% of the total area of the sign, which product or service does not constitute at least 25% of the gross sales made on the premises on which the sign is erected or maintained, is not an accessory sign. 
Sign, Area of ­
a) 	The area of a sign shall be considered to include all lettering, wording, and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background on which they are displayed, any frame around the sign and any “cutouts” or extensions, but shall not include any supporting structure or bracing. 
b) 	The area of a sign consisting of individual letters or symbols attached to or painted on a surface, building, wall or window, shall be considered to be that of the smallest quadrangle or triangle which encompasses all of the letters and symbols. 
c) 	The area of a sign consisting of a three-dimensional object shall be considered to be the area of the largest vertical cross section of that object. 
d) 	In computing the area of signs, both sides of V-shaped signs, but only one side of back-to-back signs, shall be counted. 
Sign, Non-Accessory -Any sign not an accessory sign. 
Sign, Standing -Any accessory sign that is not attached to a building. 
Sign, Window – A sign posted, painted, placed or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view and is visible from the exterior of the building or a sign that is located within three feet of the glass of a window exposed to public view and visible from the exterior of the building. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 24 at the 2008 Annual Town Meeting. 
Sign, Temporary -Any sign, including its supporting structure, intended to be maintained for a continuous period of not more than 60 days in any calendar year, and not repeated for a period of 4 months after removal. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 5 at the 2017 Annual Town Meeting. 
Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) -The Board specifically designated in this Zoning By-Law to act upon a particular Special Permit. Where no Board is specifically designated herein for a particular Special Permit, the Board of Appeals shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. 
Story -That portion of a building, other than a cellar, included between the upper surface of a floor and upper surface of the floor or roof next above. 
Story, Half -A space under a sloping roof where: 
a) 	the line of intersection of the rafter bottoms and the interior wall surface is not more than three feet above floor level on at least half the perimeter of the second floor, 
b) 	the potential space having headroom of five feet or more is not more than 60% as large as the second floor, 
c) 	provided that the length of any dormer does not exceed 75% of the length of the roofline of the side of the structure where the dormer is constructed, and 
d) 	for purposes of this calculation, when the height of the second floor is indeterminate, the height of the second floor (from finished floor to finished ceiling) shall be equal to 12 feet, the remaining portion of the wall shall be factored into the half-story calculation. 
Note: 	§1.4 was amended by Article 18 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. §1.4 was amended by Article 22 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
Street -Either: 
a) 	a public way or a way which the Town Clerk certifies is maintained and used as a public way, or 
b) 	a way approved by the Board of Survey, or 
c) 	a private way that has been and is continually used as a means of vehicular access to the lots fronting on it provided said private way is shown on a subdivision plan recorded prior to September 21, 1988. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 27 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
Structure -Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires fixed location on the ground, including buildings, mobile homes, signs, swimming pools, and tanks, but for purposes of this By-Law not including walls, fences, or paving. 
Substantial Improvement -Any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either: 
a) 	before the improvement or repairs is started, or 
b) 	if the structure has been damaged, and is being restored, before the damage occurred. Substantial Improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
The term “Substantial Improvement” does not apply to either: 
a) 	any improvements of a structure to comply with existing State or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
b) 	any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a State Inventory of Historic Places. 
Swimming Pool -An artificial receptacle capable of containing a body of water, whether in or above ground, or created by artificial means from a natural watercourse, and all appurtenances, equipment, appliances and other facilities for its operation, maintenance or use, used or intended to be used by the owner or tenant thereof and his/her family and by friends invited to use it without payment of any fee, but not including portable or other pools incapable of containing a depth of water exceeding 24 inches at any point. 
Townhouse – A one-family dwelling unit, with a private entrance, which is part of a residential structure containing three or more dwelling units that are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, and having two or three totally exposed walls, depending on the number of units in structure, to be used for access, light, and ventilation. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Watercourse -The natural channel of a stream or river through which springs, surface runoffs, and rain waters are carried during normal weather conditions. 
Wetland -Wet meadows, marshes, swamps, bogs, areas where groundwater, flowing or standing surface water or ice provide a significant part of the supporting substrate for a plant community for at least five months of the year; emergent and submergent plant communities in inland waters; that portion of any bank which touches any inland waters, as defined in DEP Regulations adopted for implementation of the Wetlands Protection Act. 
Window Display  – Any arrangement or presentation of merchandise placed within three feet of a window but not including any pricing, dollar amount or signage intended to augment the display of the merchandise. Signs associated with a window display are considered a window sign for the purposes of this By-Law. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 24 at the 2008 Annual Town Meeting. 
Wireless Telecommunications Facility -Any tower, antenna, or appurtenant structure or equipment used to provide wireless telecommunications services to individuals or institutions, but not including an amateur radio facility used in accordance with the terms of any amateur radio service license issued by the U.S. Federal Communications Commission, provided that (1) the facility is not used or licensed for any commercial purpose; and (2) the facility shall be removed upon loss or termination of such license. 
Note: §1.4 was amended by Article 25 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
1.5 Nonconforming Uses and Structures 
Note: §1.5 was adopted under Article 27 at the 2004 Annual Town Meeting. 
1.5.1 Applicability 
This By-Law shall not apply to uses or structures lawfully in existence or lawfully begun, or to a building or Special Permit issued, before the first publication of notice of the public hearing required by G.L. c. 40A, s. 5 at which this By-Law, or any relevant part thereof, was adopted.  No modification of a lawfully existing nonconforming use or structure is allowed except as authorized hereunder. 
1.5.2 Nonconforming Uses 
The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit to change or extend a nonconforming use only if it determines that such change or extension shall not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming use to the neighborhood and that it shall be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which it is located.  The following types of changes to nonconforming uses may be considered by the Board of Appeals: 
a. 	
Change or substantial extension of the use; 

b. 	
Change from one nonconforming use to another, not substantially more detrimental, nonconforming use. 


Once a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use through the exercise of a Building Permit, there is no authority to allow the property to revert to a nonconforming use. 
1.5.3 Nonconforming Structures 
The Building Commissioner may issue a Building Permit for a change in use of a pre­existing, nonconforming structure to any permitted use. 
The Building Commissioner may issue a Building Permit for an interior renovation, interior alteration or interior reconstruction of a pre-existing, nonconforming structure that does not extend the nonconformity or create a new nonconformity. 
The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit to reconstruct, extend, alter, or change a nonconforming structure only if it determines that such reconstruction, extension, alteration, or change does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure or create a new nonconformity and shall not be substantially more detrimental than the 
existing nonconforming structure to the neighborhood and that it shall be in keeping with the character of the neighborhood in which it is located.  The following types of changes to nonconforming structures may be considered by the Board of Appeals: 
a. 	
A reconstruction, extension or structural change; 

b. 	
An alteration to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent. 


1.5.4 Nonconforming Single and Two-Family Residential Structures 
A. General Residence Zoning Districts 
(1) 
In the General Residence Zoning District, as provided in Massachusetts General Law Chapter 40A, Section 6, preexisting non-conforming structures may be extended or altered with a Special Permit by the Zoning Board of Appeals, provided that no such extension or alteration shall be permitted unless there is a finding by the Zoning Board of Appeals that such extension or alteration shall not be substantially more detrimental to the neighborhood than the existing nonconforming structure.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, dormers that comply with Section 4.2.2, Linear Requirements, shall be allowed without review by the Zoning Board of Appeals. 

(2) 
If the Building Commissioner determines that such proposed alteration or structural change increases the gross floor area of the nonconforming structure by more than 300 square feet either as: 


a) 	a standalone application, in and of itself, or 
b) 	when combined with the gross floor area added to the structure during the five-year period preceding the date of the pending application, 
then the proposed alteration or structural change shall require a Special Permit from the Planning Board pursuant to Section 6D of this Zoning By-Law. 
(3) On lots that do not comply with the minimum area requirements of this Zoning By-Law (including the minimum lot area per dwelling unit), preexisting non-conforming single-and two-family structures may not be voluntarily demolished and reconstructed except in accordance with a Special Permit issued by the Planning Board under Section 6D of this Zoning By-Law. 
Note: §1.5.4 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Annual Town Meeting. §1.5.4 was amended by Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
B. Single Residence C Zoning Districts 
(1) In the Single Residence C Zoning Districts, a nonconforming single-and two-family residential structure may be reconstructed, extended, altered, or structurally changed upon a determination by the Building Commissioner that such proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or structural change does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure. 
The Building Commissioner may issue a Building Permit under any of the following circumstances: 
a) 	An alteration to a structure which complies with all current setbacks, open space, lot coverage and building height. This clause shall apply regardless of whether the lot complies with the current area and/or frontage requirements; 
b) 	An alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more required setbacks, where the alteration will comply with all current setbacks, open space, lot coverage and building height requirements.  This clause shall apply regardless of whether the lot complies with the current area and/or frontage requirements; 
c) 	A half-story addition to a nonconforming structure, that will not increase the footprint of the existing structure, create a new dimensional nonconformity or extend an existing dimensional nonconformity, provided that the existing height restrictions shall not be exceeded.  This clause shall apply regardless of whether the lot complies with the current area and/or frontage requirements. 
If the Building Commissioner determines that the proposed alteration or structural change does not meet any of the clauses listed above, a Special Permit shall be required from the Board of Appeals. 
(2) If the Building Commissioner determines that such proposed alteration or structural change increases the gross floor area of the nonconforming structure by more than thirty percent (30%) either as: 
a) 	A standalone application, in and of itself, or 
b) 	When combined with the gross floor area added to the structure during the five-year period preceding the date of the pending application 
then the proposed alteration or structural changes shall require a Special Permit from the Planning Board. 
(3) A nonconforming single-or two-family structure may be reconstructed after voluntary demolition if the building as reconstructed will be located on the same footprint as the original nonconforming structure, and will be no greater in volume or gross floor area as the original nonconforming structure. 
If the Building Commissioner determines that the proposed reconstruction would: 
a) 	cause the structure to exceed the volume or gross floor area of the original nonconforming structure or 
b) 	cause the structure to be located other than on the original footprint, 
then a Special Permit shall be required from the Planning Board prior to such 
reconstruction. 

(4) 
The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit under this Section 1.5.4.B. (2) or (3) if it finds that the enlarged building: a) Is generally in harmony with the neighborhood; b) Will neither generate excessive traffic, parking, noise or density impacts on the abutters, nor create other detrimental effects on the neighborhood; c) Is appropriate in scale and mass for the neighborhood, with particular consideration of abutting properties; d) Will not increase the existing nonconforming lot coverage, if it exists; and, 

e) 	Will not be substantially more detrimental than the existing nonconforming building to the neighborhood. 

(5) 
In making any Special Permit decision pursuant to this Section 1.5.4.B. (2) or (3), the Planning Board shall consider the following: a) Scale and design of the structure; b) The siting of the structure and driveway; 


c) Walkway, driveway and parking circulation; 
d) Exterior lighting; 

e) 	Open space and screening; and, 
f) 	Drainage. 
(6) For the purposes of this Section 1.5.4.B., a nonconforming single-and two-family structure shall be defined as a single-and two-family structure on a lot that does not comply with the existing minimum lot area and/or frontage requirements and/or the single-and two-family structure encroaches or otherwise does not comply with one or more setbacks, open space, lot coverage or building height requirements. 
An application for a Special Permit under this Section 1.5.4.B. shall comply with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 7.4 of the Zoning By-Law. 
Note: §1.5.4 was amended by Article 6 at the 2016 Annual Town Meeting. 
C. All Other Districts 
In all other districts, nonconforming single and two-family residential structures may be reconstructed, extended, altered, or structurally changed upon a determination by the Building Commissioner that such proposed reconstruction, extension, alteration, or structural change does not increase the nonconforming nature of said structure. The Building Commissioner may issue a Building Permit under the following circumstances: 
1) 	An alteration to a structure which complies with all current setbacks, open space, lot coverage and building height requirements but is located on a lot with insufficient area and/or frontage; 
2) 	An alteration to a structure which encroaches upon one or more required setbacks, where the alteration will comply with all current setbacks, open space, lot coverage and building height requirements. This clause shall apply regardless of whether the lot complies with the current area and/or frontage requirements; 
3) 	A half-story addition to a nonconforming structure, that will not increase the footprint of the existing structure, create a new dimensional nonconformity or extend an existing dimensional nonconformity, provided that the existing height restrictions shall not be exceeded.  This clause shall apply regardless of whether the lot complies with the current area and/or frontage requirements. 
1.5.5 Restoration 
A structure which has been damaged by fire or other casualty to an extent less than 50% of the fair market value of the structure on the date of the damage may be restored to its original condition and square footage, regardless of any nonconformity of the structure or its use. 
A structure damaged to a greater extent, if dimensionally nonconforming or containing a nonconforming use, may be restored to the previous nonconforming configuration or use only provided such work is started within two (2) years of the damage and completed within three (3) years of the date of the damage and where there is no increase in nonconformance with setback requirements. Any proposed change of use is subject to the provisions of this Section 1.5. 
1.5.6 Abandonment 
A nonconforming use of a structure or land, that has been abandoned or not used for a period of two (2) years, shall not be reestablished and all future use(s) shall conform with this By-Law. 
1.6 Variation 
Where this By-Law imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings or premises than is imposed by existing provisions of law or other By-Laws, the provisions of this By-Law shall control. Where a provision of this By-Law may be in conflict with any other provision or provisions of this By-Law, the more stringent or greater requirements shall control. 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 2. DISTRICTS 

2.1 Classes 
The Town of Belmont is hereby divided into 13 classes of Districts: 
Single Residence A Local Business I Single Residence B Local Business II Single Residence C Local Business III Single Residence D General Business General Residence Parking Lot Apartment House McLean District * 
Belmont Uplands District ** 
** Note: §2.1 was amended by Article 5 at the 2002 Special Town Meeting. 
* Note: §2.1 was amended by Article 2 at the 1999 First Special Town Meeting. 
Overlay Districts: Cushing Square – adopted at the 2006 Special Town Meeting Medical Marijuana – adopted at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting Adult Use Marijuana Establishment -adopted at the 2018 Special Town Meeting South Pleasant Street – adopted at the 2018 Special Town Meeting 
2.2 Location 
Said districts are located and bounded as shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Belmont dated March 14, 1955, as amended which is on file with the Town Clerk.  Said map with all explanatory matter thereon accompanies this By-Law and is hereby declared to be part hereof. 
2.3 Boundaries 
2.3.1 Street Boundaries 
The boundaries between Districts are, unless otherwise indicated, the centerlines of such streets, alleys, parkways, or railroads through which the boundary lines run. 
2.3.2 Mid-block Boundaries 
Unless otherwise specified, a boundary line within a block less than 200 feet wide is a median line between the street lines of said block. Where a block is 200 feet or more in width, the boundary line between Districts as indicated shall be 100 feet from the less restricted side of the block. 
2.4 Floodplain District Delineation 
The Floodplain District is herein established as an overlay district.  The District includes all special flood hazard areas within the Town of Belmont designated as Zone A and AE, on the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) for the administration of the National Flood Insurance Program. The map panels of the Middlesex County FIRM that are wholly or partially within the Town of Belmont are panel numbers 25017C0412E, 25017C0414E, 25017C0416E, 25017C0418E and 25017C0419E dated June 4, 2010. The exact boundaries of the District may be defined by the 100-year base flood elevations shown on the FIRM and further defined by the Middlesex County Flood Insurance Study (FIS) report dated June 4, 2010.  The FIRM and FIS report are incorporated herein by reference and are on file with the Town Clerk. 
Note: §2.4 was amended by Article 24 at the 2010 Annual Town Meeting. 
SECTION 3. USE REGULATIONS 
3.1 General Requirements 
No building structure shall be erected, altered or used and no premises shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as regulated by Section 3.2, Interpretation, and as permitted and set forth in Section 3.3, Schedule of Use Regulations, herein and in accordance with the following notation: 
Y  (Yes)  -Use Permitted  
SP  (Special Permit)  -Use allowed under a Special Permit by the designated Special Permit Granting Authority.  
Note: §3.1 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting  
SPS   (Special Permit: Size)  -Use permitted, except requiring a Special Permit if new construction, additions or alterations result in more than 5,000 square feet gross floor area in any one or more business uses (as categorized in Section 3.3) on a lot or set of contiguous lots in the same ownership at any time subsequent to June 1, 1987, except for individual additions or alterations increasing floor area in business use on the lot or set of lots by less than 10%.  
N  (No)  -Use Prohibited  

Uses permitted and uses allowed on Special Permit shall be in conformity with all the density and dimensional regulations and any other pertinent requirements of this By-Law. 
3.2 Interpretation 
Where a use might be classified under more than one of the following categories, the more specific category shall determine permissibility.  If equally specific, the more restrictive category shall govern.  A use not classifiable under any listed category may be allowed only by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals, upon the Board’s determination that the use is similar in its impacts on the neighborhood, the environs and the Town to a use which is permitted or allowed on Special Permit, and also that the test of Section 7.4.3, Special Permit Criteria, is met. 
3.3 Schedule of Use Regulations 3.3 Schedule of Use Regulations 3.3 Schedule of Use Regulations 3.3 Schedule of Use Regulations 3.3 Schedule of Use Regulations 3.3 Schedule of Use Regulations 3.3 Schedule of Use Regulations 3.4 Accessory Uses 
USES  DISTRICTS  
SR­A,B,C,D  GR  AH  LB I  LB II  LB III  GB  PL  
AGRICULTURE Keeping of livestock other than domestic pets Other agriculture BUSINESS Note: See §3.5, Major Development, for business uses involving more than 40,000 square feet floor area Commercial off-street parking lots Motor vehicle repair, sales, and rental Motor vehicle service station (see §6.7) Motorized equipment sales, service and rental including equipment powered by internal combustion engine over 10 hp Catering Service: • Up to 5,000 square feet • More than 5,000 square feet Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 10 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. Restaurant: • Up to 10,000 square feet • More than 10,000 square feet Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 10 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. Restaurant, Fast Food Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 10 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. Restaurant, Take Out Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 10 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. Place of assembly, amusement, or athletic exercise Other retail sales and services  SP Y N N N N N N N N N N N N  SP Y N N N N N N N N N N N N  N Y N N N N N N N N N N N N  N Y N N N N Y SP Y SP SP N SP SPS  N Y N SP SP SPS Y SP Y SP SP SP SP SPS  N Y N N N N Y SP SP SP SP SP N SPS  Y Y SPS SP SP SPS N N SP SP SP SP SPS SPS  N Y SP N N N N N N N N N N N  

USES  DISTRICTS  
SR­A,B,C,D  GR  AH  LB I  LB II  LB III  GB  PL  
BUSINESS (Continued) Office Manufacturing or fabrication of products of which the major portion is to be sold at retail on the premises and not more than 8 operatives are employed in the manufacturing or fabrication process Other manufacturing and warehousing Wireless Telecommunications Facility (see §6.8) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 27 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. Solar Energy System (See §4.3.8) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 9 at the 2012 Special Town Meeting. Kennels (Commercial or Nonprofit): • Daycare -the provision of day time services for the care of animals that does not include overnight boarding provided that a minimum of 60 square feet of play area is available per dog. • Boarding • Commercial Breeder • Veterinary The Planning Board shall be the SPGA for Kennels Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. Registered Marijuana Dispensary (See §6E) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 12 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting.  N N N SP N N N N N N  N N N SP N N N N N N  N N N SP N N N N N N  SPS SPS N SP SP N N N N N  SPS SPS N SP SP N N N N SP  SPS SPS N SP SP SP N N N N  SPS SPS SPS SP SP SP SP N N SP  N N N SP N N N N N N  

USES  DISTRICTS  
SR­A,B,C,D  GR  AH  LB I  LB II  LB III  GB  PL  
BUSINESS (Continued) Marijuana Cultivator (See §6F) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. Marijuana Independent Testing Laboratory (See §6F) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. Marijuana Product Manufacturer (See §6F) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. Marijuana Retailer (See §6F) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC Religious or educational use exempted from prohibition by Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, Section 3 Private school conducted for profit, including nursery, dancing and music schools Day care center Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. Family day care home Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. Child Care, Large Family Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 6 at the 1999 Second Special Town Meeting. Hospital or sanitarium Philanthropic use  N N N N Y SP Y SP SP SP SP  N N N N Y SP Y SP SP SP SP  N N N N Y N Y SP SP N N  N N N N Y Y Y SP SP N Y  N N N SP Y Y Y SP SP N Y  N N N N Y SP Y SP SP N Y  N N N N Y Y Y SP SP N Y  N N N N Y N N N N N N  

USES  DISTRICTS  
SR­A,B,C,D  GR  AH  LB I  LB II  LB III  GB  PL  
PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC (Continued) Private club or lodge owned by members and customarily conducted as a nonprofit activity: • operated for members only • other Municipal recreational use Municipal cemetery Other municipal use School-aged child care home Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 39 at the 1994 Annual Town Meeting. RESIDENTIAL Detached single-family dwelling (See §6D for the GR Districts) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. Two-family dwelling (See §6D for the GR Districts) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. Conversion of large public buildings or public or private school buildings: • With 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or less (see §6.3B) • With more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area (see §6.3A) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 5 at the 2005 Special Town Meeting. Elderly housing (see §6.4) Cluster development (see §6.5) Other apartment house  SP N Y SP SP SP Y N SP SP SP SP N  SP N Y SP SP SP Y SP SP SP SP N N  N N Y N SP SP N Y SP SP SP N SP  Y Y Y N Y SP SP SP Y SP N N N  Y Y Y N Y SP SP SP SP SP N N N  SP SP Y N Y SP SP SP SP SP N N N  Y Y Y Y Y SP N N SP SP N N N  N N N N Y N N N N N N N N  

USES  DISTRICTS  
SR­A,B,C,D  GR  AH  LB I  LB II  LB III  GB  PL  
ACCESSORY USES  
Home occupation (see §3.4.2) Lodging and Boarding • for daily or weekly periods • for longer periods only Mixed-Use – provided that at a minimum the first floor is to be reserved for commercial use and that the residential use comply with §6.10, Inclusionary Housing Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 17 at the 2007 Annual Town Meeting. Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 26 at the 2003 Annual Town Meeting. A noncommercial greenhouse; a tool shed used for the storage of tools, yard and household equipment or other similar accessory buildings (see §4.3.5) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 28 of the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. Commercial provision for the care and recreation of dogs in completely fenced-in area for not more than one hour per day.  The Board of Appeals shall consider the size and relationship of the lot to adjacent residential lots, and shall determine whether that size and relationship is adequate to accommodate the use without imposing undue noise, visual, and traffic impacts on the adjacent residential lots; it shall, after (and if) making a determination of the adequacy, impose such conditions on hours of use, number of animals accommodated at a given time, fencing, screening or other measures to contain the activity and minimize its impacts Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 29 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. Personal Kennel Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 9 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting.  Y SP Y N Y SP SP  Y SP Y N Y N N  Y SP N N Y N N  Y Y Y SP N N N  Y Y Y SP N N N  Y Y Y SP N N N  Y Y Y N Y N N  N N N N N N N  

USES  DISTRICTS  
SR­A,B,C,D  GR  AH  LB I  LB II  LB III  GB  PL  
ACCESSORY USES (Continued) Swimming pools and tennis courts and other similar recreational facilities (see §6.1) Windmills A garage for more than 3 vehicles or containing more than 660 square feet floor area Open lot storage or parking of a boat, boat trailer, house trailer, camping trailer, motor home, commercial trailer, or commercial vehicle Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 27 at the 2001 Annual Town Meeting. Open lot parking for not more than 3 vehicles accessory to a single-family dwelling, and not more than 2 vehicles per dwelling unit or 5 vehicles per structure for other dwellings Open lot parking in excess of the above accessory to residential use Shared Institutional Parking: • By Town departments • Residential overnight parking • Pick-up/drop-off of less than 30 minutes • Public or private event parking of less than 24 hours • Day time use (6 am – 6 pm) by employees and/or customers using less than 30 spaces or 50% of the spaces in the lot, whichever is greater • Day time use of more than 30 spaces or more than 50% of spaces in the lot, whichever is greater • Evening use (6 pm – 6 am) by customers and/or employees • Use by commercial vehicles Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 30 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting.  Y SP SP SP Y SP Y Y Y Y Y SP SP SP  Y SP SP SP Y SP Y Y Y Y Y SP SP SP  SP N SP N Y Y Y Y Y Y Y SP SP SP  SP SP Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  SP SP Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  SP SP Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  N SP Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y Y  N N Y N Y Y N N N N N N N N  

USES  DISTRICTS  
SR­A,B,C,D  GR  AH  LB I  LB II  LB III  GB  PL  
ACCESSORY USES (Continued) Satellite antenna with a receiving dish with a visually coherent surface of 8.5 square feet or less or a diameter of one meter (39.37”) or less (see §4.3.5) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 18 at the 1999 Annual Town Meeting. Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 26 at the 1996 Annual Town Meeting. Satellite antenna with a receiving dish with a visually coherent surface of 34 square feet or less or a diameter of two meters or less (see §4.3.5) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 18 at the 1999 Annual Town Meeting. Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 25 at the 1996 Annual Town Meeting. Satellite antenna with a receiving dish with a visually coherent surface of more than 34 square feet or a diameter of more than two meters (see §4.3.5) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 18 at the 1999 Annual Town Meeting. Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 25 at the 1996 Annual Town Meeting. Other uses customarily incidental to the principal uses herein Interior Wireless Telecommunications Facility (see §6.8 and §7.3) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 28 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. Other Wireless Telecommunications Facility (see §6.8) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 28 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. Solar Energy System (see §4.3.8) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 9 at the 2012 Special Town Meeting. Shared Driveway (See §5.1.3 k)) Note: §3.3 was amended by Article 11 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting.  Y SP SP SP Y SP Y SP  Y SP SP SP Y SP Y SP  Y SP SP SP Y SP Y SP  Y Y SP Y Y SP Y Y  Y Y SP Y Y SP Y Y  Y Y SP Y Y SP Y Y  Y Y SP Y Y SP Y Y  Y SP SP Y Y SP Y N  

3.4.1 Accessory Research or Scientific Development 
Uses, whether or not on the same parcel as activities permitted as a matter of right, accessory to activities permitted as a matter of right, which activities are necessary in connection with scientific research or scientific development or related production, may be allowed upon the issuance of a Special Permit provided the Board of Appeals finds that the proposed accessory use does not substantially derogate from the public good. 
3.4.2 Home Occupations 
Note: §3.4.2 was amended by Article 30 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
Home occupations are permitted within a dwelling, but are not permitted in accessory buildings unless granted a Special Permit pursuant to Section 6.11 subject to the following: 
Note: §3.4.2 was amended by Article 31 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting. 
a) 	there is no exterior display or visible storage of supplies or equipment to be used on or off the premises or other variation from the residential character of the premises, 
b) 	no more than one third of the habitable floor area of the residence is to be used for home occupations, 
c) 	not more than one person who is not a member of the household is employed on the premises in the home occupations, 
d) 	the production of offensive noise, vibration, odors, fumes, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, heat, humidity, glare, or other objectionable effects shall be prohibited, 
e) 	no articles are sold or offered for sale on the premises, 
f) 	traffic generated, including pick up and deliveries, does not exceed that normally expected in that residential neighborhood, and 
g) 	all parking required to service home occupations is provided for off-street, other than within a required front yard. 
h) 	If a home occupation results in patrons or clients visiting the premises or if there is a sign indicating the occupation, such home occupation is allowable only upon Special Permit acted on by the Board of Appeals under the criteria in Section 7.4.3 of the Zoning By-Law. 
i) 	A Certificate of Occupancy is required prior to establishing a home occupation, or re­establishing one following termination, and shall be issued for a period of no greater than four years, to be extended only following determination by the Building Inspector that the use continues to comply with the Zoning By-Law. 
Note: §3.4.2.i) was amended by Article 10 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Upon transfer of any beneficial interest in property in which alterations for a home occupation have been made, a Certificate of Compliance must be provided by the owner indicating that either there will be continued compliance with these provisions or that the home occupation is not to be continued. 
3.5 Major Development 
3.5.1 Applicability 
Business developments as authorized in Section 3.3, Schedule of Use Regulations, require Concept Plan approval by Town Meeting under provisions of this Section prior to submittal for a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals, if resulting in more than 40,000 square feet gross floor area in any one or more business uses (as categorized in Section 3.3) on a lot or set of contiguous lots in the same ownership at any time subsequent to June 1, 1987, except for individual additions or alterations totaling less than 10% of the resultant gross floor area on the lot or set of lots. 
3.5.2 Concept Plan Approval 
Concept Plan Approval shall be by two-thirds vote of the Town Meeting, approving the Plan and a finding that the Plan, subject to such conditions or limitations as the Town Meeting may stipulate, provides benefits to the Town which outweigh any adverse effects for the Town or the vicinity, after consideration of the criteria specified in Section 7.4.3. 
Special Permits shall then be required, and shall be approved by the Board of Appeals only upon determination by that Board that the proposal is consistent with the approved Concept Plan, or in the event of an inconsistency, that the departure is necessitated by changed conditions or earlier error, and that the inconsistency does not result in less beneficial development, based on the considerations of Section 7.4.3, Special Permit Criteria. 
3.5.3 Procedures 
a) 	Submittal.  Five copies of the Concept Plan shall be filed with the Planning Board at least 60 days prior to the date of Town Meeting vote. 
b) 	Concept Plan Contents. A Concept Plan shall consist of the following: 
1) 	A schematic development plan, indicating boundaries of the lot, buildings, roads, drives, parking, reserved open space, existing topography and proposed grading, areas of retained vegetation and proposed planting areas, and a locus plan showing relation to nearby streets, zoning district boundaries, and water bodies. 
2) 	Floor plans and elevations of all existing and proposed structures. 
3) 	Materials indicating the proposed ultimate floor area in each use; time schedule for development; service improvements proposed at the developer’s and those anticipated at the Town’s expense. 
4) 	An estimate of peak hour vehicle trips onto and off of the site. 
5) 	Analysis indicating degree of consistency with each of the considerations of Section 7.4.3, Special Permit Criteria. 
c) Study Model.  Applicants are encouraged to provide a study model of the proposal for display prior to and at hearings and the Town Meeting. 
3.5.4 Pre-Town Meeting Hearing 
Prior to Town Meeting action, the Planning Board shall hold a public hearing on the Concept Plan with timing, notice and procedures the same as those required for a hearing on a Special Permit.  In addition, the applicant shall be required to post conspicuous notice on the premises indicating the nature of the proposal and time and place of the hearing. The Planning Board shall report its recommendation to the Town Meeting, with a copy of the Concept Plan and the recommendation to be filed with the Town Clerk not less than 14 days prior to the Town Meeting vote on the Concept Plan. 
3.5.5 Special Permit 
Application for an initial Special Permit must be made not more than 12 months after the Town Meeting approval of the Concept Plan. 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 4. INTENSITY REGULATIONS 
4.1 General Requirements 
The erection, extension, alteration, or moving of a structure, and the creation or change in size or shape of a lot shall be permitted only in compliance with the intensity and dimensional requirements set forth herein, except as provided at Section 1.5, Non-Conforming Uses and Structures, and in Section 6, Chapter 40A, Massachusetts General Law, and except for lot line changes which create neither additional lots nor increase in nonconformity. 
In order to verify that any new construction requiring a plot plan at the time of building permit application complies with the intensity and dimensional requirements set forth herein and any conditions imposed by the SPGA, an ‘as-built’ plan may be required.  This plan, paid for by the property owner, prepared and stamped by a professional engineer (P.E.), architect or Registered Professional Land Surveyor (RPLS) shall be submitted to the Office of Community Development and approved by the Inspector of Buildings prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for that building. 
Note: §4.1 was amended by Article 13 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
Section 4.2, Schedule of Dimensional Regulations, continued on the next page. 
4.2 Schedule of Dimensional Regulations 
Note: §4.2 was adopted under Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
4.2.1 Zone standards
District MINIMUM LOT AREA  MINIMUM LOT FRONTAGE  MINIMUM LOT AREA PER DWELLING UNIT  MAXIMUM FLOOR AREA RATIO  MAXIMUM LOT COVERAGE  MINIMUM OPEN SPACE   
SR-A  25,000  125  25,000 - 20%  50%  
SR-B  12,000  90  12,000 - 25%  50%  
SR-C  9,000  75  9,000 - 25%  50%  
SR-D  25,000  125  - - 20%  50%  
GR  5,000  50  3,500  ­ 30%  40%  
AH  85,000  100  1,200  - 30%  40%  
LB I  - 20  - 1.25  - -
LB II  - 20  - 1.05  35%  -
LB III  - 20  - 1.05  35%  - 
GB  - 20  - - - -
PL  - - - - - - 

1) 	In the GR District, a minimum lot area of 7,000 square feet and a minimum lot frontage of 70 feet shall exist for a two-family dwelling. 
2) 	In the GR District, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to modify the minimum lot area per dwelling unit and/or the minimum lot frontage requirements, pursuant to Sections 6D and 7.4 of the Zoning By-Law, provided that the lot size and frontage of the lot on which the two-family dwelling will be constructed has a minimum lot size of 5,000 square feet and a minimum lot frontage of 50 feet. 
3) 	In an LBI District, a floor area ratio up to a maximum of 1.5 may be allowed by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals (see §4.4). 
4.2.2 Linear Requirements for Residential Districts 
MINIMUM SETBACK DIMENSIONS FEET  MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT  
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS  Front  Side  Rear  Feet  Stories  
SR-A and SR-D • Dwelling • Other  30 30  15 15  40 25  36 36  2½ 2½  
SR-B • Dwelling • Other  25 25  10 10  30 25  36 36  2½ 2½  
SR-C • Dwelling • Other  25 25  10 10  30 25  30 30  2½ 2½  
GR • Dwelling • Other  20 20  10 10  20 12  33 33  2½ 2½  
AH  30  30  30  60  -­ 

Note: §4.2.2 was amended by Article 6 at the 2016 Annual Town Meeting. 
A. 	Setbacks 
1. 	
Ornamental features, such as belt courses, chimneys, eaves, gutters, sills, pilasters, or lintels, may project up to two feet into the setback. 

2. 	
In the Single Residence C Districts, the placement of ground-mounted outdoor mechanical and fuel storage equipment on a lot shall be subject to the following requirements: 

a. 	
Not within the front yard -The front yard is defined as the area between a line obtained by extending the front elevation of the dwelling to each of the sidelines of the lot and the front line of the lot; 

b. 	
Not within the required side or rear setbacks; 

c. 	
Not within at least 10’-0” of the front elevation; and, 

d. 	
Screened so that it is not visible from the street or adjacent properties.  




Note: §4.2.2 A.2 was amended by Article 6 at the 2016 Annual Town Meeting. 
3. 	
No building need be set back more than 30% of the depth of the lot in a Single Residence A or D District, 25% of the lot depth in a Single Residence B or C District, nor more than the average of the setbacks of the buildings on the lots contiguous thereto on either side, a vacant lot, a lot occupied by a building set back more than the required minimum, or an intersecting street being counted as though occupied by a building set back at that minimum.  However, in no case shall the setback be less than 15 feet in Single Residence Districts. 

4. 	
Notwithstanding the front setback requirements listed in Section 4.2.2, the front setback for the Single Residence C Districts shall be the average of the front 


setbacks of the buildings on the lots contiguous thereto on either side.  A vacant lot, a lot occupied by a building set back more than the required minimum, or an intersecting street shall be counted as though occupied by a building set back at that minimum. 
Note: §4.2.2 A.4 was amended by Article 6 at the 2016 Annual Town Meeting. 
5. 	
Notwithstanding the front setback requirement listed in Section 4.2.2, the front setback for the GR District shall not exceed the average of the front setbacks of the buildings on the lots contiguous thereto on either side.  A vacant lot, a lot occupied by a building set back more than the required minimum, or an intersecting street shall be counted as though occupied by a building set back at that minimum. 

6. 	
On lots having depth of less than 100 feet, dwelling setback from the rear lot line shall equal not less than 40% of lot depth in the Single Residence A and D Districts, not less than 30% of lot depth in Single Residence B and C Districts, and not less than 20% of lot depth in General Residence Districts; but in no event shall the rear setback equal less than 25 feet in Single Residence Districts or less than 16 feet in General Residence Districts. 

7. 	
In the SR Districts, the Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit reducing the rear setback requirement of corner lots and other unusually configured lots to not less than the side requirement, taking into consideration the configuration of the lot, and the effect upon the neighboring property. 

8. 	
In the GR Districts, on lots having depth of greater than 100 feet, dwelling setback from the rear lot line shall equal 20% of the lot depth. 

9. 	
For structures other than dwellings, on lots having depth of less than 100 feet, principal building setback from the rear lot line shall equal not less than 25% of lot depth in Single Residence Districts or 15% of lot depth in General Residence Districts.  For accessory buildings, see Section 4.3.5. 


B. 	Height 
1. 	
Chimneys, towers and other projections not used for human occupation may exceed the height limitations herein provided that, except for single vertical freestanding tubular antennae; any such projection above the building exceeding 10 feet or 20% of the building height, whichever is greater, shall be allowed by Special Permit only. 

2. 	
In the Single Residence C Districts, the height of a Dwelling or other structure shall 


not exceed 34 feet to the ridge.  Notwithstanding the definition of ‘Height’ in Section 
1.4, the height of a Dwelling or other structure with a flat roof shall not exceed 30 feet to the highest point of the roof.  
Note: §4.2.2 B.2 was amended by Article 6 at the 2016 Annual Town Meeting. 
3. 	In the SR Districts, greater height is permitted provided the building setback from each street and lot line exceeds otherwise applicable requirements by 10 feet plus one foot for each foot of excess height, but in no case shall building height exceed 60 feet or 4 stories in height. 
Section 4.2.3, Linear Requirements for Commercial Districts, continued on the next page. 
4.2.3 Linear Requirements for Commercial Districts 
MINIMUM SETBACK DIMENSIONS FEET  MAXIMUM BUILDING HEIGHT  
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS  Front  Side  Rear  Feet  Stories  
LB I  5  6 or none  6 or none  28  2  
LB II  10  0  20  32  2  
LB III  10  0  20  28  2  
GB  5  6 or none  6 or none  36  -­ 
PL  -­ -­ -­ -­ -­ 

A. 	Setbacks 
1. 	
Ornamental features, such as belt courses, chimneys, eaves, gutters, sills, pilasters, or lintels, may project up to two feet into the setback. 

2. 	
In the LB III Districts, for structures originally built as residences and not adjacent to Residential District, the lesser of the side setback existing as of May 5, 2003, or 10 feet. 

3. 	
Adjacent to Residential District, the side and/or rear setback shall be no less than building height or 20 feet, whichever is greater. 


B. 	Height 
1. 	
Chimneys, towers and other projections not used for human occupation may exceed the height limitations herein provided that, except for single vertical freestanding tubular antennae; any such projection above the building exceeding 10 feet or 20% of the building height, whichever is greater, shall be allowed by Special Permit only. 

2. 	
No more than two stories wholly or partially above grade. 

3. 	
In LBI Districts, a maximum building height of up to 32 feet and 3 stories may be allowed by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals, as provided in Section 4.4. 


4.3 Specific Requirements 
4.3.1 Lot Width 
Any lot to be used for a dwelling shall, between the street and the rear line of the dwelling, maintain a lot width measured between side lot lines no smaller than the required street frontage for the district in which the lot is located. 
4.3.2 Unenclosed Porches 
In Single Residence and General Residence Districts, unenclosed porches, except on multi-family dwellings, may be built five feet nearer the street line than the required setback. 
4.3.3 Unenclosed Steps and Similar Projections 
Subject to Section 4.3.7, the provisions of Section 4.2 shall not apply to unenclosed steps, unroofed porches, ramps for the handicapped or other similar features which are not more than three feet high above the adjacent grade and which do not project more than four feet from the foundation wall and in no event are closer than four feet to a lot sideline and ten feet to a lot rearline. 
4.3.4 Exception for Recorded Lots 
As provided in Section 6 of Chapter 40A, Massachusetts General Law, any increase in the area, frontage, width, or setback requirements of this By-Law shall not apply to a lot to be used for single-and two-family dwellings if at the time of its recording the lot was: 
1) 	Not held in common ownership with any adjoining land, 
2) 	Conformed to then existing requirements, and 
3) 	Had less than the proposed requirement but at least 5,000 square feet of area and 50 feet of frontage. 
Applicants seeking this exemption shall document to the Building Inspector the lot’s eligibility for it, through copies of recorded deeds for that and adjoining properties as of the date of adoption of the requirements not being complied with. 
Note: §4.3.4 was amended by Article 14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
4.3.5 Accessory Buildings 
Note: §4.3.5 was amended by Article 28 of the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. 
a) 	General Requirements 

1. 	Except as provided in subsection c.2 below, a private one-story garage for not more than three automobiles, a noncommercial greenhouse, or a tool shed used for the storage of tools, yard and household equipment, or other similar accessory buildings, shall be set back at least five feet from the side line and rear line of the lot and five feet from the principal building to which it is accessory. 
Note: §4.3.5 a) 1) was amended by Article 22 at the 2008 Annual Town Meeting. 
2. 	
An accessory building shall be on the same lot as the principal building to which it is accessory. 

3. 	
A garage shall have a vehicular access from the street. 


b) 	Dimensional Regulations 
1. 	Accessory Buildings shall not exceed the following: 
• 	
150 square feet of floor area (660 square feet for a garage) or 

• 	
a height of 10 feet (15 feet for a garage). 


2. 	Accessory Buildings shall be set back at least five feet from the side line and rear line of the lot and five feet from the principal building to which it is accessory. 
c) 	Rear Yard Restrictions 
1. 	
A building accessory to a dwelling shall cover not more than 40% of the rear yard of the lot.  The rear yard for this provision is defined as the area between a line obtained by extending the rear line of the dwelling to each of the sidelines of the lot and the rear line of the lot. 

2. 	
If any part of the accessory building is forward of the rear line of the dwelling, the accessory building shall conform to the front setback, side line and rear line requirements for a dwelling in the district in which the accessory building is located. 

3. 	
Additions to existing dwellings may extend beyond the front line of existing unattached accessory buildings provided said additions meet the requirements for setback, sideline, rearline setbacks and lot coverage and open space requirements for the respective zoning district. 


Note: §4.3.5 c) 3 was amended by Article 6 at the 2007 Special Town Meeting. 
§4.3.5 c) 3 was amended by Article 23 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 

d) 	Satellite Antennae 
1. 	Satellite antenna with a receiving dish with a visually coherent surface of 8.5 square feet or less or a diameter of one meter or less may be built: 
i. 	no closer than 5 feet from any lot line or 
ii. 	on the structure to which it is accessory provided it is at least 5 feet from any lot line and, 
iii. 	if pole mounted, is not more than 10 feet above the adjacent grade. 
Note: §4.3.5 d) 1 was amended by Article 19 at the 1999 Annual Town Meeting. 
§4.3.5 d) 1 was amended by Article 28 at the 1996 Annual Town Meeting. 

2. 	Satellite antenna with a receiving dish with a visually coherent surface of more than 8.5 square feet or over one meter in diameter may be built: 
i. 	no closer than 5 feet from the rear and side lines of a lot and 
ii. 	not within the required front setback of the lot. 
iii. 	Any satellite dish located in a commercial or industrial zone any satellite dish located adjacent to Residential Districts shall be no closer than the required setbacks in that district. 
Note: §4.3.5 d) 2 was amended by Article 19 at the 1999 Annual Town Meeting. 
§4.3.5 d) 2 was amended by Article 27 at the 1996 Annual Town Meeting. 

4.3.6 Tennis Courts and Similar Recreational Facilities 
The regulations which apply to an accessory building in Section 4.3.5 shall also apply to a tennis court and other similar recreational facility as an accessory use. Where a tennis court or other facility is the principal use on a lot or is located in the front yard, the regulations of Section 4.2 shall apply. 
4.3.7 Corner Setback for Fences and Other Landscaping 
Note: §4.3.7 was amended by Article 31 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. 
a) 	Corner lots and intersecting streets 
1. 	
No building or structure in any district may be erected and no fence and no vegetation, except tree trunks, may be maintained or allowed to remain between a height of three feet and eight feet above the plane through their center line grades between the property lines of intersecting streets and a line joining points on such lines 20 feet distant from their point of intersection or, in the case of a rounded corner, the point of intersection of their tangents. 

2. 	
However, in a Local Business I, Local Business II, Local Business III or General Business District no part of a building shall be built closer to the point of intersection of right-of-way lines than 10 feet. 


Diagram for a) Corner lots and intersecting streets b) Driveways and Sidewalks or other pavement 

No fence and no vegetation, except tree trunks, shall be located within a site triangle so as to obstruct visibility between a height of three feet and a height of eight feet above the plane through their curb grades.  The site triangle is that area of the intersection of street rights-of-way or pavement with other streets, driveways or walkways, formed by the side lines of street rights-of-way or pavement, driveways or walkways and a line joining points on such lines ten feet distant from their point of intersection. 
Driveways and Sidewalks or other pavement 4.3.8 Solar Energy Systems 

Note: §4.3.8 was amended by Article 9 at the 2012 Special Town Meeting. 
a) 	Purpose 
The purpose of this Solar Energy System By-Law is to encourage investment in Solar Energy Systems in the Town of Belmont, while providing guidelines for the installation of those systems that are consistent with the character of the Town and are necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.  
b) 	Definitions 
Accessory Solar Energy System -A Solar Energy System that supplies electrical or thermal power primarily for on-site use. 
Building-Integrated Solar Energy System -A Solar Energy System that is an integral part of a principal or accessory building replacing or substituting for an architectural or structural component of the building. Building-Integrated Solar Energy Systems include but are not limited to Photovoltaic or hot water solar systems that are contained within roofing materials, windows, or skylights. 
Photovoltaic (PV) -The technology that uses a semi-conductor material to convert light directly into electricity. 
Solar Collector Panel -Any part of a Solar Energy System that absorbs solar energy for use in the system’s energy transformation process. The Solar Collector Panel does not include frames, supports or mounting hardware.  
Solar Energy System – A device or structural design feature, a substantial purpose of which is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating or cooling, electrical generation, or water heating. 
c) 	General Standards 
1. 	
A Solar Energy System shall provide power for the principal use and/or accessory use of the property on which the Solar Energy System is located and shall not be used for the generation of power for the sale of energy to other users, although this provision shall not prohibit the sale of excess power generated to the local utility company. 

2. 	
Whenever practical, all Accessory Solar Energy Systems shall be attached to a building. 

3. 	
A Solar Energy System shall not be used to display advertising, including signage, streamers, pennants, spinners, reflectors, ribbons, tinsel, balloons, flags, banners, or similar materials.  

4. 	
The manufacturer and equipment information, warning, or indication of ownership shall be allowed on any equipment of the Solar Energy System.  

5. 	
The owner of the Solar Energy System shall remove it if the Inspector of 
Buildings determines that it has become a hazard. 


6. 	
Solar Collector Panels shall be placed and arranged such that reflected solar radiation or glare shall not be directed onto adjacent buildings, properties or roadways. 

7. 	
Roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems shall be set back a minimum of 1 foot from all roof edges (eaves, gutterline, ridge) of the roof surface. 

8. 	
Appurtenant electric, piping, wiring or equipment for Solar Energy Systems shall be allowed to extend beyond the perimeter of the building on a side or rear yard exposure, but must be affixed to the building or structure in a neat and workman like manner with the intent of connection to the building system or to run underground. 

9. 	
The horizontal area covered by the area of the Solar Collector Panels of a ground-mounted system at optimum design tilt shall be calculated as part of the overall lot coverage. 

10. 
All power transmission lines and/or piping from a ground-mounted Solar Energy System to any building or other structure shall be located underground unless otherwise required by the State Building Code. 

11. 
A ground-mounted Solar Energy System shall limit the impacts on the surrounding properties, maintain safe accessibility, and limit storm water runoff. 

12. 
Solar Energy Systems as an accessory use shall be allowed, subject to the provisions of this Section 4.3.8, within the McLean District, the Belmont Uplands District, the Oakley Neighborhood Smart Growth Overlay District, and the Cushing Square Overlay District. 


d) 	Design Standards in Residential Districts 
1. 	Roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems 
i. 	Roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems are permitted on principal and accessory structures.  
ii. 	All roof-mounted Solar Collector Panels will be subject to the following height limitations: 
a. 	
The top surface of any Solar Collector Panel mounted on a south-facing sloped roof shall not exceed 12 inches above the adjacent finish roof surface. 

b. 	
The top surface of any Solar Collector Panel mounted on a north-, east-, or west-facing sloped roof shall not exceed 24 inches above the adjacent finish roof surface. 

c. 	
The top most point of any Solar Collector Panel mounted on a flat roof (1/2 inch or less per foot slope) shall not exceed 30 inches above the adjacent finish roof surface on flat roofs with or without parapets.  


The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to exceed such height limitations subject to the provisions of Section 7.4 
2. 	Ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems 
i. 	The minimum setback distance from the side and rear property lines to a ground-mounted Solar Energy System shall be five feet when oriented at minimum design tilt.  A ground-mounted Solar Energy System shall not be located within the front yard, defined as the area between the front façade of the principal building extended to the side property lines and extending to the street line (corner lots have two (2) front facades). 
ii. 	A ground-or pole-mounted Solar Energy System shall not exceed 8 feet in height to the tallest point of the Solar Collector Panels at 42.39º.  Greater height is permitted provided the Solar Energy System setback from each lot line exceeds otherwise applicable setback requirements by 10 feet plus one foot for each foot of excess height.  In no case shall the height exceed ten feet.  The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to exceed this height limitation subject to the provisions of Section 7.4. 
e) 	Design Standards in Non-Residential Districts 
1. 	Building-mounted Solar Energy Systems are permitted in the following locations: 
i. 	On the roofs of principal and accessory structures, and/or 
ii. 	On side and rear building facades, or on front or corner building facades, so long as the Solar Energy System is a Building-Integrated Solar Energy System. 
2. 	
All Solar Energy System appurtenances such as, but not limited to, plumbing, water tanks, mounting structures, and support equipment shall be screened to the maximum extent possible without compromising the effectiveness of the Solar Collector Panels.   

3. 	
Roof-mounted Solar Energy Systems 


i. 	A roof-mounted Solar Energy System on a flat roof (1/2 inch or less per foot slope), whether mounted on the principal building or accessory building, shall be considered to be a mechanical device and shall be restricted consistent with other building-mounted mechanical systems. 
ii. 	All roof-mounted Solar Collector Panels on a sloped roof will be subject to the following height limitations: 
a. 	
The top surface of any Solar Collector Panel mounted on a south-facing sloped roof shall not exceed 12 inches above the adjacent finish roof surface. 

b. 	
The top surface of any Solar Collector Panel mounted on a north -, east-, or west-facing sloped roof shall not exceed 24 inches above the adjacent finish roof surface. 


The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to exceed such height limitations subject to the provisions of Section 7.4. 
4. 	Ground-mounted Solar Energy Systems 
i. 	The minimum setback distance from the side and rear property lines to a ground mounted Solar Energy System shall be five feet when oriented at minimum design tilt.  A ground-mounted Solar Energy System shall not be located within the front yard, defined as the area between the front façade of the principal building extended to the side property lines and extending to the street line (corner lots have two (2) front facades). 
ii. 	A ground-or pole-mounted Solar Energy System shall not exceed the maximum height of ten feet. The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to exceed such height limitation subject to the provisions of section 7.4. 
4.3.9 Multiple Buildings 
More than one principal building other than a single-family or two-family dwelling may be erected on a lot, subject to the requirements and procedures for Design and Site Plan Review in Section 7.3, provided that lot area and yard requirements are met for each building without counting any lot area or yard twice. 
4.3.10 Lot Shape 
No lot shall be created so as to be so irregularly shaped or extended that it has a “Shape Factor” in excess of twenty-two (22). 
The Shape Factor equals the square of the lot perimeter divided by the lot area (before deduction for wetlands, etc.).  That portion of the lot in excess of the required lot area may be excluded from the computation of Shape Factor using an imaginary lot line, provided that the entire required frontage is included in the portion used for the calculation. 
4.4 Local Business I Exceptions 
In the Local Business I District, the Board of Appeals may authorize certain increased limits to building height and floor area ratio, as provided in Section 4.2.  All such applications shall be subject to Design and Site Plan Review by the Planning Board, as provided in Section 7.3. In acting upon applications for such increases, the Board shall consider the following, in addition to the criteria for Special Permits generally (Section 7.4.3): 
a) whether and by how much building height or scale will exceed that of nearby structures, b) whether and by how much the building will exceed the height of trees in the vicinity, c) whether any potential intrusiveness has been resolved through increased yards, design 
of building form, or other means, d) whether any resulting building prominence is appropriate, in light of the functional or symbolic role of the structure, e) whether and by how much shadowing on abutting land or streets will be increased, or 
privacy will be diminished, f) whether there are fire protection concerns created by the increase, g) what the traffic consequences are of any increased floor area, h) whether the requested increase is necessary for the proposal to proceed, and i) what the community benefits are from the proposal, including consideration of taxes, 
employment, and service. 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 5. GENERAL REGULATIONS 
5.1 Off-Street Parking and Loading 
5.1.1 Number of Spaces 
a) 	Off-street parking must be provided to service all increases in parking demand resulting from new construction, additions, or change of use to one requiring more parking, without counting any existing spaces needed to meet requirements for the existing building and use. The number of spaces indicated in Section 5.1.2, Schedule of Requirements, shall be the basis for determining adequacy of provisions. Any existing spaces removed shall be replaced in kind unless they are either in excess of the number required or removed at the request of the Town. Parking spaces also serving as loading areas shall not be credited. 
b) 	The number of spaces may be reduced to less than that stipulated below if, in acting on Design and Site Plan Review, the Planning Board determines that a smaller number would be adequate for all parking needs because of such special circumstances as: 
1. 	
shared parking for uses having peak parking demands at different times, 

2. 	
unusual age or other characteristics of site users, or 

3. 	
user sponsored demand reduction devices such as carpooling. 


c) 	In the Local Business III Districts, legal on-street parking may be credited towards meeting these requirements if located between the premises side lot lines on the same side of the street. 
5.1.2 Schedule of Requirements 
a) 	Dwellings:  two parking spaces for each dwelling unit therein, except one parking space for each dwelling unit having fewer than two bedrooms. 
b) 	Places of public assembly: one parking space for each three persons capacity based on the Massachusetts State Building Code. 
c) 	Hotels, motels, room and board, other commercial accommodations:  one parking space for each guest unit, plus one parking space for each eight units or fraction thereof. 
d) 	Restaurant:  one parking space per 2 persons seating capacity.  For purposes of calculating parking requirements, up to 20 outdoor seasonal seats shall not count in total seating capacity. 
Note: §5.1.2 d) was amended by Article 25 at the 2010 Annual Town Meeting. 
e) 	Commercial recreation:  one parking space per two persons participant capacity, plus one space per three persons spectator capacity. 
f) 	Auto service station:  three parking spaces plus three parking spaces per service bay. 
g) 	Other service establishments, retail businesses, and offices: one parking space per 250 square feet of ground floor gross floor area (350 square feet in the LB-I District) plus one space per 400 square feet gross floor area on other floors (600 square feet in the LB-I District), but not fewer than three spaces per separate enterprise. Excluded from these calculations shall be floor area used for parking or loading. 
h) 	Wholesale and industrial establishments:  one parking space per 1.5 employees on the largest shift, but capable of expansion to not less than one space per 400 square feet gross floor area. 
i) 	Other uses:  a number of spaces to be determined by the Building Inspector (or the Planning Board in cases referred to it for Design and Site Plan Review), based upon evidence from similar uses under similar circumstances. 
j) 	Mixed uses:  requirements for each use are added, unless it is determined that a smaller number is adequate because of staggered hours. 
5.1.3 Parking and Loading Area Location and Design 
a) 	Non-residential. 
• 	
Required parking for nonresidential uses shall be either on the same premises as the activity it serves or on a separate parcel if the parcel is located within 400 feet of the building entrance to be served and is in a zoning district permitting or allowing by Special Permit the use it serves. 

• 	
Parking facilities for six or more cars serving nonresidential uses shall have no elements, other than driveways approximately perpendicular to the street and parking area plantings, located in the area between the street line and the front setback line. 


Note: §5.1.3 a) was amended by Article 18 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
b) 	Residential. 
1) 	In Single Residence Districts, no parking shall be permitted within a required front yard between the side lines of the dwelling extended to the street, except on a driveway leading to, and no wider than, an attached garage, or on Special Permit from the Board of Appeals, to be granted only upon determination by the Board that: 
i. 	Feasible alternatives for providing necessary parking do not exist, 
ii. 	Effective use of plantings, grading, and location are employed to minimize visual impacts, and 
iii. 	On-site drainage is adequately provided for. 
2) 	In General Residence Districts, the following provisions shall apply to attached garages including those constructed below the ground floor and driveways and parking spaces that are created within a required front yard between the side lines of the dwelling extended to the street, 
A. 	An attached single car garage opening and associated driveway leading to, and no wider than the garage, is permitted provided that: 
1. 	
The paved area (or other driveway surface material) does not exceed 25% of the front yard area as defined above, 

2. 	
Effective use of plantings, grading, and location are employed to minimize visual impacts, 

3. 	
The maximum width of the driveway shall not exceed 12 feet, 

4. 	
The slope of the driveway shall be no greater than 15% (1.8” per 12”), and 

5. 	
On-site drainage is adequately provided for. 


B. 	Parking spaces and/or two-car garage openings or larger below the ground floor shall not be permitted except on Special Permit from the Board of Appeals, to be granted only on determination by the Board that: 
1. 	
Feasible alternatives for providing necessary parking do not exist, 

2. 	
Effective use of plantings, grading, and location are employed to minimize visual impacts of the paved front yard and/or garage, 

3. 	
The garage does not create the appearance of an additional story, which would then give an overall appearance of the structure exceeding the 2­1/2 story limitation, 

4. 	
The slope of the driveway shall be no greater than 15% (1.8” per 12”), 

5. 	
The paved area is only as wide as the garage and tapers where possible, 

6. 	
For buildings with more than one unit, the garages, and associated paved areas necessary to provide access to each garage, shall be separated from each other by at least 12 feet, the area between the driveways to be landscaped with trees and other plantings as provided for in Section 5.3 of these By-Laws, and 

7. 	
On-site drainage is adequately provided for. 


Note: §5.1.3 b) was amended by Article 18 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
c) 	Configuration.  Dimensions of spaces and aisles shall adequately provide for clearance and movement, and designated spaces shall accommodate needs of the handicapped.  The Planning Board shall adopt, and may from time to time amend, standards for such dimensions, reflecting current vehicle sizes. 
Groups of not more than 30 parking spaces shall be separated by a six foot 
landscaped walk or divider. 

d) 	Construction.  Off-street parking areas, loading areas, and access drives, if involving six or more parking spaces, shall be surfaced with at least two inches (2”) of bituminous paving or comparable paving material unless the Planning Board approves an alternative surface which, because of only seasonal or periodic use, will adequately prevent dust, erosion, water accumulation, and unsightly conditions. Such parking areas shall be curbed and provide wheel stops where needed. 
e) 	Lighting. Lighting must comply with Section 5.4.3, Light and Glare. 
f) 	Backing. All parking areas having six or more spaces shall be so designed that no vehicle will be required to back on a public way or driveway serving as access to 50 or more parking spaces in order to enter or exit from a parking space. 
g) 	Egress Location. 
1) 	There shall be not more than two driveway openings onto any street from any single premises unless each driveway is separated from all other driveways serving 20 or more parking spaces, whether on or off the premises, by at least 250 feet (measured between centerlines at the street line) on arterial streets and 150 feet on other streets. No parcel of land shall be divided in a way precluding meeting this requirement, using deeded access easements across the lots being created for shared egresses if necessary. 
2) 	No driveway sideline shall be located within 20 feet of the street line of an intersecting way. 
3) 	Driveway egresses serving 20 or more parking spaces must have not less than 250 feet sight distance in each travel direction entering an arterial street and not less than 150 feet sight distance on other streets. 
h) 	Egress Design. 
1) 	No driveway opening shall exceed 30 feet in width at the street line unless necessity of greater width is demonstrated by the applicant. 
2) 	Openings shall be graded and drainage facilities provided where necessary to prevent stormwater from ponding or running across any sidewalk. 
3) 	All driveway openings serving 20 or more parking spaces shall be constructed with a minimum edge radius of five feet on both sides. 
i) 	Bicycle Racks.  For premises requiring 40 or more parking spaces, bicycle racks facilitating locking shall be provided to accommodate one bicycle per 20 parking spaces required or fraction thereof. 
j) 	Loading.  Loading or unloading shall not interfere with the public use of sidewalks, streets, or parking areas. 
k) 	Shared Driveway. In accordance with Section 7.4, and the objectives, findings and determinations, and conditions for approval set forth below, the Planning Board, acting as the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA), may grant a Special Permit to allow a driveway on one lot to lead to a parking space on another lot, or to allow a driveway to straddle the lot line and provide access from one lot to a principal use on an adjoining lot on not more than two lots, when both lots are in a residential district(s) provided an easement is executed and is filed in the Registry of Deeds of Middlesex County. Where the Shared Driveway is located in a Cluster Development, pursuant to Section 6.5, for which a Special Permit with Site Plan Review is required, an additional Special Permit under this Section shall not be required. 
1. 	Objectives 
Any use of land involving the arrival, departure, or storage of motor vehicles shall be 
designed and operated to: 
a. 	
Promote traffic safety by assuring adequate places for storing of motor vehicles off the street, and for their orderly access and egress to and from the public street; 

b. 	
Increase the traffic-carrying capacity of streets and highways in the Town and obtain a more efficient utilization of on-street curbside parking; 

c. 	
Reduce hazards to pedestrians upon public sidewalks; 

d. 	
Protect adjoining lots and the general public from nuisances and hazards such as: 


i) 	Noise, glare of headlights, dust and fumes resulting from the operation of motor vehicles; 
ii) 	A lack of visual relief from expanses of paving; and, 
iii) 	Accelerated runoff of surface water from land covered by impervious materials; 
e. 
Maintain the character of the neighborhood and/or streetscape; and, 

f. 
Preserve historic walls, structures, and/or significant trees. 


2. 	Findings and Determinations 
Prior to granting a Special Permit, the SPGA shall make a finding and determination 
that the proposed Shared Driveway: 
a. 	
Complies with the Special Permit criteria set forth in Section 7.4.3; 

b. 	
Is consistent with the general purposes of this By-Law and its objectives; 

c. 	
Is designed in a manner that is compatible with the existing natural features of the site and is compatible with the characteristics of the surrounding area; 

d. 	
Does not result in the removal of mature trees or, where such trees are proposed to be removed, that the removal is mitigated through replanting or other means; 


e.  Will not result in conditions that unnecessarily add to traffic congestion or the potential for traffic accidents on the site or in the surrounding area;  
f.  Will not constitute a demonstrable adverse impact on the surrounding area resulting from:  
i)  Excessive noise, level of illumination, glare, dust, smoke, or vibration which is higher than levels now experienced from uses permitted in the surrounding area;  
ii)  Emission or discharge of noxious or hazardous materials or substances; or  
iii) Pollution of waterways or groundwater; and,  
g.  Will be maintained through a maintenance agreement mutually acceptable by the subject property owners.  

3. 	Conditions for Approval 
The SPGA may impose conditions and limitations on the Special Permit for the Shared Driveway as it deems necessary to ensure that the findings and determinations that it must make under Section k) 2 above are complied with, including but not limited to: 
a. 	
Screening or landscaping from view from adjoining lots or from a street, by planting, walls, fences or other devices; 

b. 	
Regulating the number, design and location of access drives or other traffic features; 

c. 	
Requiring a greater number of off-street parking spaces, and with greater setbacks, landscaping and screening than the minimum standards set forth in Section 5.3; and 

d. 	
Such other limitation as may be reasonably related to reducing any adverse impact on, or increasing the compatibility of the Shared Driveway with the surrounding area. 


Note: §5.1.3 k) was amended by Article 11 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
5.2 Signs 
Note: §5.2 was amended by Article 5 at the 2017 Annual Town Meeting. 
5.2.1 Intent and Purpose 
It is recognized that signs perform important functions in the community and are essential for the public safety and general welfare, such as communicating messages, providing information about goods and services available, and providing orientation.  It is further recognized that because of their potential impact on the visual and perceptual environment, signs must be regulated in order to: 
a) 	prevent hazards to vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
b) 	prevent conditions which have a blighting influence; 
c) 	provide for easy recognition and legibility of all permitted signs and other uses in the immediate vicinity; 
d) 	preserve the amenities and visual quality of the Town and curb the deterioration of the community environment; and 
e) 	conserve energy. 
It is the intent of this Section 5.2 to protect property values, create a more attractive business climate, enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community, provide a more enjoyable and pleasing community and to encourage appropriates uses of land. 
5.2.2 Permits 
No sign (other than a temporary sign in a window or a sign pursuant to Section 5.2.5 a) 1.shall be erected, altered or enlarged in a General or Local Business District until a permit has been issued by the Building Inspector, to be issued only for signs complying with all applicable provisions of this By-Law. 
Any party seeking to erect a sign that does not meet dimensional or operational requirements of this By-Law may seek a waiver of the requirements of this By-Law from the Planning Board.  The Planning Board may provide such a waiver if it finds that such a waiver will not adversely impact the health and safety of nearby persons or property and that granting the waiver is materially consistent with the purposes of this By-Law.  In granting such a waiver, the Planning Board shall specify the size, type, and location of the sign(s) and impose such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary to promote the purposes of this By-Law. 
5.2.3 General Requirements 
a) 	Movement.  No sign shall contain any visible movable or moving parts (except for the hands of a traditional analog type, i.e., non-digital clock whose face does not exceed 36 inches in diameter), any moving, flashing, or animated lights, or any automatically changing written or pictorial matter or message. 
b) 	Illumination.  No sign shall be illuminated between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless the premises on which it is located are legally open for business. Signs may be illuminated only by the following means: 
1. 	
By a white, steady stationary light shielded and directed solely at the sign; 

2. 	
By interior non-exposed lights; 

3. 	
By exposed neon or similar tube illumination. 


c) 	Temporary Signs.  Temporary signs must comply with the requirements for permanent signs, except for temporary non-commercial signs allowed in all districts without a permit from the Building Inspector. 
d) 	Removability. No sign shall be painted or posted on the surface of any wall without an intermediary removable surface. 
e) 	Sign Location. Signs attached to a roof and v-shaped signs attached to buildings are not permitted.  Signs attached to a building must be either flat against the wall or perpendicular to the wall.  If attached flat against the wall, the sign shall not project more than 12 inches outward or six inches upward from the wall or parapet of the building.  If perpendicular to the building, the sign may not project more than five feet from the building, three feet over a public sidewalk, and shall be no less than two feet from the curb line. 
The minimum vertical clearance to the underside of any sign projecting over a sidewalk or other pedestrian or vehicular passage shall be 10 feet above the surface of the sidewalk or passage. 
5.2.4 Prohibited Signs. 
The following sign types shall not be permitted, constructed, erected, or maintained: 
a) 	Any sign that advertises or calls attention to any commercial activity, business, product, or service that is not produced, sold, carried, or conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. No such sign shall remain in place or on vacated premises for more than 90 days from the date the vacancy commenced or commercial activity or service ceased, unless otherwise permitted by this By-Law; 
b) 	String lights used in connection with commercial premises with the exception of 
temporary lighting for holiday decoration; 

c) 	Signs erected so as to obstruct any door, window or fire escape on a building; 
d) 	Signs which incorporate in any manner flashing, moving or intermittent lighting, excluding public service signs showing time and temperature; and, 
e) 	Signs illuminated by other than a white, steady stationary light. 
5.2.5 District Regulations 
a) 	All Districts.  In all zoning districts, the following are permitted: 
1. Non-Commercial Signs.  Non-commercial signs, subject to the following conditions: 
a. 	Standing signs accessory to a non-commercial building are permitted in all districts, provided that no more than two such signs are permitted for each such building use, plus one additional sign for each additional street where the lot fronts on more than one street, each such sign not to exceed 18 square feet in area; 
b. 	
No such sign shall be affixed to a tree or utility pole or otherwise erected in a public way except pursuant to Section 5.2.5 a) 1. c. below; 

c. 	
Non-commercial signs may be erected in the Town’s right of way adjacent to a private property by the property owner only if (a) there is no protrusion of the sign into the public walkway or roadway; (b) placement of the sign will not damage any plantings that are in the area; and (c) placement does not pose a hazard to passersby; 

d. 	
Non-commercial signs may be erected on other Town property only pursuant to such other administrative policy governing the placement of signs on Town property duly enacted by the Board of Selectmen; 

e. 	
The non-commercial sign complies with Section 5.2.3 and the applicable 
dimensional requirements for commercial signs in the same district; 


f. 	
Any such non-commercial sign must be no larger than the largest commercial sign permitted in the district in which it is located; 

g. 	
The number of non-commercial signs permitted on one property shall be no more than the number of commercial signs permitted on the property pursuant to this By-Law; however, non-commercial signs shall not count toward the allowable square footage or allowable number of signs on a parcel of land; 

h. 	
Non-commercial sandwich board signs are permitted, provided that they comply with the dimensional standards in Section 5.2.5 b) 7 a. through 7 e.; and 

i. 	
Non-commercial temporary signs may be in place for longer than 90 days, notwithstanding the definition of temporary signs. 


2. 	
One sign displaying the street number and/or name of the occupant of the premises not exceeding 150 square inches in area.  Such sign may include identification of a home occupation only if authorized on Special Permit from the Board of Appeals. 

3. 	
Temporary signs pertaining to the lease, sale, renovation, or maintenance of, or initial occupancy of a lot or building, provided that the aggregate area of all such signs on the premises does not exceed nine square feet.  Notwithstanding the definition of temporary signs, the following shall apply: 

a. 	
temporary signs pertaining to the lease or sale of a lot or building shall be removed within 10 days of the effective date of the lease or sale; and, 

b. 	
temporary signs pertaining to the renovation or maintenance of a lot or building shall be removed within 90 days of the sign being installed or when the renovation or maintenance is finished, whichever is less. 



4. 	
Signs at Town boundaries and within a street right-of-way, if authorized on Special Permit by the Board of Selectmen, not exceeding five square feet in sign area indicating the meetings of any Town civic organization. 


b) 	Business Districts.  In an area zoned as a Local Business or General Business District, the following are permitted in addition to signs permitted under Section 5.2.5 a). 
1. 	Attached Signs.  One sign for each exterior wall of an establishment if such wall faces a public way, private way, or contains a public entrance. 
• 	
Wall Mounted -The area of the sign may not exceed the lesser of 10% of the wall area of such establishment or 65 square feet. 

• 	
Projecting – The area of the sign may not exceed 12 square feet if projecting perpendicular to the wall. 

• 	
More than one sign -The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit authorizing more than one identifying sign on an exterior wall provided that the aggregate area of such signs does not exceed the limits set forth herein. 


2. 	
Directories.  One directory of the establishments occupying a building or identification of the principal such establishment at each public entrance to the building. Such directory shall not exceed 1.5 square feet in area for each establishment occupying the building. 

3. 	
Standing Signs.  The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for the erection of a standing sign. A Special Permit may be granted if the Board finds that the sign complies with the requirements and purposes of this By-Law.  The Special Permit shall specify the size, type, and location of the sign and impose such other terms and conditions as deemed necessary to promote the purposes of this By-Law. The size of the sign shall not exceed 15 square feet in area nor shall it exceed 5 feet in height above the ground. The Special Permit may require the sign to be renewed, provided that such renewal period does not exceed five years. A special permit shall not be required for the erection of a non-commercial standing sign. 

4. 	
Awnings. A metal or cloth awning, whether containing signage or not, may be located 7.5 feet or higher from the ground and may project over the sidewalk, more than three feet but in no event closer than two feet to the curb line, notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary. 

a. 	
Valance – A valance shall consist of the vertical surface of the awning that hangs perpendicular to the ground. 

i. 	The maximum height of the valance shall be 18 inches or less. 
ii. 	The maximum letter or symbol height on the valance shall be 14 inches or less, with a margin around the edge of the valance of 2 inches or greater. 
1. 	
If lettering and/or symbols are placed on the valance they shall only depict the company name and/or the property’s address. 

2. 	
Logos shall not be permitted on the valance. 


iii. 	The aggregate area of letter and/or symbols shall not exceed 60% of the area of the valance. 

b. 	
Slope – The slope of the awning shall consist of the angled surface of the awning that connects to the façade of the building and to the valance, whose height shall not exceed 50% of the height of the window or door that it hangs above. Where 




an awning hangs above a window and a door, the height of the awning shall not exceed the height of the window that it hangs above. 
i. 	If a wall sign either exists or is also proposed, no signage shall be permitted on the slope. 
ii. 	If lettering and/or symbols are placed on the valance, then signage located on the slope shall be restricted to one logo. 
iii. 	Signage on the slope shall not exceed 25% of the area of the slope, and shall have a margin around the edge of the slope of 2 inches or greater. 
c. 	Sides – Signage shall not be placed on the vertical surfaces of the awning that connects the façade of the building to the slope and to the valance. 
5. 	Marquee. A metal or cloth, roof-like projection extending from the façade of a building with a vertical surface or “face”’ greater than 18 inches in height, whether containing signage or not, the Marquee may be located 7.5 feet or higher from the ground and may project over the sidewalk more than three feet but in no event closer than two feet to the curb line, notwithstanding any provision herein to the contrary. 
a. 	
The height of a marquee shall not exceed more than 30% of the height of the window or door that it hangs above. Where a marquee hangs above a window and a door, the height of the marquee shall not exceed 30% of the height of the window that it hangs above. 

b. 	
If a wall sign either exists or is also proposed, neither a marquee structure nor sign shall be permitted. 

c. 	
A marquee shall be permitted in lieu of a wall sign, and signage on the marquee shall be subject to the following provisions: 


i. 	The signage shall be located on the face (the vertical surface of the marquee that hangs perpendicular to the ground). Signage shall not be permitted on the roof (the top of the marquee, whether sloped, angled, or flat), nor on the sides (the vertical surfaces of the marquee that connect the façade of the building, the roof, and the face), 
ii. 	The signage area may not exceed the lesser of 10% of the wall area of such establishment, 65 square feet, or 50% of the area of the face, and shall have a margin around the edge of the face of 2 inches or greater. 
6. 	
Window Signs. Window signs (permanent and/or temporary) shall be permitted, provided that the aggregate area of such signs does not exceed 20% of the area of the window glass. 

7. 	
Commercial Sandwich Board Signs.  One “A” frame Sandwich Board sign per business or building shall be permitted (including within the public right-of-way, sidewalk only, except in conditions of snow and/or ice), subject to the following conditions: 

a. 	
The sign shall only be displayed, adjacent to the buildings only, and not along the curb; 

b. 	
If placed on public property, the sign may not be placed without the prior written permission from the Board of Selectmen in accordance with the Town’s General Bylaws, Section 60-800 D, Public ways, sidewalks and rights-of-way; 

c. 	
The sign shall not exceed 24 inches in width and 48 inches in height, including supports and sign area; 

d. 	
The sign shall not protrude on the sidewalk in such a way as to obstruct pedestrian traffic or reduce the open sidewalk width to less than four feet; 

e. 	
The sign shall be free of sharp corners, protrusions and devices that could inadvertently cause injury; 

f. 	
Liability insurance coverage shall be carried, and evidence of same may be requested by the Building Inspector. Said insurance must cover personal injuries and property damage that may occur in such areas. Such coverage limits on liability insurance policy shall be in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000) per claim and two million dollars ($2,000,000) per occurrence for any and all claims which may arise, for any reason, as a result of the placement of such a sign. The business shall also require the insurer to give at least thirty (30) days written notice of termination, reduction or cancellation of the policies to the Town; and, 

g. 	
Commercial sandwich board signs shall only be displayed during business hours and shall be removed thereafter. 




5.2.6 Maintenance 
a) 	Every sign permitted hereunder shall be maintained in good condition. If a sign shows corrosion or deteriorated paint over 25% of the area of one side or if damage to a sign causes the loss of 10% of its surface or if a sign suffers damage or deterioration which creates a risk of harm to the person or property of another, it shall be repaired or removed. 
b) 	The Building Inspector may order the repair of a sign that is not secure, safe or in good state of repair by written notice to the owner.  If the defect in the sign is not corrected within 30 days of said written notice, the Building Inspector may order the removal of the sign. 
5.2.7 Nonconforming Signs 
Signs made nonconforming as a result of a change to this By-Law that are subsequently enlarged, redesigned, replaced, or altered in any way including repainting in a different color, shall comply immediately with all provisions of this By-Law and provided further that any such sign which has deteriorated to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed 35% of the replacement value of the sign at the time of replacement shall not be repaired or rebuilt or altered except to conform to the requirements of this By-Law. 
5.3 Landscaping 
5.3.1 Applicability 
Street, sideline, parking area, and district boundary plantings and screening shall be provided as specified below for any new nonresidential building, or Free-Standing Wireless Telecommunications Facility, or when any new building, addition, or change of use results in a parking increase of five or more spaces, or results in any loading or exterior storage area for equipment, materials, or supplies serving a nonresidential use. In performing Design and Site Plan Review under Section 7.3, the Planning Board may authorize alternatives to the following specifications, taking into consideration existing vegetation, topography, soils, and other site conditions, provided that equivalent screening, shading, and articulation are achieved. 
Note: §5.3.1 was amended by Article 29 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
5.3.2 Plantings 
a) 	Required plantings shall include both trees and evergreen shrubs, and preferably will include trees existing on the site.  To be credited towards meeting these requirements: 
• 	
Trees must be at least 2.5 inches caliper four feet above grade, be of a species common in the area, and be ones which reach an ultimate height of at least 30 feet. 

• 	
Shrubs must be of an evergreen species common in the area, and be at least 36 inches in height at the time of building occupancy, and reach an ultimate height of at least five feet, except half those heights for street planting areas. 


b) 	Plantings shall be provided at the rate of at least one tree per 40 linear feet of planting area length, and at least one shrub per three feet. Plantings preferably will be grouped, not evenly spaced, and shall be located or trimmed to avoid blocking egress visibility.  The planting area shall be at least three feet wide, unpaved except for access drives and walks, essentially perpendicular to the area. 
5.3.3 Requirements 
a) 	Street Planting Area. Street planting is required for nonresidential premises having a front yard setback of ten feet or more.  Required street planting shall be provided within ten feet of the street property line along the entire street frontage except at drives. 
b) 	Sideline Planting Area. Sideline planting is required for premises having a front yard setback of ten feet or more.  Required sideline planting shall be provided within five feet of the side lot line between the front lot line and the building setback (as built, not as required). 
c) 	Parking Area Plantings. Planting areas must comprise a minimum of 2% of the interior area of parking lots containing three or more rows of parking spaces.  In such cases, a minimum of one tree and four shrubs exclusive of perimeter plantings must be planted for every 3,500 square feet of parking lot. Planting areas must each contain not less than 30 square feet of unpaved soil area.  Trees and soil plots shall be so located as to provide visual relief and wind interruption within the parking area, and to assure safe patterns of internal circulation. 
d) 	District Boundary Planting Area. District boundary planting is required on any premises along the full length of any nonresidential district boundary abutting or extending into a Residential District and being developed for a use not permitted or allowed on Special Permit in that District, unless abutting property is determined by the Planning Board to be unbuildable or visually separated by topographic features. Required planting shall be located within ten feet of the boundary. 
5.3.4 Screening 
Any parking, loading, or storage area for equipment, materials, or supplies serving a nonresidential use or a Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility (including any appurtenant equipment storage building or structure), and any dumpster or similar trash receptacle shall be screened from any adjoining lot residentially used or zoned or in public use.  Screening shall consist of plantings as specified in Section 5.3.2 which, unless sufficiently dense to effectively obscure vision, must be supplemented with an opaque fence or wall at least five feet high. 
Note: §5.3.4 was amended by Article 30 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
5.3.5 Existing Vegetation 
Wherever possible, the above requirements shall be met by retention of existing plants. If located within 25 feet of a street, no existing tree of 6 inches caliper or greater (measured four feet above grade), dense hedgerow of four or more feet in both depth and height, or existing earth berm providing similar visual screening shall be removed or have grade changed more than one foot unless dictated by plant health, access safety, or identification of the premises.  
5.3.6 Exceptions 
Where plant materials as required would harmfully obstruct a scenic view, substitution of additional low level plantings which will visually define the street edge or property line may be authorized, provided that proposed buildings are also designed and located to preserve that scenic view. 
5.3.7 Maintenance 
All plant materials required by this By-Law shall be maintained in a healthful condition. Dead limbs shall be promptly removed, and dead plants shall be replaced at the earliest appropriate season. Any fences required for screening shall be properly maintained. 
5.3.8 Nonconforming Landscaping and Screening 
a) 	Any improvement along the property boundary, including landscaping, screening, and fencing, legally erected and conforming to the requirement of this By-Law when so erected, may continue to be maintained, even though as a result of changes to this By-Law the boundary improvements no longer conform to its requirements, provided that such boundary improvements shall not be enlarged, redesigned or altered except so as to make them conform to said requirements, and further provided that any such boundary improvements which have been destroyed or damaged to such an extent that the cost of restoration would exceed 50% of the replacement value of the boundary improvements at the time of destruction or damage shall not be repaired, rebuilt or altered, except so as to make said boundary improvements conform to the requirements of this By-Law. 
b) 	The exemption for nonconforming landscaping and screening herein granted shall terminate with respect to any boundary improvements which: 
1. 	
shall have been abandoned, or 

2. 	
shall not have been repaired or properly maintained for at least 60 days after notice to do so has been given by the Building Inspector.  


5.4 Environmental Controls 
5.4.1 Permitted Activity 
No activity (except for warning devices, temporary construction or maintenance work, parades, special events, or similar special circumstances) shall be permitted in any district unless the following requirements are met.  Applicants may be required to provide evidence of probable compliance, whether by example of similar facilities or by engineering analysis.  Issuance of a permit on the basis of that evidence shall certify the Town’s acceptance of the conformity of the basic structure and equipment, but future equipment changes and operating procedures must be such as to also comply with these requirements. 
5.4.2 Noise 
The requirement of the Belmont Noise By-Law (§60 Article 6 of the General Bylaws) must be met.  
5.4.3 Light and Glare 
a) 	Lighting fixture types are defined as follows: 
Type 1.  No light cutoff. 
Type 2. Luminaire shielded such that peak candlepower is at an angle of 75 degrees or less from vertical, and essentially no light is emitted above the horizontal. 
Type 3. Luminaire shielded such that total cutoff is less than 90 degrees from vertical, and no light source is in direct view of an observer 5 feet above the ground at any point off the premises. 
Diagram for Lighting Fixture Types 

b) 	Lighting limitations.  The following limitations shall be observed by all uses, unless granted a Special Permit under Section 5.4.8, upon determination by the SPGA that it is inherently infeasible for that use (e.g. public outdoor recreation) to meet these standards, and that all reasonable efforts have been made to avoid glare or light overspill onto residential premises. 
LIGHTING LIMITATIONS  DISTRICTS  
LB, GB, PL  Other  
Maximum Luminaire Mounting Height (feet) Fixture Type 1 Fixture Type 2 Fixture Type 3  20 30 40  10 15 20  
Maximum Off-Site Overspill (foot-candles) Fixture Type 1 Fixture Type 2 Fixture Type 3  0.3 1.0 3.0  0.2 0.3 0.5  

c) 	No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted. Processes, such as arc welding, which create light flashes shall be confined within buildings or shielded to prevent either glare or flashing reflected from the sky. 
d) 	An exterior lighting plan is required where compliance with these requirements is not apparent, and in all applications for a Special Permit for lighting, to include indication of location, mounting height, and orientation of luminaires, and sufficient technical information on the fixture to determine its type and resulting illumination levels. 
5.4.4 Air Quality 
a) 	Any use whose emissions are such as to cause it to be classified as a major new stationary source of air pollution, as defined by the U.S.E.P.A. under the Clean Air Act, and any use required to apply to DEP under 310 CMR 7.00 or to EPA under Section 112 of the Clean Air Act for permission to emit asbestos, benzene, beryllium, mercury, vinyl chloride, or radio nuclides shall be permitted only if granted a Special Permit under Section 5.4.8. 
Note: §5.4.4 a) was amended by Article 26 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
b) 	No emission of odorous gases or odoriferous matter in such quantities as to be offensive shall be permitted.  Any process which involves the creation and/or emission of any odors shall be provided with a secondary safeguard system. 
5.4.5 Hazardous Materials 
Use of premises involving one or more of the following may be allowed only if granted a Special Permit under Section 5.4.8: 
a) 	manufacturing as the principal use of the premises, if the products manufactured are either: 
1. 	
when wastes, regulated as hazardous under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 21C.; or 

2. 	
substances listed on the Massachusetts Substance List contained in 105 CMR 670.000, Appendix A; 


b) 	keeping of flammable fluids, solids, or gases in quantities exceeding four times that requiring licensure under 527 CMR 14.00, except for storage of fuel for consumption on the premises or by vehicles operated incidental to the principal use of the premises; 
c) 	any use for which licensure is required under 310 CMR 30.800 to transport, use, treat, store, or dispose of hazardous waste (but not those excluded under 310 CMR 30.801); 
d) 	any use whose waste generation requires the obtaining of an EPA identification number, except for small quantity generators, as defined under DEP Regulations, 310 CMR 30.351; 
Note: §5.4.5 d) was amended by Article 26 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
e) 	discharge to surface water requiring a Permit under 314 CMR 3.00 (“NPDES Permit”). 
5.4.6 Vibration 
No use shall be permitted which produces vibration which is discernible to the human sense of feeling (except as sound) at or beyond the boundaries of the premises for 3 minutes or more in any hour between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. or for 30 seconds or more in any one hour between 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.  Vibrations exceeding two-thirds the frequency/amplitude limitations established by the Board of Fire Prevention Regulations at 527 CMR 13.11 (18) shall, except for quarry activities within the jurisdiction of that Board, be deemed to be discernible without instruments. 
5.4.7 Electrical Disturbances 
No electrical disturbance shall be permitted which adversely affects the operation of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance. 
5.4.8 Special Permits 
a) 	Special Permit Granting Authority.  The Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for applications under Section 5.4 shall be the Board of Appeals, except that if another agency is designated under other provisions of this By-Law as SPGA for the use being applied for, that agency shall also act as SPGA under this Section. 
b) 	Submittals. Applicants shall submit such material, including technical analyses, as is reasonably necessary for the SPGA to make the determinations under (c) below. That may include, as germane, a lighting plan, documentation of air quality modeling, identification of any toxic or hazardous materials involved and substances to be emitted, a description of precautions, handling practices, monitoring, and recovery systems proposed, and, if appropriate, a hazard prevention and contingency response plan. 
c) 	Decision Criteria.  Special Permits shall be granted if the SPGA finds that in light of peculiarities of location or circumstance, the proposed use will not cause harm or adverse disturbance to the environment or to other premises, will not jeopardize health or safety either on or off-premises, and that either any control or safety systems being relied upon are fail-safe or redundant, or it has been demonstrated that there would be no adverse health or safety consequences beyond the boundaries of the premises in the event of system failure, in light of on-site decay, dilution, or dispersion. 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 6. SPECIAL REGULATIONS 
6.1 Swimming Pools 
Swimming pools must be compliant with all applicable State Building Codes (780 CMR: State Board of Building Regulations and Standards). 
Note: §6.1 was amended by Article 20 at the 2000 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.2 Earth Removal 
The removal from any premises of more than 50 cubic yards of sand, gravel, stone, topsoil, or similar materials within any 12 month period shall be permitted only incidental to construction on the premises under a current Building Permit or, if authorized on Special Permit by the Board of Appeals, incidental to landscaping or site improvement in cases where no Building Permit is involved. 
6.3A Public Building and School Conversion 
Note: §6.3A was amended by Article 5 at the 2005 Special Town Meeting. 
The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit for the conversion of public buildings or school buildings to multi-family residential use subject to the requirements and conditions set forth below. 
6.3A.1 Objectives 
The general objectives of permitting such conversions are: 
a) To provide for continued use of unused public buildings or public or private school 
buildings. b) To provide additional housing units, including diversity in type and affordability. 
Note: §6.3A.1 b) was amended by Article 26 at the 2003 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.3A.2 Buildings Eligible for Conversion A public building or public or private school building located in any zoning district is 
eligible for conversion to multi-family use, but only provided it meets all of the following tests: a) It was originally constructed not less than 20 years prior to the filing of the application 
for Special Permit. 
b) It was used for not less than 15 years for public or school purposes. 
c) It contains not less than 10,000 square feet in gross floor area 

6.3A.3 Special Permit Criteria 
Special Permits for building conversion shall be subject to the procedures and requirements of Section 7.3, Design and Site Plan Review.  The proposal must be found by the Board of Appeals to meet all of the following, as well as complying with Section 7.3 and the Special Permit criteria of Section 7.4.3: 
a) 	All the tests of Section 6.3A.2 have been met. 
b) 	The conversion will result in not fewer than five additional dwelling units. 
c) 	There will be provided a minimum of 1,200 square feet of lot area per dwelling unit. However, a minimum 1,000 square feet is allowed if the developer meets the following affordable housing requirements. The fifth housing unit and every third unit thereafter shall be an affordable housing unit; except that beginning with the 23rd unit, that 23rd unit and every fourth unit thereafter shall be an affordable housing unit. Nothing in this section shall preclude a developer from providing more affordable housing units than required under the provisions of this By-Law. 
Note: §6.3A.3 c) was amended by Article 26 at the 2003 Annual Town Meeting. 
d) 	Off-street parking shall be provided as required at Section 5.1. 
e) 	There will be no exterior enlargements or extensions of the building other than those necessary to comply with applicable health, building and fire codes except such incidental changes as may be approved by the Board of Appeals enhancing the residential building while being in harmony with the neighborhood. 
f) 	The proposed conversion will not create traffic hazards or volume greater than the capacity of the streets affected. 
g) 	The proposed conversion will not be detrimental or injurious to the neighborhood. 
h) 	Adequate and appropriate facilities will be provided for the proper operation of the converted building. 
i) 	The converted premises will be adequately landscaped and outdoor parking areas appropriately screened, all in harmony with the neighborhood. 
6.3A.4 Additional Conditions 
The Board of Appeals may attach such additional conditions and limitations to a Special Permit granted under this Section as may be necessary to protect the neighborhood surrounding the property, and as may be necessary to encourage the most appropriate use of the land and building to be converted. 
6.3B Public Building and School Conversion – 10,000 Square Feet or Less 
Note: §6.3B was adopted by Article 5 at the 2005 Special Town Meeting. §6.3B was amended by Article 18 at the 2007 Annual Town Meeting. 
Conversion of public buildings with 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or less to multi-family residential use shall be permitted by-right, subject to the requirements and conditions set forth below and those found in Section 7.3 of these By-Laws. 
6.3B.1 Objectives 
The general objectives of permitting such conversions are: 
a) To allow the re-use of surplus public buildings, 
b) To allow multi-family use at an appropriate scale and density, 
c) To promote the re-use and rehabilitation of historically significant structures, 
d) To promote transit oriented development, and 
e) To increase the diversity of housing. 
6.3B.2 Buildings Eligible for Conversion 
A public building of 10,000 square feet of gross floor area or less is eligible for conversion 

to multi-family use by-right, subject to Design and Site Plan Review by the Planning Board, but only provided the following criteria are fulfilled: a) The building was originally constructed more than 20 years prior to the filing of the application for Design and Site Plan Review. b) The building was used for more than 15 years for public or school purposes. c) The building contains 10,000 square feet or less in gross floor area. 
6.3B.3 Application 
The Planning Board shall hear all petitions for multi-family use through the Design and 
Site Plan Review process.  All applications shall follow the guidelines and submittal 
requirements found in Section 7.3 of these By-Laws. 

6.3B.4 Approval Criteria 

Applications for the conversion of a public building to multi-family use shall comply with 
the following criteria as well as the applicable objectives listed within Section 7.3: 
a) Density shall not exceed three (3) dwelling units. 
b) Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of not less than 1.5 spaces per unit to a 

maximum of two (2) spaces per unit. For proposed increases beyond 1.5 spaces per unit, the Planning Board shall determine that the spaces can be created within the footprint of the building (i.e. no reduction in the existing open space on the lot) or that they can be provided off-site, provided that the applicant can exhibit long-term control over these spaces. 
c) 	Only one (1) and two (2) bedroom units or a mix of these are allowed. 
d) 	If applicable, the façade(s) of any building that is determined to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places will be appropriately rehabilitated, as provided for in the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation (36 CFR Part 67). 
e) 	The conversion to multi-family use shall comply with the provisions of Section 6.10, Inclusionary Housing of these By-Laws. 
f) 	Open space surrounding existing buildings shall be maintained and any new outdoor parking areas shall be screened at a minimum with evergreens, all in harmony with the neighborhood.  This screening shall be five (5) feet in height at the time of building occupancy and be planted not more than six (6) feet on center, provided that adequate sight lines for pedestrians and motor vehicles are maintained. 
6.4 Elderly Housing 
“Elderly Housing” as authorized in Section 3.3, Schedule of Use Regulations, shall comprise of multi-family dwellings operated by the Belmont Housing Authority (BHA) for occupancy by elderly persons or elderly families (as defined in Section 26J, Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 121 (Ter. Ed.) or 42 U.S. Code, Section 1402, both as amended, and equivalent provisions of law from time-to-time in force). 
6.5 Cluster Development 
The Board of Appeals may grant a Special Permit for any tract of land in a Single Residence District to be developed as a Cluster Development subject to the requirements and conditions set forth below: 
6.5.1 Objectives 
The general objectives of Cluster Developments are to encourage: 
a) 	Preservation of open space for park, recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes. 
b) 	Better utilization of natural features of the land through a greater flexibility of design. 
c) 	More efficient provision of municipal services. 
d) 	Creating opportunities for affordable housing. 
Note: §6.5.1 d) was amended by Article 26 at the 2003 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.5.2 Tract Size 
The minimum tract areas upon which Cluster Developments may be allowed in the various Single Residence Districts are: 
Single Residence A -180,000 square feet 
Single Residence B -120,000 square feet 
Single Residence C -84,000 square feet 
Single Residence D -180,000 square feet 
6.5.3 Number of Dwelling Units 
a) 	The maximum number of dwelling units allowed within any Cluster Development shall be the number determined by dividing 85% of the area of the tract, exclusive of any wetlands or floodplain, by the minimum lot size permitted in the Single Residence District(s) within which the Cluster is located. 
b) 	The maximum number of dwelling units allowed within the Cluster Development shall be the number determined by dividing 100% of the area of the tract, exclusive of any wetlands or flood plain, by 95% of the minimum lot size permitted in the single residence district(s) within which the cluster is located, provided that where five (5) or more housing units will be developed, the Board of Appeals determines that the developer complies with the following affordable housing requirements.  The fifth housing unit and every third unit thereafter shall be an affordable housing unit; except that beginning with the 23rd unit, that 23rd unit and every fourth unit thereafter shall be an affordable housing unit. 
Note: §6.5.3 b) was amended by Article 26 at the 2003 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.5.4 Open Land 
a) 	The area of open land shall equal at least 25% of the total area of the Cluster Development tract.  Such land shall have a shape, dimension, character and location suitable to assure its use for park, recreation, conservation or agricultural purposes by all the residents of the Cluster. Provision shall be made so that the open land shall be readily accessible to the owners and occupants of the lots in the Cluster, and owned by a corporation, association or trust whose owners or beneficiaries are all the owners and occupants of the lots, or by the Town, or otherwise as the Board of Appeals may direct in accordance with Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A. 
b) 	In all cases, a perpetual restriction of the type described in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 184, Section 31 (including future amendments thereto and corresponding provisions of future laws) running to or enforceable by the Town shall be recorded in respect to such land. Such restriction shall provide that the open land shall be retained in perpetuity for one or more of the following uses:  conservation, agriculture, recreation or park.  Such restriction shall be in such form and substance as the Board of Appeals shall prescribe and may contain such additional restrictions on development and use of the open land as the Board of Appeals may deem appropriate after considering any comments which the Conservation Commission may choose to submit. 
c) 	If a Special Permit is issued, the Board of Appeals may impose as a condition that 
the open land shall be conveyed by the applicant free of any mortgage interest or 
security interest and subject to a perpetual restriction of the type described in Section 
6.5.4 a) prior to the issuance by the Building Inspector of a Building Permit for any dwelling or structure. 
6.5.5 Dimensional Regulations 
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, a Cluster Development tract shall comply with the frontage, setback, distance between buildings and building heights set forth in the Schedule of Dimensional Regulations contained in Section 4.2 of this By-Law.  If the Cluster Development is divided into one or more individual lots, the frontage of each lot on a street or on a private road or way within the Cluster Development tract shall be as specified by the Board of Appeals consistent with fire safety, aesthetics and the character of the Cluster Development tract. 
6.5.6 Attached Dwelling Units 
The Board of Appeals may in its discretion allow a Cluster Development to consist in whole or in part of attached dwelling units if such units are not inconsistent with the aesthetics and physical appearance of the other buildings in the immediate vicinity. 
6.5.7 Limitation of Subdivision 
No lot shown on a plan for which a Permit is granted under this Section may be further subdivided and a notation to this effect shall be shown on the plan. 
6.5.8 Design and Site Plan Review 
Cluster Developments, whether or not containing attached dwelling units, are subject to the Design and Site Plan Review procedures and requirements of Section 7.3 of this By-Law. 
6.5.9 Amendments 
Following the granting by the Board of Appeals of a Special Permit under this Section, it may, upon application and for good cause shown after notice and a public hearing as required for granting a Special Permit, amend the plan solely to make changes in lot lines shown on the plan, provided, however, that no such amendment shall: 
a) 	Grant any reduction in the size or change in location of the open land; 
b) 	Grant any change in the layout of the ways; 
c) 	Increase the number of lots; or 
d) 	Decrease the dimensional requirements of any lot below the minimum dimensions permitted by this By-Law. 
6.6 Floodplain District 
Note: §6.6 was adopted under Article 26 at the 2004 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.6.1 Purposes 
The purposes of this Section are to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare, to protect human life and property from the hazards of periodic flooding, to preserve natural flood control characteristics, to maintain the flood storage capacity of the floodplain, and to bring the Town of Belmont into compliance with the National Flood Insurance Program (42 U.S. Code 4001-4128), and regulations adopted pursuant thereto. 
6.6.2 Definitions 
Note: §6.6.2 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. 
Unless otherwise defined below, the terms used throughout this Section shall have the meaning as defined by 780 CMR. 
Area of Special Flood Hazard -The land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A, AO, AH, A1-30, AE, A99, V1-30, VE, or V. 
Development -Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations. 
District -Floodplain District. 
Flood Boundary and Floodway Map -An official map of a community issued by FEMA that depicts, based on detailed analyses, the boundaries of the 100-year and 500-year floods and the 100-year floodway. (For maps done in 1987 and later, the floodway designation is included on the FIRM.) 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM) -An official map of a community issued by FEMA where the boundaries of the flood and related erosion areas having special hazards have been designated as Zone A or AE. 
Note: §6.6.2 was amended by Article 24 at the 2010 Annual Town Meeting. 
§6.6.2 was amended by Article 28 at the 2006 Annual Town Meeting. 

Flood Insurance Study -An examination, evaluation, and determination of flood hazards, and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of flood-related erosion hazards. 
Floodway -The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation. 
Regulatory Floodway see Floodway. 
Special Flood Hazard Area -An area having special flood-related erosion hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99, AH, V, V1-30 or VE. 
Substantial Damage -Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to it’s before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
6.6.3 Use Regulations 
a) 	The Floodplain District shall be considered as overlying other districts. Any uses permitted or allowed by Special Permit in the portions of the districts so overlaid shall continue to be permitted or allowed by Special Permit, subject to the provisions of this Section. 
b) 	Except as provided below, the following shall be prohibited in the Floodplain District: 
1. 	
New buildings or structures. 

2. 	
Filling, dumping, excavation, removal, or transfer of any earth material which will restrict or increase flood water flow or reduce the flood water storage capacity. 


c) 	The following shall be permitted in the Floodplain District: 
1. 	
Land use for conservation of water, plants, and wildlife. 

2. 	
Recreation, including play areas, wildlife reserves, golf, boating, and fishing where otherwise legally permitted. 

3. 	
Grazing, farming, forestry, and nurseries. 

4. 	
Proper operation and maintenance of dams and other water control structures, including temporary alteration of water level for emergency purposes. 

5. 	
Addition or alteration to an existing structure, but if constituting a substantial improvement (see definition), only if authorized by Special Permit from the Board of Appeals. 


6.6.4 Requirements 
All development in this District, including structural and nonstructural activities, whether permitted by-right or allowed by Special Permit, must be in compliance with the following: 
• 	
780 CMR 120.G of the Massachusetts State Building Code, which addresses construction in floodplains and floodways; 

• 	
310 CMR 10.00, Wetlands Protection, Department of Environmental Protection; 

• 	
310 CMR 13.00, Inland Wetlands Restriction, Department of Environmental Protection; 

• 	
Title 5, minimum requirements for the subsurface disposal of sanitary sewage, Department of Environmental Protection. 


Note: §6.6.4 was amended by Article 24 at the 2010 Annual Town Meeting. §6.6.4 was amended by Article 26 at the1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.6.5 Floodway Requirements 
a) 	Floodway Data: In Zone A and Zone AE, along watercourses that have not had a regulatory floodway designated, the best available federal, state, local or other floodway data shall be used to prohibit encroachments in floodways which would result in any increase in flood levels within the community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
Note: §6.6.5 a) was amended by Article 24 at the 2010 Annual Town Meeting. 
b) 	In the regulatory floodways designated on the Belmont FIRM or Flood Boundary and Floodway Map no encroachments in the floodway shall be permitted which would result in any increase in the base flood discharge level. 
c) 	Base Flood Elevation Data: Base Flood Elevation Data is required for subdivision proposals or other developments greater than 50 lots or five (5) acres, whichever is the lesser, within unnumbered A Zones. 
6.6.6 Special Permit 
Upon their receipt, applications for Special Permits in the Floodplain District shall be referred to the Planning Board, Board of Health, and Conservation Commission for their review and comment. In a riverine situation, the applicant shall notify the NFIP State Coordinator, Massachusetts Office of Water Resources and the NFIP Program Specialist in FEMA Region I of any proposed alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Special Permits for substantial improvements within the Floodplain District shall be approved only upon the Board of Appeals making the following determinations: 
a) 	All requirements of Section 6.6, Floodplain District, are complied with. 
b) 	No substantial increase in hazard to occupants of the premises or to others will result from the proposed improvements. 
c) 	Reasonable efforts have been made, relative to the scale of the proposed improvements, to reduce any existing hazard or noncompliance with these requirements. 
6.6.7 Waiver 
If satisfied, based on a Letter of Map Amendment or Letter of Map Revision obtained by the applicant from FEMA, that the site of a proposed development or improvement is above the Base Flood Elevation shown on the FIRM, the Building Commissioner may waive compliance with this Section, and a copy of such waiver shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 
Note: §6.6.7 was amended by Article 31 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.7 Motor Vehicle Service Stations 
Motor Vehicle Service Stations shall be granted a Special Permit only in conformity with the following: 
6.7.1 Location 
No location shall be approved if a vehicular entrance or exit will be so located as to create an unusual hazard. Sight distance shall be at least 250 feet in each travel direction. No vehicular entrance or exit will be so located so as to cross a major pedestrian flow, such as on sidewalks servicing churches, schools, recreation areas, or compact retail districts. 
6.7.2 Egress Design 
Driveway sidelines shall be separated from the sidelines of intersecting streets and other driveways on the premises by not less than 40 feet and from other lot lines by not less than 10 feet.  Entrances and exits together shall occupy not more than 40% of the lot frontage, and shall be clearly channeled through use of curbed planting areas or similar devices. 
6.7.3 Queues 
There shall be adequate space off-street for not fewer than two vehicles to await service per filling lane. 
6.7.4 Setbacks 
No service building shall be located within 40 feet of a street line, and no pump or other dispensing device, movable sign or display, or temporary or permanent storage of merchandise shall be located within 20 feet of a street line. 
6.7.5 Parking 
Any parking or vehicle storage proposed in excess of the requirements of Section 5.1.2 must be justified in applying for a Special Permit, and may be subject to setback and screening requirements. 
6.8 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
Note: §6.8 was adopted under Article 31 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.8.1 
Use Regulations 

No Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be permitted to be constructed unless such Facility has completed Design and Site Plan Review pursuant to Section 6.8.4 and 

7.3
 and, if required by Section 3.3, a Special Permit has been issued pursuant to Sections 6.8.5 and 7.4.  No Wireless Telecommunications Facility, other than an Interior Wireless Telecommunications Facility, shall be permitted in any Historic District subject to the provisions of §40 Article 3-315 of the General Bylaws of the Town. 


6.8.2 Dimensional Regulations 
Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (d) of this subsection, all Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be required to comply with all applicable requirements set forth in Section 4. 
a) 	No Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be permitted to be located within 500 feet of any Historic District subject to the provisions of Article 15 of the General By-Laws of the Town. 
b) 	Except as otherwise permitted in this subsection, no Wireless Telecommunications Facility or appurtenant equipment storage building or structure, other than an Interior Wireless Telecommunications Facility, shall be permitted to be located within 50 feet of a single-or two-family dwelling. 
c) 	A Wireless Telecommunications Facility or appurtenant equipment storage building or structure that is accessory to a principal use other than a single-or two-family dwelling, may be permitted to be located within 50 feet of a single-or two-family dwelling; provided, however, that, if such dwelling is located within a Single Residence or General Residence District, no such Facility, building or structure shall be permitted to be located within 25 feet of such dwelling. 
d) 	No Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall exceed 100 feet in height. 
6.8.3 Performance Standards 
a) 	All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall, at all times, be in compliance with all applicable standards of Federal law, State regulations including, but not limited to the Regulations of the Department of Public Heath, 105 CMR 122.000, the State Building Code and the published standards of the Electronic Industries Association. 
1. 	
Prior to any significant change to an approved Wireless Telecommunications Facility or associated equipment, notice of such change shall be given to the Building Inspector, together with documentation or other evidence showing that the Facility will continue to be in compliance with such standards. 

2. 	
At least annually, the operator of an approved Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall certify to the Building Inspector that the Facility continues to be in compliance with such standards. 


b) 	Except as otherwise authorized by the Board of Appeals, a Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be completely fenced for security within an area no greater than 25 feet in radius from the base of the Facility tower, to a height of 6 feet. Such fencing shall be compatible with the character of the property and neighboring properties, and shall not be of barbed wire or razor wire. 
c) 	All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be constructed utilizing materials colors and textures that minimize the visual impact of the proposed Facility on the Town, the District and neighborhood in which the Facility is located, and adjoining properties. A Façade-Mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall utilize materials, colors and textures that minimize the viewer’s ability to distinguish the Facility from the building surface adjacent to it. Where appropriate, plantings and screening shall also be utilized to minimize such visual impact. 
d) 	Except as specifically authorized by a Special Permit or required by the U.S. Federal Aviation Administration, no Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall incorporate any artificial exterior lighting. 
e) 	No Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall incorporate any signs except for those essential for the provision of safety or ownership information.  Each Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall incorporate a sign, approved by the Planning Board, providing essential emergency response information including, at a minimum, a telephone number that can be used to contact the Facility operator’s representative at all times. 
f) 	Any Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be designed so that, in the event of a structural failure, such Facility shall collapse and fall entirely within the boundaries of the lot on which it is located. Such design shall be certified by a professional engineer. 
g) 	Except in an emergency, no servicing of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility or associated equipment, other than an Interior Wireless Telecommunications Facility, shall occur except during hours authorized by Special Permit. 
h) 	All Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall comply with §60 Article 6 of the General Bylaws of the Town of Belmont, governing sources of noise. 
6.8.4 Submission Requirements for Design and Site Plan Review 
In addition to the documents required to be submitted pursuant to Section 7.3, each application for Design and Site Plan Review of a Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be accompanied by ten copies of the following: 
a) 	Copies of all required franchises, licenses or other federal, state or local permits required for the operation of the proposed Facility or appurtenant equipment; 
b) 	Plans and elevations demonstrating compliance with the Dimensional Regulations set forth in Section 6.8.2; and 
c) 	Examples or renderings of the materials, colors and textures proposed to be used. 
6.8.5 Special Permit Standards and Submission Requirements 
a) 	Submission Requirements for Special Permits 
Each application for a Special Permit for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be accompanied by fifteen (15) copies of the following: 
1. 	
The owner’s deed to the lot or lots upon which the Facility is proposed to be located, together with evidence of the Applicant’s control of the Facility’s proposed location. 

2. 	
An inventory of existing and approved Wireless Telecommunications Facilities owned or operated by the Applicant and located within two miles of the Belmont town line, as well as Facilities for which an application for approval has been filed with any governing authority, together with maps of existing or expected service coverage from such Facilities. 

3. 	
Evidence of the need for the proposed Facility and of how the proposed Facility addressed that need. 

4. 	
For any proposed Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility, evidence that the need for such a Facility cannot be addressed by a Facility other than a Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility. 

5. 	
A discussion of the feasibility of addressing such need with a Wireless 
Telecommunications Facility located on municipally-owned property. 


6. 	
For any proposed Freestanding Wireless Telecommunications Facility, evidence that a crane, balloon or other temporary representation of the height of the Facility has been brought to the site and kept in place for not less than 72 consecutive hours, together with photographs of such representation taken from a sufficient number of locations suitable for evaluating the visual impact of the proposed Facility on the Town, the District and neighborhood in which the Facility is proposed to be located, and adjoining properties. 

7. 	
Proposed hours during which the Facility and associated equipment may be serviced, and a description of regular maintenance procedures. 


b) 	Special Permit Standards 
Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7.4.3, a Special Permit for a Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall be issued if, upon submission of all required materials and documents and compliance with the procedures set forth in Section 7.4.4, the Board of Appeals finds that: 
1. 	
The proposed Wireless Telecommunications Facility is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the public; and 

2. 	
The interests of the public convenience or welfare have been appropriately balanced against the interest of the Town, the District and neighborhood in which the Wireless Telecommunications Facility is proposed to be located, and adjoining properties. 


Such Special Permit shall be subject to any limitations imposed pursuant to Section 7.4.5. 
c) 	Factors to Consider in Special Permit Decision 
In making any Special Permit decision pursuant to this Section, the Board of Appeals shall consider, in addition to the preferred qualities set forth in Section 7.4, the following: 
1. 	
The height of the proposed Facility; 

2. 	
The proposed Facility’s proximity to residential structures; 

3. 	
The nature and uses of adjacent and nearby properties; 

4. 	
Surrounding topography including, in particular, features that affect the provision of wireless telecommunication services; 

5. 	
Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 

6. 	
The availability of existing structures and buildings so as to avoid the need for Freestanding Wireless Telecommunication Facilities; 

7. 	
The good faith efforts of the Applicant to locate the proposed Facility on an existing structure or building or to use a less visual obtrusive site or Facility design; 

8. 	
The availability of alternative technology not requiring the siting of the proposed Facility or permitting the utilization of a less obtrusive site or Facility design; 

9. 	
Any wireless telecommunications service benefits to the Town and its residents; 

10. 
The good faith efforts of the Applicant to avoid making the proposed Facility a principal use of the lot; and, 

11. 
Potential interference with other electronic devices within the Town. 


Note: §6.8.5 c) was amended by Article 31 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.8.6 Removal of Abandoned Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
Any Wireless Telecommunications Facility that is not operated, or that is not in compliance with Section 6.8.3 a) 2). for a continuous period of six months shall be considered abandoned, and the Building Inspector may, by appropriate notice sent by certified mail, order that such Facility be removed within 30 days. At the time of removal, the Facility and all associated debris shall be removed from the premises. 
Any Special Permit issued pursuant to Section 6.8.5 shall require the holder of such Special Permit to post a bond or other surety, specifically approved by Town Counsel, in an amount sufficient to guarantee the removal of the Facility in accordance with this Section and the lawful disposal of any components thereof.  In the event that the posted amount does not cover the cost of such removal and disposal, the Town may place a lien upon the premises covering the difference in cost. 
6.9 Affordable Housing 
Note: §6.9 was adopted under Article 2 at the 1999 Special Town Meeting. §6.9 was amended by Article 2 at the 2006 Special Town Meeting. 
The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for any tract of land identified as Zone 6, General Residential District, on the McLean District Zoning Map, which Special Permit shall allow: 
a) 	the construction and use of an apartment house or other multi-family dwellings which contain at least 25% “affordable units” as defined in Section 6.10.2 and which contain up to 40 dwelling units overall; and 
b) 	the modification of any intensity or dimensional requirement set forth in Section 4.2 or Section 4.3 as necessary in the determination of the Planning Board to permit such development to contain the greatest practical number of affordable units, but in no event so as to allow more than 40 dwelling units overall. 
6.10 Inclusionary Housing 
Note: §6.10 was adopted under Article 17 at the 2013 Special Town Meeting. 
6.10.1 Purpose 
The purposes of this Section are to encourage the expansion and upgrade of the Town's affordable housing stock, in order to provide for a full range of housing choices for households of all incomes, ages and sizes; to prevent the displacement of low-to moderate-income Town residents; to increase the production of Affordable Units to meet existing and anticipated employment needs within the Town; to establish standards and guidelines in order to implement the foregoing; and to meet the requirements of MGL c. 40B and the Local Initiative Program. 
6.10.2 Definitions 
For purposes of this Section 6.10 of the Zoning By-Law, capitalized words shall mean as defined elsewhere in this By-Law or as defined below: 
Affordable Housing Trust Fund -An account established and operated for the exclusive purpose of creating or preserving affordable housing in the Town.  The Affordable Housing Trust Fund may be used for the following purposes within the Town: the purchase and improvement of land and Housing Units for the development of new and/or rehabilitated Housing Units for purchase or rental by Qualified Affordable Housing Purchasers or Tenants or to preserve existing affordable housing.  Expenditures from the Affordable Housing Trust Fund shall be authorized by a majority vote of the Belmont Housing Trust. 
Affordable Housing Unit -A Housing Unit that by Deed Restriction is and shall remain affordable to and occupied by a Qualified Affordable Housing Unit Purchaser or Tenant, and is eligible for inclusion in the Chapter 40B Subsidized Housing Inventory through the Local Initiative Program. 
Belmont Resident – Since there is a “local preference” for some of the Affordable Housing Units, the people or households that may qualify for the local preference must be Belmont Residents, defined as follows: 
a. 	
an individual or family maintaining a primary residence within the Town of Belmont; or 

b. 	
an individual who is employed at least 30 hours per week within the Town of Belmont; or 

c. 	
a parent or guardian with children attending the Town of Belmont Public Schools. 


Comparable Unit -When used with respect to quality, character, and room size, means that there are sufficient features in common between the Affordable Housing Unit and the Market Rate Housing Unit so as to render the units similar in nature.  Moreover, while the actual design or finishes provided in the Affordable Housing Units versus the Market Rate Housing Unit may differ in a non-material fashion and still constitute Comparable Units, the same amenities proposed for the Market Rate Housing Unit must be provided for the Affordable Housing Units, including without limitation full kitchen, full bath, and parking. Further, the actual room size for the Affordable Housing Unit may not differ in any significant manner to that of the Market Rate Housing Unit. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, when used with respect to external appearance, location and bedroom distribution, means that the external appearance of the Affordable Housing Unit and the Market Rate Housing Unit must be so similar in nature so as to render them indistinguishable while the location of the Affordable Housing Units and the bedroom distribution of such units must be no different from that of the Market Rate Housing Unit. 
Deed Restriction -A provision, acceptable in form and substance to the Town of Belmont, in a deed to real property that runs with the land in perpetuity or for the longest period of time allowed by law, so as to be binding on and enforceable against any person claiming an interest in the property.  Any Restriction created under this Section 6.10 shall survive any bankruptcy, insolvency, foreclosure, or other action, and shall not be subject to nullification for any reason.  Additionally, the Restriction shall provide that in the event that any affordable rental unit is converted to a condominium unit, the condominium unit shall be restricted in perpetuity to ensure that it remains affordable to households in the same income range as prior to the condominium conversion. 
Development -A single parcel or set of contiguous parcels of land held in common ownership for which one or more building permits will be sought within a 24 month period of time. The number of Housing Units to be counted from any project shall be calculated as the net increase in the number of Housing Units as compared to the number of Housing Units in existence on such land as of the date that the building permit application is filed with the Town of Belmont Office of Community Development. 
Dwelling Unit -A building or portion of a building intended as living quarters for a single family, having a single set of kitchen facilities (a stove plus either or both refrigerator and sink) not shared with any other unit; or quarters for up to five persons in a dormitory, congregate dwelling, or similar group dwelling. 
Housing Unit ­
a. 	
A Dwelling Unit; or 

b. 	
A habitable unit within a senior or assisted living facility. 


Market Rate Housing Unit – Housing Units available to the general public on the open market, without price restrictions or consumer income limitations. 
Median Income – the mid-point of incomes of households in the Boston Standard Metropolitan Statistical Area, adjusted for household size, as determined annually by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and regardless of housing type or ownership. 
Mixed-Use Residential Development -A Development consisting of a combination of residential and non-residential uses. 
Qualified Affordable Housing Unit Purchaser or Tenant -A household with total annual income that does not exceed eighty percent (80%) of the Median Income. 
Residential Development – A Development consisting exclusively of Housing Units. 
6.10.3 Applicability 
This Section 6.10 shall apply to any Development with a residential component that requires a Special Permit pursuant to Section 3.3 of the Zoning By-Laws, Schedule of Use Regulations, or pursuant to any overlay district. 
6.10.4 Requirements 
1) 	Residential Developments that result in six (6) or more new Housing Units shall provide Affordable Housing Units as outlined in the table below: 
Size of Residential Development  Percent of Affordable Housing Units Required for Residential Developments  
6 to 12 Housing Units  10%  
13 to 40 Housing Units  12%  
More than 40 Housing Units  15%  

2)  Mixed-Use Residential Developments that result in ten (10) or more new Housing Units shall provide ten percent (10%) of the Housing Units within the subject Development as Affordable Housing Units.  
3)  Where the calculation of Affordable Housing Units results in a fractional unit greater than one-half (.5), the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole unit. Where the calculation results in a fractional unit less than or equal to one-half (.5), the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole unit.  

4) 	Rental Developments with units for households at 50% or less of Median Income may reduce the total number of required Affordable Housing Units by an amount equal to the number of units available to households at 50% or less of Median Income, or by 25% of the Affordable Housing Units required, whichever is less. 
5) 	Except for cash payments permitted in Section 6.10.5 with respect to for-sale Developments, Affordable Housing Units shall be provided within the Development that requires the Affordable Housing Units. 
6.10.5 Cash Payment Option for For-Sale Affordable Units 
1) 	The applicant for a Residential Development of 6 to 9 for-sale new Housing Units may choose to make a cash payment to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund in lieu of providing any Affordable Housing Units.  Such cash payment shall be equal to five percent (5%) of the value of each Market Rate Housing Unit in the Development. 
2) 	The applicant for a Development of 10 or more for-sale new Housing Units may appeal to the Board of Appeals (ZBA) to make a cash payment to the Affordable Housing Trust Fund in lieu of providing any Affordable Housing Units required under this Section 6.10. Such cash payment shall be equal to five percent (5%) of the value of each Market Rate Housing Unit in the Residential Development resulting in the Affordable Housing Unit or three percent (3%) of the value of each Market Rate Housing Unit in the Mixed-Use Residential Development resulting in the Affordable Housing Unit.  In making its decision, the ZBA shall seek a recommendation from the Belmont Housing Trust and consider such recommendation on this appeal. 
6.10.6 Selection of Qualified Affordable Housing Unit Purchasers or Tenants 
The selection of Qualified Affordable Housing Unit Purchasers or Tenants shall be pursuant to the Local Initiative Program and shall be administered as follows: 
a. 	
The selection process shall include a plan for marketing of the Affordable Housing Units created under this Section 6.10.  The duration and design of this plan shall reasonably inform all those seeking affordable housing, both within and outside the Town, of the availability of such units. 

b. 	
Belmont Residents shall be given preference for seventy percent (70%) of the Affordable Housing Units created under this Section 6.10. 

c. 	
Owners of Developments may sell or lease Affordable Housing Units to the Town of Belmont, the Belmont Housing Trust, the Belmont Housing Authority, or to a private nonprofit entity serving Belmont for the purpose of providing affordable housing opportunities within the Town, in order that such entity carry out the steps needed to market the Affordable Housing Units and manage the choice of buyers or renters. 


6.10.7 Timing of Construction 
1) 	Occupancy permits for any new Market-Rate Housing Units or nonresidential space shall be issued at an equal ratio of occupancy permits for required Affordable Housing Units. 
2) 	Affordable Housing Units shall be dispersed throughout the building(s) and shall be comparable to Market-Rate Housing Units. Affordable Housing Units provided under terms of this Section 6.10 shall be provided on-site in the subject Development. 
For an Affordable Housing Unit within a senior or assisted living facility, a comparable Affordable Housing Unit shall include the provision of mandatory living services. 
3) 	All documents necessary to ensure compliance with this Section 6.10 and the Local Initiative Program provisions shall be subject to the review and approval of the Special Permit Granting Authority and Town Counsel. Such documents shall be a condition of the Special Permit and executed prior to the issuance of any Certificate of Occupancy. 
6.10.8 Rental Development Annual Oversight and Monitoring 
1) 	There shall be a monitoring agent for rental Developments with Affordable Housing Units, to be agreed upon by the owner of the Development and the Special Permit Granting Authority. 
2) 	The owner shall be responsible for all payments charged by, or related to, the monitoring agent. 
3) 	An annual independent compliance audit shall be submitted to the Town by the monitoring agent to insure compliance with this Section 6.10 and the Local Initiative Program provisions. 
6.10.9 General Provisions 
1) 	Enforcement of this Section 6.10, as it applies to all Developments, shall be the responsibility of the Town of Belmont Inspector of Buildings. 
2) 	Provision of accessible Housing Units shall be as determined by Federal Regulations. Standards for accessible units shall comply with 24 C.F.R. Section 
8.32. 
3) 	This Section 6.10 shall not apply to the rehabilitation of any building or structure, all of or substantially all of which is destroyed or damaged by fire or other casualty or a natural disaster; provided, however, no rehabilitation nor repair shall increase the density, bulk, or size of any such building or structure which previously existed prior to the damage or destruction thereof except in conformance with this Section 6.10. 
4) 	This Section 6.10 shall not apply to Developments under Massachusetts General Laws (MGL) Chapter 40B. 
6.10.10 Severability, Conflict with Other By-Laws 
1) 	If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provision of this Section 6.10 invalid, the remainder of this Section shall not be affected thereby.  The invalidity of any section or sections, or parts of any section or sections, of this Section shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or parts of sections or the other By-Laws of the Town of Belmont. 
2) 	Nothing contained in this Section 6.10 shall be construed to apply to the use of land or structures for religious or educational purposes if doing so would violate the applicable provisions of M.G.L. Chapter 40A, Section 3. 
3) 	To the extent this Section 6.10 is silent on a particular issue or conflicts with the Local Initiative Program, the requirements of the Local Initiative Program shall govern. 
6.11 Historic Accessory Building Preservation 
Note: §6.11 was adopted under Article 31 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.11.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to promote the preservation of unique Historic Accessory 
Buildings by permitting their adaptive reuse for uses that may not otherwise be permitted 
under this Zoning By-Law, thereby making their functional preservation and restoration feasible. 
6.11.2 Definition 
A “Historic Accessory Building” is an accessory building such as a free-standing barn, 
greenhouse or carriage house built before 1921, which is located on the same lot as the 
principal building to which it is accessory, and which is either: 
a) 	listed on the Inventory of the Historic and Archaeological Assets of the Commonwealth as maintained by the Massachusetts Historic Commission; or 
b) 	listed on the National Register or State Register of Historic Places; or 
c) 	specifically designated as a “Historic Accessory Building” by the Belmont Historic District Commission, using the criteria for evaluation established for determining eligibility for the National Register of Historic Places. 
6.11.3 Applicability 
The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for the reuse of a Historic Accessory 
Building in any residential district of the Town, allowing the adaptation of such Building 
for use as a home occupation, or for one accessory dwelling unit. 
Note: §6.11.3 was amended by Article 32 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.11.4 Procedure 
a) 	An Application for a Special Permit under this Section shall comply with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 7.4 of this Zoning By-law, and the Planning Board’s Special Permit Regulations. 
b) 	Upon receipt of an Application, the Planning Board shall forward a copy of the Application to the Historic District Commission for its review and recommendations concerning the proposed exterior treatments of the Building, including such things as windows, roofing and siding materials, and landscaping. Such recommendations shall include: 
1) 	the Commission’s assessment as to whether the proposed reuse and associated exterior alterations would adversely affect the historic landscape or the architectural and historic integrity of the principal building or the Historic Accessory Building itself; and 
2) 	specific conditions which the Commission believes should be imposed on the Special Permit in order to prevent any adverse effects. 
The Historic District Commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations to the Planning Board within thirty-five (35) days of the Commission’s receipt of the Application.  Otherwise, the Application shall be deemed approved. 
c) 	The Planning Board may issue a Special Permit under this Section only if it finds that the proposed reuse and any related building alterations and site development meet all of the applicable Special Permit criteria set forth in Section 7.4.3, and 
1) 	are generally in harmony with the neighborhood; 
2) 	will neither generate excessive traffic, parking, noise or density impacts on the abutters, nor create other detrimental effects on the neighborhood; 
3) 	will preserve and/or restore the original architectural features of the Building to the maximum extent practicable; 
4) 	will not adversely affect the historic landscape or the architectural and historic integrity of the principal building or the Historic Accessory Building itself; and 
5) 	will not result in any enlargement or relocation of the Historic Accessory Building. 
d) 	If the Historic Accessory Building is proposed to be used for a home occupation, the Planning Board must also find that the following criteria are or will be met in addition to the criteria set forth in Section 6.11.4 c): 
Note: §6.11.4 d) was amended by Article 32 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting. 
1) 	There will be no exterior display or visible storage of supplies or equipment to be used on or off the premises, or other variation from the residential character of the premises; 
2) 	Not more than one person who is not a member of the household will be employed on the premises; 
3) 	There will be no production of offensive noise, vibration, odors, fumes, smoke, dust or other particulate matter, heat, humidity, glare, or other objectionable effects; 
4) 	No articles will be sold or offered for sale on the premises; 
5) 	Traffic generated, including pick up and deliveries, will not exceed that normally expected in the residential neighborhood in which the Historic Accessory Building is located; and 
6) All parking will be provided on-site, and not within a required front yard. 
e) 	If the Historic Accessory Building is proposed to be used for an accessory dwelling unit, the Planning Board must also find that the following criteria are or will be met in addition to the criteria set forth in Section 6.11.4 c): 
1) 	The accessory dwelling unit use will be incidental to the ownership and use of the principal structure on the same lot; and 
2) 	The accessory dwelling unit or the principal structure will be occupied by the owner of the subject premises, except for bona fide temporary absences. 
Note: §6.11.4 e) was amended by Article 32 at the 2009 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.11.5 Conditions of Approval 
In granting a Special Permit under this Section, the Planning Board shall require that a perpetual preservation restriction on said Building and its landscape context be granted to the Town or other appropriate body or preservation organization under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 184, Section 31.  The form of such preservation restriction shall be subject to review and approval by Town Counsel. 
In addition, the Planning Board may impose such other conditions, safeguards and limitations on time or use that it determines to be appropriate to assure compliance with the applicable criteria set forth in Section 6.11.4 including, but not limited to conditions: 
a) 	prohibiting the Special Permit from being transferred to a subsequent owner without the approval of the Planning Board; 
b) 	specifying the required number of on-site parking spaces and their location; 
c) 	limiting the business operations of a home occupation, such as the number of patrons/clients visiting the premises, hours of operations, and hours and location of deliveries; 
d) 	requiring installation of additional landscaping; 
e) 	requiring continuing maintenance of landscaping; 
f) 	requiring a restrictive covenant to be imposed on the subject property, prohibiting the division or reduction in size of the lot on which the Historic Accessory Building is located. 
6.11.6 Nonconforming Historic Accessory Buildings 
Any exterior or interior alteration to a preexisting nonconforming Historic Accessory Building made pursuant to a Special Permit issued under this Section shall be deemed not to constitute an “alteration to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent” requiring consideration and a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals under Section 
1.5.3. 
6.11.7 Compliance with Applicable By-Laws 
Except as expressly provided in this Section, the grant of a Special Permit for the reuse of a Historic Accessory Building shall not relieve the applicant from the need to comply with all other applicable Town By-laws and Regulations. 
6.12 Religious and Municipal Building Preservation 
Note: §6.12 was adopted under Article 31 at the 2013 Annual Town Meeting. 
6.12.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to promote the preservation of Religious and Municipal Buildings by permitting their adaptive reuse for residential or commercial use (or combination thereof) that may not otherwise be permitted under this Zoning By-Law. 
6.12.2 Buildings Eligible Under this By-Law 
A Religious or Municipal Building located in any zoning district is eligible for a Special Permit under this Section 6.12 if: a) The building, or at least one of the buildings located on the property, was always 
used for religious or municipal purposes; and b) The Religious or Municipal Building was originally constructed prior to 1950. 
6.12.3 Uses Allowed by Special Permit 
The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to allow a Religious or Municipal Building, as identified under Section 6.12.2, to be used for other residential or commercial uses (or any combination thereof) than otherwise would be allowed in the underlying zoning district. 
6.12.4 Incentives for Preservation 
In order to permit the adaptive reuse of Religious or Municipal Buildings, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to: a) Reduce the on-site parking requirements; b) Modify Inclusionary Housing requirements of Section 6.10; and c) Increase, within the existing buildings, the number of stories and dwelling units 
allowed by the underlying zoning district. 
6.12.5 Special Permit Procedure 
a) 	An Application for a Special Permit under this Section shall comply with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 7.4 of this Zoning By-law. 
b) 	Applicants are encouraged to meet informally with the Planning Board and Historic District Commission to discuss the proposal prior to submittal of a formal Application. 
c) 	Upon receipt of an Application, the Planning Board shall forward a copy of the Application to the Historic District Commission for its review and recommendations concerning the proposed exterior treatments of the Religious or Municipal Buildings, including such things as windows, roofing and siding materials, and landscaping. Such recommendations shall include: 
1) 	the Commission’s assessment as to whether the proposed exterior alterations would adversely affect the historic landscape or the architectural and historic integrity of the principal historic building itself; and 
2) 	specific conditions which the Commission believes should be imposed on the Special Permit in order to prevent any adverse effects and promote appropriate rehabilitation as provided for in the Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation (36 CFR Part 67). 
The Historic District Commission shall hold a public hearing and make recommendations to the Planning Board within thirty-five (35) days of the Commission’s receipt of the Application. Otherwise, the Application shall be deemed approved by the Historic District Commission. 
d) 	Upon receipt of an Application, the Planning Board shall forward a copy of the Application to the Belmont Housing Trust for its review and recommendations concerning Inclusionary Housing.  The Belmont Housing Trust shall make recommendations to the Planning Board within thirty-five (35) days of the Commission’s receipt of the Application. Otherwise, the Application shall be deemed approved by the Belmont Housing Trust. 
e) 	The Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for development of a Religious and Municipal Building if it finds that the conditions for approval for Special Permits set forth in Section 7.4.3 of this Zoning By-Law have been met. 
f) 	In granting a Special Permit under this Section 6.12, the Planning Board shall require that a perpetual preservation restriction on the Religious or Municipal Building be granted to the Town or other appropriate body or preservation organization under the provisions of Massachusetts General Laws, Chapter 184, Section 31.  The form of such preservation restriction shall be subject to review and approval by Town Counsel. 
6.12.6 Nonconforming Buildings 
Any exterior or interior alteration to a preexisting nonconforming Religious or Municipal Building made pursuant to a Special Permit issued under this Section shall be deemed not to constitute an “alteration to provide for a substantially different purpose or for the same purpose in a substantially different manner or to a substantially greater extent” requiring consideration and a Special Permit by the Board of Appeals under Section 
1.5.3. 
6.12.7 Rules and Regulations 
The Planning Board shall be charged with administering this By-Law and may promulgate rules and regulations to implement its provisions. 
SECTION 6A. McLEAN DISTRICT 
Note: §6A was adopted under Article 2 at the 1999 Special Town Meeting. 
There are six (6) Subdistricts within the McLean District: Residential Subdistrict (divided into Zone 1A and 1B and Zone 2); Senior Living Subdistrict; Research and Development Subdistrict; McLean Institutional Subdistrict; Open Space Subdistrict, and the Cemetery Subdistrict. 
6A.1 Allowed Uses 
6A.1.1 Residential Subdistricts 
Within the Residential Subdistricts, side-by-side attached single-family dwellings (and the conversion of structures existing as of the date of adoption hereof to single-family or multi-family dwellings) shall be allowed, as well as private club or lodge facilities used exclusively by residents with a maximum aggregate gross floor area of 16,000 square feet (provided that such facilities are located within the first floor of existing buildings that are rehabilitated and reused and that dwelling units are located within the upper floors of such buildings) and those other accessory uses permitted in the Single Residence A, B, C and D Districts, other than lodging and boarding (provided, however, that accessory parking shall be limited as provided in Section 6A.3 and accessory structures shall only be allowed by Special Permit issued by the Planning Board). 
6A.1.2 Senior Living Subdistrict 
Within the Senior Living Subdistrict, a continuing care retirement community shall be allowed, which shall be defined as development comprised of housing and other associated services operated or sponsored as a coordinated unit by a corporation or organization having as its principal purpose the provision of housing and associated services, including those designed to provide for medical care and assistance with activities of daily living, for elderly persons. A continuing care retirement community may include one or more of the following types of facilities: 
a) 	Independent Living Facilities.  Independent Living Facilities provide private living and dining accommodations to persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older, and may include the provision of common areas, social and educational programs, and psychological counseling and crisis intervention as needed, all with the purpose of providing an environment in which older persons can continue to derive the personal and psychological benefits of independent living while also enjoying the substantial social and educational benefits of community living. Home health care facilities for the provision of medical, nutritional, social, psychological, and educational services for the residents of the Independent Living Facilities are permitted. 
b) 	Assisted Living Facilities. Assisted Living Facilities provide a sheltered living environment for persons fifty-five (55) years of age or older, and may include such services as housekeeping, cooking and common dining, social, psychological, and educational programs, programs for Alzheimer care, assistance with personal needs, and crisis intervention, all with the purpose of assisting each resident to continue to develop and to lead a productive and fulfilling life. 
c) 	Nursing Care Facilities. Nursing Care Facilities are those facilities licensed or approved by the applicable state or federal agency to provide full-time convalescent or chronic care to individuals who, by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity, are unable to care for themselves. Nursing Care Facilities may include medical and therapeutic and ancillary support and rehabilitation services, including but not limited to, food services, programs for Alzheimer care, social, psychological, and educational programs, and twenty-four hour supervision as appropriate. 
d) 	Multipurpose Senior Facilities. Multipurpose Senior Facilities provide social, educational, medical and therapeutic, wellness, counseling, recreational, outreach, and other activities for residents of the Independent Living Facilities, the Assisted Living Facilities and the Nursing Care Facilities. Multipurpose Senior Facilities may include a beauty parlor/barber shop, convenience store, ice cream parlor, bank, exercise center, and other such services ancillary to a senior living community, so long as such services are provided exclusively for staff, residents and their guests. 
e) 	Day Care and Similar Programs. Adult Day Care Facilities and Respite Care Facilities shall be allowed; provided, however, that such uses shall not serve more than 100 persons per day. 
6A.1.3 Research and Development Subdistrict 
Within the Research and Development Subdistrict, offices for and laboratories for research and development, including but not limited to, research and development in the fields of biology, chemistry, electronics, engineering, geology, medicine, pharmaceutical, physics, computer research and technology shall be allowed. 
6A.1.4 McLean Institutional Subdistrict 
Within the McLean Institutional Subdistrict, psychiatric hospital use, including clinical, research and teaching programming in the nature of McLean Hospital's current operations as of the effective date of this By-Law, shall be the principal use. To the extent consistent with such principal use, the following non-psychiatric medical uses are also allowed, but such uses in the aggregate shall not exceed 30% of the gross floor area within the Subdistrict: clinics, educational facilities, outpatient services, research and development laboratories and other types of hospital uses and residential programs and professional offices for doctors and other hospital professionals or paraprofessionals; further provided, however, that the following non-psychiatric medical uses in the aggregate shall not exceed 25,000 square feet in gross floor area: clinics, outpatient services and professional offices for doctors, other hospital professionals and paraprofessionals. Uses accessory to psychiatric hospital use and serving the needs of patients or employees are also allowed including overnight accommodations for visitors, cafeterias, fitness centers or gymnasiums, library, art gallery, places of worship, automatic teller machines and auditoriums so long as such services are provided exclusively for staff, residents and their guests. 
6A.1.5 Open Space Subdistrict 
Within the Open Space Subdistrict, passive recreational uses shall be allowed; provided that the existing building known as Mill Street Lodge can be used as a facility for marketing dwellings in the Residential Subdistricts; the existing building known as Pleasant Street Lodge can be used as a facility for marketing units or space within the Senior Living Subdistrict or Research and Development Subdistrict; and accessory outdoor parking, trails and visitor and interpretative facilities are allowed within publicly-owned land within the Subdistrict. Except as expressly provided herein, the lands within the Open Space Subdistrict shall be continued in an undeveloped and natural condition. Except as expressly provided herein, cutting, removing or destroying trees (other than the removal of diseased or damaged trees), altering the natural topography and constructing or locating structures within the Subdistrict shall not be allowed. Such land shall not be used for residential, industrial, institutional or commercial use, except that construction and use of vehicular and pedestrian access ways shall be allowed (only within those areas identified as "Vehicular Access Easement" on the Zoning Map) and the installation and maintenance of underground utilities and underground communication connections shall be allowed (only to the extent that such utilities and connections are located and constructed in a manner which minimizes the impact on the conservation values of the property). Continuation and replacement of existing utility and communication facilities shall be allowed. Continuation of the existing recreational field shall be allowed. Use of existing buildings within publicly-owned land within the Subdistrict for cemetery purposes shall be allowed. 
6A.1.6 Cemetery Subdistrict 
Within the Cemetery Subdistrict, cemetery and associated interment uses, structures, including offices, garage, maintenance buildings and columbariums together with landscaping, pathways, access drives and accessory parking shall be allowed. The installation and maintenance of underground utilities and underground communication connections shall be allowed (only to the extent that such utilities and connections are located and constructed in a manner which minimizes the impact on the conservation values of the property). Continuation and replacement of existing utility and communication facilities shall be allowed. 
6A.2 Dimensional Requirements 
Gross floor area shall have the meaning set forth in this By-Law except that such area shall include all structures within the Subdistrict (except for preserved structures of historic significance which are vacant, unused and unoccupied and structures on privately-owned land used by the Town for public purposes), not within a given lot, and except that interior parking areas shall be excluded. 
6A.2.1 Residential Subdistricts 
The dimensional requirements applicable to the Residential Subdistricts are: 
a) 	Maximum building height of 2.5 stories and 36 feet. For the purposes of this Section 6A, "height" shall mean the vertical distance from the average natural grade adjoining the building at all exterior walls to the highest point of the roof. Notwithstanding the foregoing, for purposes of determining the height of no more than 12 buildings in Zone 1A (each of which must have its side with its greatest height from grade turned more than 90° away from the northern boundary of the Subdistrict) and no more than 20 buildings in Zone 2, an alternative height limit shall be applied: the vertical distance from the average natural grade adjoining the building on the side that has the highest average natural grade to the highest point of the roof shall not exceed 36 feet and the vertical distance from the average natural grade adjoining the building on the side that has the lowest average natural grade to the highest point of the roof shall not exceed 50 feet. For buildings using this alternative height limit, a floor having a ceiling elevation at or below the average natural grade adjoining the building on the side that has the highest average natural grade shall not be considered a story. Each dwelling unit shall be considered a separate building for the purpose of determining height hereunder. No flat or shed roofs shall be allowed on buildings or building elements of more than one story. 
b) 	Maximum number of dwelling units and gross floor area. 
1) 	in Zone 1A, maximum of 33 units and a maximum total gross floor area of 99,000 square feet. 
2) 	in Zone 1B, maximum of 22 units and a maximum total gross floor area of 66,000 square feet. 
3) 	in Zone 2, maximum of 56 units and a maximum total gross floor area of 168,000 square feet. 
4) 	notwithstanding the provisions of subsections b) 1), b) 2), and b) 3), an additional 11 dwelling units may be constructed as an historic preservation bonus based on rehabilitation and reuse of buildings consistent with the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Rehabilitation; five such units shall be earned based on preservation and restoration of the existing building known as Upham Building and shall be located in Zone 2; four such units shall be earned based on rehabilitation and reuse of the existing building known as Garage Building and shall be located in Zone 1A or 1B; one such unit shall be earned based on rehabilitation and reuse of the existing building known as Hope Cottage and shall be located in Zone 2 and one such unit shall be earned based on rehabilitation and reuse of the existing building known as South Cottage and shall be located in Zone 2. Such units shall not have a maximum gross floor area so long as they are located in the existing buildings as preserved and restored. Such units shall have a maximum average gross floor area of 3,000 square feet if they are located outside the buildings preserved and restored. 
c) 	Minimum open space of 60% of lot area within Zone 1A and minimum open space of 40% of lot area within Zone 1B and Zone 2. 
d) 	Maximum lot coverage of 20% of lot area within Zone 1A and Zone 1B and maximum lot coverage of 30% of lot area within Zone 2. 
e) 	Maximum impervious surface coverage of 40% of lot area within Zone 1A and maximum impervious surface coverage of 60% of lot area within Zone 1B and Zone 2. For the purposes of this Section 6A, "impervious surface coverage" shall mean the total area of all surfaces which reduce or prevent the absorption of stormwater into land (including buildings, parking lots, driveways and sidewalks). 
f) 	Minimum setback from buildings to the Subdistrict boundary line of 15 feet. No fences or walls higher than 4 feet (or such greater height as is approved by the Planning Board in connection with Design and Site Plan Review), nor any parking areas may be placed within such setback. 
g) 	Minimum setback from buildings to common driveways of 15 feet. 
h) 	Along the northerly boundary of Zone 1A, for 400 feet from the northeast corner of the Subdistrict, and along the easterly boundary of Zone 1A, for 200 feet from the northeast corner of the Subdistrict, the following shall apply: 
1) 	The area within 30 feet of such portions of such boundaries shall be maintained in an undeveloped and natural condition, except for the landscaping described below. 
2) 	If structures are located in Zone 1A within 100 feet of such portions of such boundaries, there shall be landscape buffering, including evergreen trees of substantial size (12 to 15 feet in height) upon planting, along both sides of such portions of such boundaries (to the extent permitted by the Town, where on Town property), which shall: 
a) 	provide a dense visual screening of such structures from view from the adjacent land in the Open Space Subdistrict; 
b) 	be designed in a manner consistent as feasible with the natural appearance of the area, and 
c) 	be designed in a manner consistent as feasible with the continued life and health of the existing trees. Such landscape buffering may include the removal of invasive plants and their replacement with other native species. 
6A.2.2 Senior Living Subdistrict 
The dimensional requirements applicable to the Senior Living Subdistrict are: 
a) 	Maximum building height of 5 stories and 58 feet, except that one building may extend as high as 6 stories and 67 feet; provided that in such case the Planning Board determines that the siting and design of the building having such additional height shall be such that its roof elevation does not exceed the roof elevation of the 5 story building in the Subdistrict with the highest roof elevation and takes into consideration the tree line in the vicinity of such building; provided, further that a parking structure shall have a maximum height of 5 stories and 45 feet. For purposes of determining the height of a building in the Subdistrict, if and only if the lowest floor of the building is used for parking, then an alternative height limit shall be applied: the vertical distance from the average natural grade adjoining the building on the side that has the highest average natural grade to the highest point of the roof shall not exceed 58 feet and the vertical distance from the average natural grade adjoining the building on the side that has the lowest average natural grade to the highest point of the roof shall not exceed 68 feet. For buildings using this alternative height limit, a floor having a ceiling elevation at or below the average natural grade adjoining the building on the side that has the highest average natural grade shall not be considered a story. 
b) 	Maximum number of 480 units, at least 30 non-nursing care units of which must be set aside on a continuing basis as affordable units, and no more than a total gross floor area of 600,000 square feet; provided, however, that an additional 6 units having a total gross floor area of no more than 6,000 square feet may be constructed as a historic preservation bonus based on rehabilitation and reuse of buildings consistent with the United States Secretary of the Interior's Standards and Guidelines for Rehabilitation; two such units shall be earned based on rehabilitation and reuse of the existing building known as Chapel Building; and four such units shall be earned based on rehabilitation and reuse of the existing building known as Office Building. Of the 486 units, no more than 400 shall be Independent Living Facilities, no more than 150 shall be Assisted Living Facilities and no more than 150 shall be nursing care beds within Nursing Care Facilities. "Affordable units" shall mean units which are rented or sold to, and occupied by, households with annual incomes of up to 120% of the median area household income, as such median is defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. The availability of the affordable units may be phased in by approval of the Planning Board in connection with Design and Site Plan Review. 
c) 	Multipurpose Senior Facilities (not including customary common areas for the residential units) cannot exceed 10% of the total allowable gross floor area and shall be included within such total allowable gross floor area. 
d) 	Minimum open space of 30% of lot area within the Subdistrict. 
e) 	Maximum lot coverage of 40% of lot area within the Subdistrict. 
f) 	Maximum impervious surface coverage of 70% of lot area within the Subdistrict. 
g) 	Minimum setback from buildings to the Subdistrict boundary line of 10 feet. No fences or walls higher than 4 feet (or such greater height as is approved by the Planning Board in connection with Design and Site Plan Review), nor any parking areas, may be placed within such setback. 
6A.2.3 Research and Development Subdistrict 
The dimensional requirements applicable to the Research and Development Subdistrict 
are:  
a)  Maximum building height of 4 stories and 67 feet; except that a parking structure shall have a maximum height of 5 stories and 45 feet.  
b)  Maximum gross floor area of 150,000 square feet.  
c)  Minimum open space of 30% of lot area within Subdistrict.  
d)  Maximum lot coverage of 40% of lot area within Subdistrict.  
e)  Maximum impervious surface coverage of 70% of lot area within Subdistrict.  
f)  Minimum setback from buildings to the Subdistrict boundary line of 15 feet. No fences or walls higher than 4 feet (or such greater height as is approved by the Planning Board in connection with Design and Site Plan Review), nor any parking areas, may be placed within such setback.  

6A.2.4  McLean Institutional Subdistrict 
The dimensional requirements applicable to the McLean Institutional Subdistrict are: a) Maximum building height of 4 stories and 67 feet. 
b) 	Maximum gross floor area of 668,000 square feet. 
c) 	Minimum setback from buildings to the Subdistrict boundary line of 15 feet. No fences or walls higher than 4 feet (or such greater height as is approved by the Planning Board in connection with Design and Site Plan Review), nor any parking areas, may be placed within such setback. 
d) 	The area within the Subdistrict shown on the Zoning Map as "Conservation Buffer" shall be maintained as open space in an undeveloped and natural condition and no building, fences, walls or paving shall be located in such area. 
6A.2.5  Cemetery Subdistrict. 
The dimensional requirements applicable to the Cemetery Subdistrict are: 
a) 	Maximum gross floor area of 2,450 square feet. 
b) 	Minimum setback from buildings to the Subdistrict boundary line of 15 feet. Minimum setback from buildings to public streets of 30 feet. No fences or walls higher than 4 feet (or such greater height as is approved by the Planning Board in connection with Design and Site Plan Review), nor any parking areas, may be placed within such setbacks. 
6A.3 Parking and Access Requirements 
6A.3.1  Maximum Number of Spaces. 
Accessory parking for the uses allowed in the Residential Subdistricts, the Senior Living Subdistrict, the Research and Development Subdistrict, the McLean Institutional Subdistrict, and the Cemetery Subdistrict shall be allowed provided that such parking may not exceed the limits set out in the following table. 
Residential Subdistricts  Two inside parking spaces and two outside parking spaces per dwelling and 122 parking spaces for guests.  
Senior Living Subdistrict  One parking space per unit and 50 parking spaces for staff and guests.  
Research and Development Subdistrict  Three and one-half parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.  
McLean Institutional Subdistrict  • For existing uses and structures 853 parking spaces. • For new construction, as follows: 3 per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area; provided, however, that the total of parking spaces added for all new construction may not exceed 150 spaces.  
Open Space Subdistrict (privately-owned lands)  Five parking spaces adjacent to the Mill Street Lodge; five parking spaces adjacent to the Pleasant Street Lodge.  
Cemetery Subdistrict  Seven parking spaces.  

The accessory use parking of commercial vehicles shall be further restricted as follows in the several Subdistricts: 
a) 	Residential Subdistricts -by Special Permit only. 
b) 	Senior Living Subdistricts – prohibited. 
c) 	Research and Development Subdistrict – permissible if parked indoors or in a parking garage overnight. 
d) 	McLean Institutional Subdistrict – permissible. 
e) 	Open Space Subdistrict – prohibited. 
f) 	Cemetery Subdistrict – prohibited except for Town-owned vehicles. 
Note: §6A.3.1 was amended by Article 28 at the 2001 Annual Town Meeting. 
6A.3.2  Parking Location and Layout 
Parking must be located in the same Subdistrict as the use it serves. Parking space sizes shall conform to the rules and requirements generally applicable to the Town of Belmont as established from time to time by the Planning Board. Inside parking spaces in the Residential Subdistricts shall be located within a dwelling or an attached garage (no garage shall contain more than two spaces). Outside parking spaces in the Residential Subdistricts shall be located within a driveway leading to the garage. Guest parking spaces in the Residential Subdistricts shall be outside and shall be located in clusters of no more than 6 spaces each, such clusters to be located as approved by the Planning Board in connection with Design and Site Plan Review. No more than 350 parking spaces in the Senior Living Subdistrict may be outdoor surface spaces; the remainder must be located within a parking garage or other building. No more than 350 parking spaces in the Research and Development Subdistrict may be outdoor surface spaces, the remainder must be located within a parking garage or other building. 
6A.3.3  Access Limitations 
Vehicular access to the Residential Subdistricts and the McLean Institutional Subdistrict shall be via Mill Street, except in case of emergency access. Vehicular access to the Senior Living Subdistrict and the Research and Development Subdistrict shall be via Pleasant Street, except in case of emergency access. 
6A.4 Design and Site Plan Review 
Any activity requiring a Building Permit in any Subdistrict, and any proposed construction of a vehicular access way across land in the Open Space Subdistrict, shall require Design and Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board pursuant to this Section 6A.4 (the provisions of Section 7.3 of this By-Law shall not apply except as provided below). 
The Planning Board shall promulgate rules requiring any applicant for Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6A.4 to pay a review fee, in an amount to be determined by the Planning Board to cover the reasonable costs of the Planning Board for the employment of any independent consultants determined to be needed to assist in the review of the application for Design and Site Plan Approval. Such consultants shall be qualified professionals in the relevant fields of expertise determined by the Planning Board. 
The objectives of Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6A.4 shall be to: 
a) 	obtain appropriate evidence that a traffic monitoring and mitigation program agreement has been entered into with the Town; 
b) 	obtain appropriate evidence that the proponent or other party has placed into escrow the funds required pursuant to any traffic monitoring and mitigation program agreement entered into with the Town; 
c) 	determine the adequacy of measures proposed to mitigate construction period impacts on the natural features of the site, on neighboring premises and on the Town roadway system; 
d) 	determine the adequacy of measures proposed to mitigate the effects of the development on significant natural and landscape features of the site, including the preservation of specimen trees; 
e) 	determine the appropriateness of the proposed design and materials of proposed 
buildings; 

f) 	determine the adequacy of measures proposed to limit peak offsite stormwater runoff to predevelopment levels and to protect water quality in accordance with State stormwater management standards, including adherence to the criteria set forth in Section 6A.5; 
g) 	determine the adequacy of measures proposed to prevent adverse erosion or sedimentation effects on the natural features of the site or on neighboring premises; 
h) 	where applicable, obtain appropriate evidence of compliance with all applicable 
regulatory and licensing requirements with respect to the handling of potentially 
hazardous materials, including biologic or radioactive materials; 

i) 	determine that adequate measures have been taken for the private maintenance and management of the development (including roadway maintenance and repair, maintenance of landscape elements and natural open space, maintenance and repair of stormwater management facilities and common utilities, snow removal, trash removal and recycling); 
j) 	determine that the adjoining premises within and outside of the McLean District will be protected against seriously detrimental uses by provision for surface water drainage, sound and light buffers, prevention of undue solar reflection and glare and preservation of views, light and air; 
k) 	determine that there will be no serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians within the site or on adjacent streets or sidewalks; 
l) 	determine the adequacy of the arrangement of parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the buildings; 
m) determine the appropriateness of the proposed methods of disposal of refuse and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted on the site, including size, location and landscape screening of dumpsters or other trash receptacles; 
n) 	determine that the height and bulk of the proposed buildings will not be injurious to surrounding property outside of the McLean District, including appropriate location and screening of non-habitable roof elements; 
o) 	determine the adequacy of the lighting, landscape planting (including adequate buffers along Subdistrict boundaries) and other exterior construction features in relation to the proposed use of the site and the interests of the safety, convenience and welfare of the public; 
p) 	determine the appropriateness of the relationship of structures and open spaces to the natural landscape and existing buildings, including the relationship between structures in Zone 1A and the adjacent publicly-owned land in the Open Space Subdistrict; 
q) 	obtain appropriate evidence of compliance of the proposal with the applicable 
requirements of this By-Law other than this Section 6A.4; and 

r) 	obtain appropriate evidence of compliance of the proposal with any non-zoning agreements entered into with the Town of Belmont regarding land in the McLean District. 
Any Applicant for Design and Site Plan Review shall submit ten copies of a preliminary concept plan for review by the Planning Board prior to submission of a formal application. The preliminary review shall provide an opportunity for the Applicant to identify early in the process the preferences of the Planning Board relative to the development of the site. The preliminary concept plan should show the proposed location and size of all buildings, parking areas, driveways and undisturbed natural areas. When the Applicant submits a preliminary concept plan to the Planning Board, the Applicant shall at the same time provide a copy of such submission to the Conservation Commission, the Historic District Commission, the Community Development Office, the Town Administrator, the Police Department and the Fire Department (the "Commenting Agencies"). The Planning Board will provide advice and guidance to the Applicant after an opportunity for the Commenting Agencies and the public to provide written comments on the preliminary concept plan. 
Each application for Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6A.4 shall be accompanied by ten copies of the documents described in Section 7.3.4. In addition, the application shall also be accompanied by ten (10) copies of: 
I. 	plans showing the existing and proposed topography in two foot contours and showing subsurface conditions; 
II. 	a construction management program including plans for construction vehicle access routes, on-site construction worker parking, designation of material storage methods and locations, and designation of construction hours; 
III. 	a development phasing plan, setting forth the anticipated timing of construction and occupancy of the proposed development; 
IV. 	
plans showing anticipated views of the proposed development from public locations outside of the McLean District; 

V. 	
a reasonably scaled model of the proposed development; 


VI. 	plans indicating specimen trees and other existing vegetation to be preserved; 
VII. 	a traffic circulation plan; 
VIII. 	an erosion and sedimentation mitigation plan; 
IX. 	
evidence of property ownership; 

X. 	
a stormwater management plan, including the calculations described in Section 6A.5 a) and setting forth all proposed facilities and performance standards in sufficient detail to permit the Planning Board to evaluate the proposed development in accordance with the provisions of Section 6A.5; 


XI. 	a written statement of the manner in which the proposal meets each of the objectives set forth above; 
XII. 	evidence that the proposal complies with any non-zoning agreements entered into with the Town of Belmont regarding land in the McLean District; and 
XIII. 	evidence that a crane, balloon or other temporary representation of the height of each proposed structure has been brought to the site and kept in place for not less than 72 hours, together with photographs of such representation taken from a sufficient number of locations suitable for evaluating the visual impacts of each proposed structure in accordance with the objectives set forth above. 
Where applicable, plans shall be prepared by a registered architect, landscape architect, land surveyor or professional engineer. 
The Planning Board or its designee shall review a submitted application for completeness and shall notify the Applicant within thirty (30) days of its submission whether the application is complete or, if not, what items are missing. If the Planning Board fails to so notify the Applicant within such time, the application shall be deemed complete; provided that nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit the ability of the Planning Board to require additional information. The time for holding a public hearing shall not commence until the Planning Board has received a complete application. Upon receiving notice that an application is complete, the Applicant shall provide a copy of the complete application to the Commenting Agencies. After an application has been submitted, no tree removal, grading, filling, construction of roads or installation of utilities shall occur with respect to the proposed area of development until the application has been approved by the Planning Board. 
In reviewing an application of Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6A.4, the Planning Board shall follow the procedures established in the first two paragraphs of Section 7.3.3. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the Commenting Agencies inviting written comments and recommendations. An application may be denied where: 
a) 	an application is incomplete or 
b) 	no reasonable conditions will ensure that the proposed development is consistent with the objectives set forth in this Section 6A.4. Such a denial shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons therefor. 
It is the intent of this Section 6A.4 that an application for Design and Site Plan Review hereunder shall be approved if such application, as affected by such reasonable conditions as the Planning Board may impose, is consistent with the objectives in this Section 6A.4 and all other requirements of this Section 6A. The Planning Board may impose such reasonable conditions on its approval as it shall deem appropriate to assure the continuing consistency of the development with the objectives set forth herein. The Planning Board may require the posting of a bond or other reasonable security as a condition of its approval as it shall deem appropriate to assure compliance with the approval and its conditions. 
An appeal from a decision of the Planning Board may be filed with Superior Court or Land Court under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, Section 17, within twenty days of the filing of the decision with the Town Clerk. Any proposed amendment to an Approval under this Section 6A.4 shall follow the procedures set forth herein for an initial application. Notwithstanding any provisions hereof to the contrary, Design and Site Plan Approval shall not be required for alterations or repairs to an existing building which do not increase the height, bulk or footprint thereof, which are not being performed to provide for its use for a substantially different purpose and which do not violate the conditions contained within any prior Design and Site Plan Approval applicable to such building; provided that the proponent must nonetheless obtain the Planning Board's approval of a construction mitigation plan appropriate for the scope of the proposed alteration or repair prior to the issuance of a Building Permit. If Design and Site Plan Approval is required for alterations or repairs, the Planning Board shall only require such information as reasonably necessary given the scope of proposed alteration or repair. 
6A.5 Stormwater Management Facilities 
Stormwater management facilities shall comply with the following requirements: 
a) 	Calculations for pre-and post-development runoff based on the 100-year, 24-hour storm event shall be submitted to the Town Engineer upon application for Design and Site Plan Review. 
b) 	Where possible, roof drainage shall be piped directly into the ground via infiltration trenches and/or dry wells. Where possible, roads and paving areas shall be designed to allow absorption of runoff into adjacent pervious areas. 
c) 	Additional detention of post-development impervious surface discharge shall be provided to assure that peak storm discharge can be accommodated by and not prohibit additional discharge to the limited hydraulic capacity of the existing Town off-site storm drainage system. 
d) 	Stormwater management solutions shall be kept local within each Zone to minimize accumulation and the need for larger structures. 
e) 	Stormwater runoff shall be retained by open detention basins or by an underground chamber system similar to Cultec Contractor Chamber Systems, or equal. At least 50% of the required detention in each Zone shall be by underground chambers. 
f) 	Open detention basins shall have a water storage depth of no more than 3 feet at peak in the event of the 100-year storm. All detention basins or chambers shall have a controlled outlet so as not to exceed the capacity of the existing Town drainage system. Any exposed concrete retaining wall surfaces (both sides) shall be finished with natural stone to assure a visually attractive structure. 
g) 	Underground chambers in all traffic and parking areas shall be heavy duty and structurally capable of withstanding highway H-20 loading or the heaviest fire department vehicle whichever is greater. Chambers shall be aligned parallel to the contours. In so far as possible, underground chambers shall be constructed under proposed roadways and parking areas or within building foundations so as to limit the disturbance of existing natural open space. 
h) 	Excess roof drainage shall be piped directly to the underground detention chambers, while runoff from road and parking areas shall be passed through water quality inlets/deep sump catch basins to remove trash, debris and some amount of sediment and oil and grease from stormwater runoff. Stormwater discharge from the underground chambers shall be through a weir box or other device to carefully regulate discharge flows to the Town's storm drainage system. 
i) 	Disruption to existing tree cover and vegetation shall be minimized. 
j) 	All stormwater management facilities shall be the least visually obtrusive. 
k) 	Structures shall have all appurtenances carefully integrated to minimize visual presence. 
l) 	Dikes, berms and other required grading, shall be blended with the terrain and 
appropriately vegetated and landscaped. 

m) All walls, pipe structures and appurtenances shall be designed to assure public safety by devices which prevent climbing and other hazards. 
n) 	Open detention basins shall have retaining walls having a height (measured at the point of maximum vertical distance from grade) no greater than 4 feet and a length no greater than 100 feet. 
o) 	Redirection of stormwater shall not have an adverse effect on wetland areas within the McLean District. 
p) 	Open detention basins shall have sufficient outlet capacity to drain within five days following the 100-year storm event. 
6A.6 Coordination with Other Provisions of By-Law 
Where this Section 6A imposes a greater restriction upon uses or structures than is imposed by the remaining provisions of this By-Law, the provisions of this Section 6A shall control. Within the McLean District, more than one principal building may be erected on a lot, subject to the limitations of Section 4.3.5 and Section 4.3.6 regarding accessory buildings and recreational facilities, and subject to Design and Site Plan Review and the other limitations set forth in this Section 6A. The provisions of Section 5 and Section 6 of this By-Law shall apply to uses and structures within the McLean District, except that Sections 5.1.1 and 5.1.2 shall not apply. Within the McLean District, Wireless Telecommunications Facilities shall be allowed by Special Permit in accordance with Section 6.8. 
6A.7 Validity 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Section 6A shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof. 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 6B. BELMONT UPLANDS DISTRICT 
Note: §6B was adopted under Article 5 at the 2002 Special Town Meeting. 
6B.1 Allowed Uses 
No building structure shall be erected, altered or used and no premises shall be used for any purpose or in any manner other than as set forth in this Section 6B.1, Allowed Uses.  Any use not included in this Section 6B.1 as an allowed use is prohibited in the Belmont Uplands District. 
6B.1.1 Office Uses 
Buildings to house offices and accessory uses for business or professional uses are allowed provided that medical offices, where the principal use of which are to provide diagnoses and outpatient care on a routine basis for one or more physicians, dentists, or other health care providers are permitted only to the extent that such offices do not occupy more than 33% of the total net usable square feet of the building. Day care is a permitted accessory use, provided that such use is substantially for the tenants of the building. 
6B.1.2 Research and Development Uses 
Offices and laboratories for research and development, including but not limited to, research and development in the fields of biology, chemistry, electronics, engineering, geology, medicine, pharmaceutical, physics, computer research and technology are allowed pursuant to all applicable federal, state and local regulations. 
6B.1.3 Open Space Uses 
Passive recreational uses, trails and accessory parking and visitor and interpretative structures, including without limitation, non-habitable kiosks, trail signage, engraved boulders, benches, are allowed. 
6B.1.4 Structured Parking Facilities 
Structured parking facilities accessory to a permitted use are allowed. 
6B.1.5 Wireless Telecommunications Facilities 
Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are allowed by Special Permit in accordance with Section 6.8., provided however, Interior Wireless Telecommunications Facilities are allowed as an accessory use provided such Facilities have completed Design and Site Plan Review pursuant to Section 6.8.4, Section 6B.6 and Section 6B.8.  No Roof-Mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facility shall exceed the maximum building height provided in Section 6B.2. However, Roof-Mounted Wireless Telecommunications Facilities can exceed such height by Special Permit. 
6B.2 Dimensional Requirements 
The dimensional requirements applicable to the Belmont Uplands District are: 
a) Minimum lot area of 9 acres; 
b) 	Minimum lot frontage of 500 feet; 
c) 	Minimum front setback of 65 feet; 
d) 	Minimum side setback of 40 feet; 
e) 	Minimum rear setback of 40 feet. 
f) 	Maximum building height of 4 stories and 98 feet (including mechanical penthouses, exhaust pipes and vents and related non-habitable space); except that a parking structure shall have a maximum height of 3 stories and 36 feet. 
g) 	Maximum gross floor area of 245,000 square feet, excluding the square footage of any structured parking, mechanical penthouses, exhaust pipes and vents and related non-habitable space. 
h) 	Minimum open space of 65%. 
i) 	Maximum floor area ratio of 1.0. 
j) 	Maximum lot coverage of 20%. 
k) 	Maximum impervious surface coverage of 35%. 
For purposes of calculating items (a) and (h) – (k), lot and lot area shall mean the whole area of a parcel or parcels of land under one ownership (including land within the layout of a private way) notwithstanding that a portion of such parcel(s) of land are separated from the remaining portion of the parcel(s) of land by a private way or that a portion of such parcel(s) are located in another City or Town provided such land across a private way or in another City or Town is permanently restricted to passive Open Space and/or Open Space Uses. 
6B.3 Parking and Access Requirements 
6B.3.1 Maximum Number of Spaces 
Accessory parking for the uses allowed in the Belmont Uplands District are allowed provided that such parking may not exceed 3.25 parking spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
6B.3.2 Bicycle Racks 
For premises requiring 40 or more parking spaces, bicycle racks facilitating locking shall be provided to accommodate one bike per 20 parking spaces required. 
6B.3.3 Parking Location and Layout 
Parking shall be located on the same lot as the use it serves provided that the Planning Board, as part of the approval required under Section 6B.6 of this By-Law, may, in its discretion, permit reasonable off-site parking as long as such off-site parking is secured through a long-term written agreement and has the substantial likelihood of reducing on-site impervious surfaces, does not create new impervious surfaces elsewhere and will not negatively impact adjacent Town streets and intersections.  Parking space sizes shall conform to the rules and requirements generally applicable to the Town of Belmont in Section 5.1 and as established from time to time by the Planning Board.  No more than 110 parking spaces may be outdoor spaces and outside of the footprint of the garage; the remainder must be located on, within or below a parking garage or other building. 
6B.4 Signs 
In the Belmont Uplands District, signs are permitted in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 5.2.4 a) and b). 
6B.5 Lighting 
In the Belmont Uplands District, the lighting limitation provisions of Section 5.4.3 b) applicable in a General Business District shall apply provided, however, that primary exterior roadway and parking fixtures shall be full cut off (current IESNA definition), not exceeding 175 watts. Secondary exterior fixtures shall be selected by the developer, and approved by the Planning Board, in a manner that mitigates glare above the horizontal and off site.  Garage rooftop and interior garage fixtures shall be located and shielded to eliminate direct glare onto the surrounding terrain beyond 100 feet from the garage structure or the property line, whichever is closer. 
6B.6 Design and Site Plan Review 
Any activity requiring a Building Permit in the Belmont Uplands District shall require Design and Site Plan Approval by the Planning Board pursuant to this Section 6B.6 and Section 6B.8 (the provisions of Section 3.5 and 7.3 of this By-Law shall not apply except as provided below). 
The Planning Board shall promulgate rules requiring any applicant for Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6B.6 to pay a review fee, in an amount to be determined by the Planning Board to cover the reasonable costs of the Planning Board for the employment of any independent consultants (including but not limited to attorneys) determined to be needed to assist in the review of the application for Design and Site Plan Approval.  Such consultants shall be qualified professionals in the relevant fields of expertise determined by the Planning Board. 
The objectives of Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6B.6 are: 
a) 	to obtain appropriate evidence that traffic impacts of a project will be identified through a traffic study and then appropriately mitigated through mitigation plans funded and constructed by a project proponent, including but not limited to programs to limit vehicle trips to the project site, such as a required Transportation Demand Management (TDM) plan, and/or physical improvements to the impacted on-site and off-site roadways and intersections that are identified in the traffic studies prepared regarding the proposed project.  A TDM shall consider, at a minimum: 
1) 	Ridesharing Programs, including but not limited to, carpool/vanpool matching programs through the local Transportation Management Association (TMA); joint programs with area commercial tenants; dissemination of promotional materials to employees’ newsletters about the program; coordination with CARAVAN which leases commuter vans and provides administrative and organizational assistance; preferential parking for carpoolers; and guaranteed ride home program; 
2) 	Alternative Work Schedules; 
3) 	Public Transportation including, but not limited to, subsidized passes for public transportation and consultation with public transit authorities to establish bus service to project site; and 
4) 	Bicycle Facilities including, but not limited to, inclusion of bicycle racks and/or bicycle storage lockers and showering facilities as part of a project. 
b) 	to determine that the architecture of the building(s) and any parking garages reflect the prominence of the buildings on the site and in the neighborhood, including, but not limited to determination on the appropriateness of the building materials proposed for the facades of all buildings and parking structures; 
c) 	to determine that measures proposed to mitigate construction period impacts on the wetlands and floodplain areas on the site, on adjoining premises and on the Town roadway system are adequate; 
d) 	to determine the adequacy of measures proposed to mitigate the effects of the development on wetlands and floodplain areas on the site and on adjoining properties; 
e) 	to determine the adequacy of measures proposed to limit peak off-site stormwater runoff to predevelopment levels and to protect water quality in accordance with the Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection (“MADEP”) stormwater management standards, including adherence to the criteria set forth in Section 6B.7; 
f) 	where applicable, to obtain appropriate evidence of compliance with all applicable federal, state and local regulatory and licensing requirements with respect to the handling of potentially hazardous materials, including biologic or radioactive materials; 
g) 	to determine that adequate measures have been taken for the private construction, maintenance and management of the natural open space on the site, including the creation of an acceptable Open Space Maintenance Plan and Agreement by which the applicant (including future successors and assigns) agrees to undertake the proper construction, maintenance and management of the natural open space on the site; 
h) 	to determine that the adjoining premises within and outside of the Belmont Uplands District will be protected against seriously detrimental uses by provision for stormwater drainage, sound and light buffers, prevention of undue solar reflection and glare and preservation of views, light and air; 
i) 	to determine that there will be no serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians within the site or on adjacent streets or sidewalks and to determine that the development shall promote the use of public transportation; 
j) 	to determine the adequacy of the proposed methods of commercial removal of refuse and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted on the site, including size, location and landscape screening of dumpsters or other trash receptacles; 
k) 	to determine the adequacy of lighting, landscape planting, preservation of specimen trees (where reasonable), location and screening and/or camouflaging of non-habitable roof elements and other exterior construction features in relation to the proposed use of the site and the interests of the safety, convenience and welfare of 
the public; 
l) 	to determine there is adequate provision for municipal water and sewer to service the site; 
m) 	to determine that the height and bulk of the proposed buildings on a project site comply with the dimensional requirements of Section 6B.2 and to obtain appropriate evidence of compliance of the proposal with the applicable requirements of this By-Law other than this Section 6B.6; 
n) 	to obtain appropriate evidence of compliance of the proposal, or satisfactory assurances of compliance, with any non-zoning agreements entered into with the Town of Belmont regarding land in the Belmont Uplands District; and 

o) 	to obtain appropriate evidence that any proposed Conservation Restriction or wetland restoration programs will adequately protect and/or restore the resources intended. 
6B.7 Stormwater Management Facilities 
Stormwater Management Facilities shall comply with the following requirements: 
a) 	Pre-and post-development runoff rates from the site during the 2-, 10-, 25-and 100­year storm events shall be calculated and compared in order to demonstrate post-development discharge rates do not exceed the pre-development discharge rates. These calculations shall be submitted with the application for Design and Site Plan Review under Section 6B.6. 
b) 	Where possible, a portion of building roof drainage shall be piped directly to an underground infiltration system to be sized to meet MADEP groundwater recharge requirements for the site. Once the required MADEP groundwater recharge volumes are met, an overflow pipe from the infiltration system to the adjacent stormwater management systems may convey excess stormwater flows. Underground infiltration systems shall be constructed under proposed parking areas or building foundations so as to limit the disturbance of existing natural open space. 
c) 	Stormwater runoff from the on-site paved areas will be collected and conveyed through deep sump catch basins and storm drain pipes to adjacent stormwater management systems.  The pipe capacity of the storm drain system shall be designed to convey the 10-year storm frequency. 
d) 	Open detention basins and other Best Management Practices (BMPs) shall detain at a minimum the difference in pre-versus post-development stormwater discharge rates from the site. 
e) 	Open detention basins shall have adequate storage volume to contain the peak elevation during the 100-year storm event within its top of bank. 
f) 	Compensatory storage volumes provided due to loss in floodplain storage of Little River shall result in a minimum net increase of 1.5 times the existing volume impacted. 
g) 	Disruption to existing tree cover and vegetation shall be minimized. 
h) 	Dikes, berms and other required grading shall be blended with the terrain and landscaped and appropriately vegetated with wetland and indigenous species. 
i) 	All walls, pipe structures and appurtenances shall be designed to assure public safety by devices which prevent climbing and other hazards. 
j) 	Creation of an acceptable Stormwater Facilities Maintenance Plan and Agreement by which the Applicant agrees to manage and to maintain the Stormwater Facilities servicing the site. 
6B.8 	Site Plan Review Procedures 
Each application for Design and Site Plan Review under Section 6B.6 shall be accompanied by ten copies of the documents described in Section 7.3.4.  In addition, the application shall also be accompanied by ten copies of: 
i) 	plans showing the existing and proposed topography in two foot contours and showing underground utilities; 
ii) 	a construction management program including, but not limited to, plans for construction vehicle access routes, on-site construction worker parking, designation of material storage methods and locations, and designation of construction hours; 
iii) 	a development plan, setting forth the anticipated timing of construction and 
occupancy of the proposed development; 

iv) 	plans showing anticipated views of the proposed development from public locations outside of the Belmont Uplands District; 
v) 	plans indicating the location of wetlands and floodplains, if any, and other existing vegetation to be preserved; 
vi) 	an erosion and sedimentation control plan; 
vii) 	evidence of property ownership; 
viii) 	a stormwater management plan, including the calculations described in Section 6B.7a) and setting forth all proposed facilities and performance standards in sufficient detail to permit the Planning Board to evaluate the proposed development in accordance with the provisions of Section 6B.7; 
ix) 	a written statement of the manner in which the proposal meets each of the objectives set forth above; 
x) 	evidence that the proposal complies with any non-zoning agreements entered into with the Town of Belmont regarding land in the Belmont Uplands District; 
xi) 	evidence that a view shed analysis has been performed using a digitally created representation of the height of each proposed structure for the site, together with photographs of such representation taken from a sufficient number of locations suitable for evaluating the visual impacts of each proposed structure in accordance with the objectives set forth above; and 
xii) 	the Planning Board may, in its discretion, require a traffic study which shall include an impact study on those roadways and intersections reasonably believed to be likely impacted by the project, as well as any mitigation proposals to reduce or eliminate the identified impacts. 
Where applicable, plans shall be prepared by a registered architect, landscape architect, land surveyor or professional engineer. After an application has been submitted, no tree removal, grading, filling, construction of roads or installation of utilities shall occur with respect to the proposed area of development until the application has been approved by the Planning Board. 
In reviewing an application for Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6B.8, the Planning Board shall follow the procedures established in the first two paragraphs of Section 7.3.3 Notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the appropriate boards and departments inviting written comments and recommendations.  An application may be denied where: 
a) 	an application is incomplete, or 
b) 	no reasonable conditions can be imposed which will insure that the proposed development is consistent with the objectives set forth in Section 6B.6 and applicable sections of the Belmont Zoning By-Law. Such a denial shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons therefor. 
It is the intent of Section 6B.6 and this Section 6B.7 that an application for Design and Site Plan Review shall be approved if such application, as affected by such reasonable conditions as the Planning Board may impose, is consistent with the objectives in Section 6B.6 and all other requirements of this Section 6B and the Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law.  The Planning Board may impose such reasonable conditions on its Approval, as it shall deem appropriate to assure the continuing consistency of the development with the objections set forth herein.  The Planning Board may require the posting of a performance guaranty as a condition of its Approval as it shall deem appropriate to insure compliance with the Approval and its conditions. 
An appeal from a decision of the Planning Board granting or denying Design and Site Plan Approval may be filed with Superior Court or Land Court under Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, Section 17, within twenty days of the filing of the decision with the Town Clerk. 
Any proposed amendment to an approval under Section 6B.6 and this Section 6B.8 shall follow the procedures set forth herein for an initial application. 
6B.9 	Coordination with Other Provisions of By-Law 
This Section 6B together with the rest of this By-Law constitute the zoning regulations for the Belmont Uplands District. Where conflicts exist between this Section 6B and the rest of this By-Law, the provisions of this Section shall govern. Except where specifically indicated in this Section, the provisions of this Section supersede Sections 3 (Use Regulations), 4 (Intensity Regulations) and 5.1.1 (Parking – Number of Spaces), 5.1.2 (Parking – Schedule of Requirements), 5.1.3 a) (Parking and Loading Area Location and Design, Location), 5.3.3 c) (Landscaping for Parking Area Plantings) 6.6.3 b) (Floodplain District, Use Regulations) and 7.3 (Design and Site Plan Review). 
6B.10 Validity 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this Section 6B shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof. 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 6C. THE OAKLEY NEIGHBORHOOD SMART GROWTH OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Note: §6C was adopted under Article 9 at the 2007 Special Town Meeting. 
6C.1  	Purposes 
The purposes of The Oakley Neighborhood Smart Growth Overlay District (OL) are: 
1. 	
To encourage smart growth in the development of the former Our Lady of Mercy real properties located within the distinctive, attractive and livable residential neighborhood intersected by Belmont Street and Oakley Road (Oakley Neighborhood). 

2. 	
To promote low impact, green, and sustainable development that is pedestrian friendly within the Oakley Neighborhood. 

3. 	
To ensure high quality site planning, architecture and landscape design that is consistent with the distinct visual character and identity of the Oakley Neighborhood and provides the Oakley Neighborhood with safety, convenience and amenities appropriate to its residential nature. 

4. 	
To establish development standards that ensures context-sensitive design and creative site planning in the reuse of existing buildings and construction of new buildings. 

5. 	
To provide for diversified housing stock at a variety of costs in close proximity to the Belmont Street bus line, including affordable housing, that meets the needs of the Town’s population and promotes diversity. 

6. 	
To generate positive tax revenue, and to benefit from the financial incentives provided by Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R, while providing the opportunity for housing choice among households of varying incomes, ages and sizes. 


6C.2	  Scope and Authority 
The OL is established pursuant to the authority of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 59.00, and shall be deemed to overlay the parcels as shown on the Zoning Map of the Town of Belmont, as amended. At the option of the owner, development of land within the OL may be undertaken by means of a Site Plan Approval pursuant to the zoning controls set forth in this Section 6C or by complying with all applicable zoning controls set forth in the Zoning By-Law of the Town of Belmont (Underlying Zoning). Development Projects proceeding under this Section 6C shall be governed solely by the provisions of this Section 6C and shall be deemed exempt from the standards and/or procedures of the Underlying Zoning. 
6C.3  	Establishment and Delineation of The Oakley Neighborhood SmartGrowth Overlay District and Sub-Districts 
Within the OL, there are Sub-Districts identified as OL Church Buildings Sub-District, OL Rectory Sub-District, OL Senior Center Sub-District and OL Triangle Sub-District.  The boundaries of the OL and the Sub-Districts are delineated on a sheet labeled “The Oakley Neighborhood Smart Growth Overlay District and Sub-Districts” which is a part of the Official Zoning Map of the Town of Belmont on file in the office of the Town Clerk. 
6C.4  Definitions 
As used in this Section 6C, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
AASHTO – The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials. 
Administering Agency -An organization designated by the Belmont Board of Selectmen, which may be the Belmont Housing Authority or other qualified housing entity, with the power to monitor and to enforce compliance with the provisions of this By-Law related to Affordable Units, including but not limited to computation of rental and sales prices; income eligibility of households applying for Affordable Units; administration of an approved housing marketing and resident selection plan; and recording and enforcement of an Affordable Housing Restriction for each Affordable Unit in the OL. In a case where the Administering Agency cannot adequately carry out its administrative duties, upon certification of this fact by the Belmont Board of Selectmen or by DHCD such duties shall devolve to and thereafter be administered by a qualified housing entity designated by the Belmont Board of Selectmen or, in the absence of such timely designation, by an entity designated by the DHCD. 
Affordable Unit – an Affordable Rental Unit or an Affordable Homeownership Unit that is affordable to and occupied by an Eligible Household. 
Affordable Housing Restriction – A deed restriction of an Affordable Homeownership Unit meeting the requirements in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 184, Section 31 and the requirements of this By-Law. 
Affordable Rental Unit -A dwelling unit required to be rented to an Eligible Household in accordance with the requirements of this By-Law. 
Affordable Homeownership Unit – A dwelling unit required to be sold to an Eligible Household in accordance with the requirements of this By-Law. 
Alley – A roadway or shared driveway on which no primary buildings have front doors and the primary purpose of which is to provide immediate access to garages and private parking spaces serving such buildings. 
Applicant – A landowner or other petitioner that files a site plan for a Development Project subject to the provisions of the OL. 
Approving Authority – The Planning Board of the Town of Belmont acting as the authority designated to review projects and issue approvals under this By-Law. 
As-of-Right Development -A Development Project allowable under this By-Law without recourse to a Special Permit, Variance, zoning amendment, or other form of zoning relief. A Development Project that is subject to the Site Plan Review requirement of this By-Law shall be considered an As-of-Right Development. 
Basement – A portion of a building partially underground, but having less than sixty percent (60%) of its clear height below grade (see Cellar). 
Cellar -A portion of a building partially underground, having sixty percent (60%) or more of its clear height below grade (see Basement). 
Convent – The residential building located within the OL Church Buildings Sub-District as of the date of adoption of this By-Law. 
DHCD – The Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) or any successor agency. 
Design Standards – The document entitled Belmont The Oakley Neighborhood Smart Growth Overlay District Design Standards, as amended, approved by DHCD on April 18, 2008, pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R, Section 10. The Design Standards are applicable to all Development Projects within the OL that are subject to Site Plan Review by the Approving Authority. 
Development Lot – One or more lots which are designated as a Development Lot on a site plan for a Development Project proposed within the OL and for which Site Plan Approval is required under the provisions of this By-Law.  The lots comprising a Development Lot need not be in the same ownership. Where the Development Lot consists of more than a single lot, the lots, in combination, shall be treated as the Development Lot, may be contiguous or non-contiguous, and at the discretion of the Approving Authority, may be considered as one lot for the purpose of calculating parking requirements. 
Development Project – A residential development undertaken under this Section 6C. The limits of a Development Project shall be identified on the Site Plan which is submitted to the Approving Authority for Site Plan Review. 
Dwelling – A building containing one or more dwelling units separated by side yards from any other structure or structures except accessory buildings. The following types of Dwellings are specifically defined: 
a. 	
Multi-Family Dwelling – A single residential building containing more than three Dwelling Units designed for occupancy by the same number of families as the number of Dwelling Units. 

b. 	
Single-Family Detached Dwelling — A detached residential building containing a single Dwelling Unit, other than a mobile home, designed for occupancy by one family only and located on a distinct lot. 

c. 	
Three-Family Dwelling – A single residential building containing three Dwelling Units. 

d. 	
Two-Family Dwelling – A single residential building containing two Dwelling Units.  


Dwelling Unit – A building or portion of a building intended as living quarters for a single family, having a single set of kitchen facilities (a stove plus either or both refrigerator and sink) not shared with any other unit. 
Eligible Household – An individual or household whose annual income is below eighty percent (80%) of the area-wide Median Household Income as determined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), adjusted for household size, with income computed using HUD's rules for attribution of income to assets. 
Family – One or more persons, including domestic employees, occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit; provided that if five or more persons of the group occupying said dwelling are not kindred to each other, as defined by civil law, they shall not be deemed to constitute a family. 
Height, Building – The vertical distance from the grade to: 
a. 	
the highest point of the roof or parapet for flat or shed roofs; 

b. 	
the midpoint between the lowest and highest points of the roof for gable, hip and gambrel roofs (upper roof pitch 4” per foot or greater); or 

c. 	
the point of change in roof slope for mansard roofs (upper roof pitch under 4” per foot). 



Historically Significant Buildings – The Our Lady of Mercy church building located on Belmont Street built in 1927 in the Lombardy Romanesque style by the religious architectural firm of Maginnis and Walsh (“Church”) and the Our Lady of Mercy rectory located on Lawndale Street, built in the Craftsman style in 1900 (“Rectory”). 
Home Occupation – The use of a room or rooms in a Dwelling Unit as an office or studio by a resident provided said use is permitted pursuant to Section 3.4.2 of the Underlying Zoning. 
Household Income, Median – The median income, adjusted for household size, as reported by the most recent information from, or calculated from regulations promulgated by, the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Lot – The whole area of a single parcel of land under one ownership. Whenever such a parcel is divided on a plan which has been placed on file at the Middlesex South District Registry of Deeds at Cambridge, the term lot as used in this By-Law shall mean a lot as shown on such plan. 
Lot Coverage – Percentage of total lot area covered by structures or roofed. 
Lot Frontage – The boundary of a lot on land coinciding with a street line if there are both rights of access and potential vehicular access across that boundary to a potential building site. Measured continuously along one street line between side lot lines. In the case of corner lots, measured on the street designated by the Applicant or, failing that, by the Building Inspector as the frontage street, between the side lot line and the midpoint of the corner radius. 
Oakley Neighborhood Association – An unincorporated neighborhood association located in Precinct 6 comprised of Belmont residents owning or renting homes on streets near the Our Lady of Mercy real properties which organized in 2005 for the purpose of influencing and promoting appropriate future development of the Our Lady of Mercy real properties within the Oakley Neighborhood. 
OL – An overlay zoning district adopted pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R, in accordance with the procedures for zoning adoption and amendment as set forth in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A and approved by the Department of Housing and Community Development pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R and 760 CMR 
59.00. 
Open Space – An open area on a lot, unbuilt on, containing landscape materials, pedestrian walks, patios, recreational facilities, but excluding driveways and parking spaces. 
Renovation – Physical improvement that adds to the value of the real property. Painting, ordinary repairs, and other normal maintenance do not constitute a renovation. 
Setback – An area open to the sky, located between a street or other property line and any structure or element thereof other than a fence, wall, or other customary yard accessory. Setback is measured perpendicular to the street, property line or Sub-District boundary. 

Setback, Front -A setback taken from a street line. Typically, corner and through lots must provide two front setbacks. 
Setback, Rear -A setback taken from a rear property line, that is, typically a line or set of lines approximately parallel to the street frontage, and separating lots whose frontage is established on different streets. Setbacks on irregularly shaped lots where “side” versus “rear” is indeterminate shall be construed as rear setbacks. 
Setback, Side -A setback taken from a side property line, typically a line or set of lines which intersect a street line, separating lots whose frontage is established on the same street. Corner lots commonly have one side setback and one rear setback. 
Shared Parking Facilities – Off-street parking facilities designed and intended to serve more than a single Dwelling as shown on a Site Plan. 
Site Plan – A plan depicting a proposed Development Project for all or a portion of the OL and which is submitted to the Approving Authority for its review and approval in accordance with the provisions of Section 6C.12 of this By-Law. 
Site Plan Approval – The Approving Authority’s authorization for a proposed Development Project based on a finding of compliance with this By-Law and Design Standards after the conduct of a Site Plan Review. 
Site Plan Review – The review procedure established by this By-Law and administered by the Planning Board of the Town of Belmont as the Approving Authority. 
Sub-District – A specific and defined area of land within the OL that is subject to specific requirements for allowable uses or dimensional requirements that may differ from the requirements for allowable uses or dimensional requirements in other specific and defined areas within the OL.  
Underlying Zoning – The zoning requirements adopted pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A that are otherwise applicable to the geographic area in which the OL is located, as said requirements may be amended from time to time. 
Unduly Restrict – A provision of the OL or a Design Standard that adds unreasonable costs or unreasonably impairs the economic feasibility of a proposed Development Project in the OL. 
Unrestricted Unit – A Dwelling Unit that is not restricted as to rent, price or eligibility of occupants. 
Use, Accessory – A use subordinate to the Principal Use on the same lot or in the same structure and serving a purpose customarily incidental to the Principal Use, and which does not, in effect, constitute conversion of the Principal Use of the lot, site or structure to a use not otherwise permitted in the OL. 
Use, Principal – The main or primary purpose for which a structure, building, or lot is designed, arranged, licensed, or intended, or for which it may be used, occupied, or maintained under this Section 6C. 
Use, Recreation / Community – Any horticultural or active or passive recreational use of land such as for walking and bicycle paths, parks, gardens or other green spaces or use of buildings for community purposes such as meeting areas. 
Zoning By-Law – The Zoning By-Law of the Town of Belmont, Massachusetts, adopted in accordance with and pursuant the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A. 
Zoning Map – The Zoning Map of the Town of Belmont, Massachusetts, adopted in accordance with and pursuant the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A. 
6C.5  Permitted Uses 
The following uses shall be permitted in the following Sub-Districts As-of-Right upon Site Plan Approval, and at residential densities specified in Table 6C.8.1 pursuant to the provisions of this By-Law: 
Single-Family Detached Dwelling Unit  Two-Family Dwelling  Three-Family Dwelling  Multi-FamilyDwellingUnit  Recreation /CommunityUse  
Church Buildings Sub-District  Yes  Yes  Yes  No, except as authorized at §6C.7.1  Yes  
Rectory Sub-District  Yes  Yes  Yes  No  Yes  
Senior Center Sub-District  Yes  No  No  No  Yes  
Triangle Sub-District  Yes  Yes  No  No  Yes  

6C.6  Prohibited Uses or Activities in the OL 
1. 	
Non-Residential Use, except for Home Occupations permitted pursuant to Section 3.4.2 of the Underlying Zoning, and Recreation / Community Use. 

2. 	
Any use prohibited by Section 5.4 of the Underlying Zoning in effect as of October 22, 2007. 

3. 	
Any use not listed in Section 6C.5 is expressly prohibited; provided, however, that uses permitted in the Underlying Zoning district are permitted as long as they are not exercised in connection with a Development Project. 


6C.7  Building Renovation and Additional Allowable Dwelling Units 
1. 	In order to promote the re-use and rehabilitation of buildings in the OL in existence as of the date of this By-Law, an Applicant shall be authorized to construct a number of Dwelling Units in addition to the maximum As-of-Right density provided said development occurs through renovation of existing buildings in the OL as follows: 
a. 	If an Applicant proposes and obtains Site Plan Approval to renovate the Our Lady of Mercy church building to include no more than six (6) Multi-Family dwelling units, the Applicant shall also be entitled to construct an additional Dwelling Unit within the OL Church Buildings Sub-District such that a total of ten (10) Dwelling Units may be permitted in the OL Church Buildings Sub-District, inclusive of the renovated church, provided that: the additional Dwelling Unit is shown on the same Site Plan as the church building renovation; and the proposed additional Dwelling Unit complies with all requirements of this By-Law, including setbacks and dimensional requirements and Design Standards. 
2. 	Buildings that are moved to another location in the OL shall comply, upon relocation, with all requirements of this By-Law, including setbacks and dimensional requirements. 
6C.8  Dimensional and Other Requirements 
1. 	
New buildings within the OL shall be subject to the following bulk and dimensional requirements based on the use of the Development Lot: 

2. 	
Setbacks from other buildings. All buildings must maintain a minimum twenty (20) foot setback from other buildings both within and adjacent to the District. 

3. 	
In the Church Buildings Sub-District, the rear setback of dwellings with frontage on Belmont Street or Oakley Road shall be defined as the setback opposite the Belmont Street side of the dwelling. 

4. 	
Building Renovation. Renovation of existing buildings may maintain existing building footprints, and may only expand such footprints insofar as such expansion is in compliance with the required dimensional requirements for new buildings. Renovation building projects need not meet setback requirements applicable to new construction, but renovated buildings may not cross lot lines or Sub-District boundaries. 

5. 	
Number of buildings on a lot. Not more than one principal building may be erected on a lot provided, however, that up to three total buildings including renovated buildings may be allowed in the Church Buildings Sub-District, and that accessory buildings such as sheds may also be permitted. 

6. 	
In the Triangle Sub-District, side yard setback may be reduced to zero for a dwelling sharing a party wall with another dwelling on the abutting lot, provided the opposite side yard setback shall be at least sixteen (16) feet from the opposite lot side line. 

7. 	
Fractional Units. When the application of the allowable densities specified in Table 6C.8.8 results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 

8. 	
Maximum Residential Development. Unless a greater number of dwelling units is permitted pursuant to Section 6C.7 governing building renovation and additional allowable dwelling units, the aggregate number of dwelling units that may be constructed in the OL is eighteen 


Single-Family Dwelling  Two-Family Dwelling  Three-Family Dwelling  Multi-Family Dwelling  Recreation /Community Use  
Frontage(linear feet)  50  50  90  N/A  N/A  
Setback, Front (linear feet)  25  25  25  N/A  N/A  
Setbacks, Side (linear feet)  10  10  15  N/A  N/A  
Setback, Rear (linear feet)  30  30  30  N/A  N/A  
Height(feet)  36  36  36  N/A  N/A  
Maximum Lot Coverage (%)  25  30  40  N/A  N/A  
Minimum Open Space (%)  50  50  40  N/A  50  

(18) and is calculated for each of the Sub-Districts as follows: 
Sub-District  Highest DensityAllowable Residential Use unless otherwise approved pursuant to §6C 7.1  Allowable Units Per Acre unless otherwise approved pursuant to§6C 7.1  Allowable Number of Units unless otherwise approved pursuant to§6C 7.1  
Church Buildings Sub-District  Two-Family or Three-Family  15  9  
Rectory Sub-District  Two-Family or Three-Family  15  3  
Senior Center Sub-District  Single-Family  8  2  
Triangle Sub-District  Two-Family  12  4  

6C.9  Off-Street Parking 
Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of not less than one (1) space per Dwelling Unit to a maximum of two (2) spaces per Dwelling Unit to be located within 300 feet of the front entrance to the Dwelling.  For proposed increases beyond one (1) space per unit, the Approving Authority shall determine that the spaces can be created within the lot while maintaining compliance with dimensional and maximum lot coverage requirements, or that the parking spaces can be provided off-site, subject to the Applicant demonstrating ownership of or a recorded use easement subject to all off-site spaces. 
6C.10  Design Standards 
To ensure that new development shall be of high quality, and shall meet the standards envisioned by the Town of Belmont in adopting this By-Law, the Planning Board shall adopt the Design Standards governing the issuance of Site Plan Approvals for Development Projects within the OL and shall file a copy with the Town Clerk. In addition to the standards set forth in this By-Law, the physical character of Development Projects within the OL shall comply with such Design Standards. In the event of any conflict between this By-Law and the Design Standards, this By-Law shall govern and prevail. 
6C.11  Affordable Housing 
1. 	
Number of Affordable Units. Twenty percent (20%) of all Dwelling Units constructed in a Development Project shall be Affordable Units. Twenty-five percent (25%) of all rental dwelling units in a Development Project shall be Affordable Units. Provided however, for Development Projects in which all of the Dwelling Units are limited to occupancy by elderly persons and/or by persons with disabilities, twenty-five percent (25%) of the Dwelling Units shall be Affordable Units, whether the Dwelling Units are rental or ownership units. 

2. 	
Fractional Units. When the application of the percentages specified above results in a number that includes a fraction, the fraction shall be rounded up to the next whole number if the fraction is 0.5 or more. If the result includes a fraction below 0.5, the fraction shall be rounded down to the next whole number. 

3. 	
Affordable Units shall comply with the following requirements: 

a. 	
The monthly rent payment for an Affordable Rental Unit, including utilities and parking, shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the maximum monthly income permissible for an Eligible Household, with price determined assuming a family size equal to the number of bedrooms in the unit plus one unless other affordable program rent limits approved by DHCD shall apply; 

b. 	
For an Affordable Homeownership Unit the monthly housing payment, including mortgage principal and interest, private mortgage insurance, property taxes, condominium and/or homeowner's association fees, insurance, and parking, shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the maximum monthly income permissible for an Eligible Household, assuming a family size equal to the number of bedrooms in the Dwelling Unit plus one; and 

c. 	
Affordable Units required to be offered for rent or sale shall be rented or sold to and occupied only by Eligible Households. 



4. 	
Design and Construction. 

a. 	
Design. Affordable Units must be comparable in initial construction quality and exterior design to the Unrestricted Units. However, nothing in this section is intended to limit a homebuyer’s rights to renovate a Dwelling Unit under applicable law. The Affordable Units must have access to all on-site amenities. The total number of bedrooms in the Affordable Units shall, insofar as practicable, be proportionate to the total number of bedrooms in all units in the Development Project. 

b. 	
Timing. All Affordable Units must be constructed and occupied not later than concurrently with construction and occupancy of Unrestricted Units. For any Development Project that is approved in phases, the proportion of Affordable Units shall be consistent across all phases. 



5. 	
Age/Disability. At the Applicant’s option, the Development Project may include the imposition of deed restrictions on Age or Disability to permit the Development Project to be exclusively for the elderly and/or persons with disabilities provided, however, that any such restrictions may not be applicable to the District as a whole. 

6. 	
Affordable Housing Restriction. Each Affordable Unit shall be subject to an Affordable Housing Restriction which is recorded with the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry District of Middlesex County. The Affordable Housing Restriction shall provide 


for the implementation of the requirements of this By-Law. All Affordable Housing Restrictions must include, at minimum, the following: 
a. 	
Description of the Development Project, including whether the Affordable Unit will be rented or owner-occupied. 

b. 	
A description of the Affordable Unit by address and number of bedrooms. 

c. 	
The term of the Affordable Housing Restriction shall be the longest period customarily allowed by law but shall be no less than thirty (30) years. 

d. 	
The name and address of the Administering Agency with a designation of its power to monitor and enforce the Affordable Housing Restriction. 

e. 	
Reference to a housing marketing and resident selection plan, to which the Affordable Unit is subject, and which includes an affirmative fair housing marketing program, including public notice and a fair resident selection process. The housing marketing and selection plan may provide for preferences in resident selection to the extent consistent with applicable law. The plan shall designate the household size appropriate for a unit with respect to bedroom size and provide that preference for such unit shall be given to a household of the appropriate size. 

f. 	
A requirement that buyers or tenants will be selected at the initial sale or initial rental and upon all subsequent sales and rentals from a list of Eligible Households compiled in accordance with the housing marketing and selection plan. 

g. 	
Reference to the formula pursuant to which rent of a rental unit or the maximum resale price of a homeownership unit will be set. 

h. 	
A requirement that only an Eligible Household may reside in an Affordable Unit and that notice of any lease or sublease of any Affordable Unit to another Eligible Household shall be given to the Administering Agency. 

i. 	
Provision for effective monitoring and enforcement of the terms and provisions of the Affordable Housing Restriction by the Administering Agency. 

j. 	
Provision that the Restriction on an Affordable Homeownership Unit shall run in favor of the Administering Agency and the Town of Belmont, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit initial sale and re-sale to and occupancy by an Eligible Household. 

k. 	
Provision that the Restriction on Affordable Rental Units in a rental Development Project or rental portion of a Development Project shall run with the rental Development Project or rental portion of a Development Project and shall run in favor of the Administering Agency and the Town of Belmont, in a form approved by municipal counsel, and shall limit rental and occupancy to an Eligible Household. 

l. 	
Provision that the owner(s) or manager(s) of Affordable Rental Unit(s) shall file an annual report to the Administering Agency, in a form specified by that agency certifying compliance with the provisions of this By-Law and containing such other information as may be reasonably requested in order to ensure affordability. 

m. 	
A requirement that residents in Affordable Units provide such information as the Administering Agency may reasonably request in order to ensure affordability eligibility and compliance. 

n. 	
Designation of the priority of the Affordable Housing Restriction over mortgages and other restrictions. 


7. 	Administration. The Administering Agency shall ensure the following: 
a. 	
Prices of Affordable Homeownership Units are properly computed; rental amounts of Affordable Rental Units are properly computed. 

b. 	
Income eligibility of households applying for Affordable Units is properly and reliably determined. 

c. 	
The housing marketing and resident selection plan conforms to all requirements and is properly administered. 

d. 	
Sales and rentals are made to Eligible Households chosen in accordance with the housing marketing and resident selection plan with appropriate unit size for each household being properly determined and proper preference being given. 

e. 	
Affordable Housing Restrictions meeting the requirements of this section are recorded with the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds or Land Court Registry District of Middlesex County. 


8. 	The housing marketing and selection plan may make provision for payment by the Applicant of reasonable costs to the Administering Agency to develop, advertise, and maintain the list of Eligible Households, to conduct the housing lottery, and to monitor and enforce compliance with affordability requirements. 
6C.12  Administration 
The Approving Authority shall adopt and file with the Town Clerk administrative rules relative to the application requirements and contents for Site Plan Review.  Such administrative rules and any amendment thereto must be approved by the Massachusetts Department of Housing and Community Development. The Site Plan Review process encompasses the following: 
1. 	
Pre-application Review. The Applicant is encouraged to participate in a pre-application review with the Oakley Neighborhood Association at any time and from time to time and with the Approving Authority at a regular meeting(s) of the Approving Authority.  The purpose of the pre-application review is to minimize the Applicant's costs, and to obtain the advice and direction of the Approving Authority and the Oakley Neighborhood Association prior to filing the application. At the pre-application review the Applicant shall outline the proposal and seek preliminary feedback from the Oakley Neighborhood Association and the Approving Authority, other municipal review entities, and other members of the public. The Applicant is also encouraged to request site visits by the Oakley Neighborhood Association and/or the Approving Authority and/or its designee in order to facilitate pre-application review. 

2. 	
Application Procedures. 


a. 	An application for Site Plan Approval shall be filed by the Applicant with the Town Clerk and a copy of the application including the date of filing certified by the Town Clerk shall be filed forthwith with the Approving Authority. The Applicant shall also file the required number of copies of the application with the Building Inspector and with the Approving Authority. Said filing shall include any required forms provided by the Approving Authority. 
b. 	As part of any application for Site Plan Approval, the Applicant must submit the following documents to the Approving Authority and the Administering Agency: 
1) 	Evidence that the Development Project complies with the cost and eligibility requirements of Section 6C.11.3; 
2) 	Development Project plans that demonstrate compliance with the requirements of Section 6C.11.4; and 
3) 	A form of Affordable Housing Restriction that satisfies the requirements of Section 6C.11.6.  
c. 	
Review fees. The Applicant shall be required to pay for reasonable consulting fees to provide peer review of the application for the benefit of the Approving Authority. Such fees shall be held by the Town of Belmont in an interest-bearing escrow account, and shall be used only for expenses associated with the use of outside consultants employed by the Approving Authority in reviewing the Site Plan application. Any surplus funds remaining after the completion of such review, including any interest accrued, shall be returned to the Applicant forthwith. 

d. 	
Upon receipt by the Approving Authority, applications for Site Plan Approval shall be distributed to the Board of Selectmen, Board of Health, Housing Trust, Housing Authority, Building Inspector, Conservation Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, Department of Public Works, the Fire and Police Departments and the Water and Sewer Commission. Any reports from these parties shall be submitted to the Approving Authority within sixty 


(60) 
days of filing of the application. 

e. 	
Within thirty (30) days of filing of an application with the Approving Authority, the Approving Authority or its designee shall evaluate the proposal with regard to its completeness and shall submit an advisory report in writing to the Applicant certifying the completeness of the application. The Board or its designee shall forward to the Applicant, with its report, copies of all recommendations received to date from other boards, commissions or departments. 


3. 	
Public Hearing. The Approving Authority shall hold a public hearing and review all applications according to the procedure specified in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R, Section 11. 

4. 	
Prior to the granting of any Site Plan Approval for a Development Project, the Applicant must demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Administering Agency, that the method by which such affordable rents or affordable purchase prices are computed shall be consistent with state or federal guidelines for affordability applicable to the Town of Belmont 

5. 	
Site Plan Approval Decision. 

a. 	
The Approving Authority shall make a decision on the Site Plan application, and shall file said decision with the Town Clerk, within 120 days of the receipt of the application by the Town Clerk. The time limit for public hearings and taking of action by the Approving Authority may be extended by written agreement between the Applicant and the Approving Authority.  A copy of such agreement shall be filed with the Town Clerk. 

b. 	
Failure of the Approving Authority to take action within 120 days or extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be an approval of the application. 

c. 	
An Applicant who seeks approval because of the Approving Authority’s failure to act on an application within the 120 days or extended time, if applicable, must notify the Town Clerk in writing, within fourteen (14) days from the expiration of said time limit for a decision, of such approval and that a copy of that notice has been sent by the Applicant to parties in interest by mail and that each such notice specifies that appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R and shall be filed within twenty (20) days after the date the Town Clerk received such written notice from the Applicant that the Approving Authority failed to act within the time prescribed. 

d. 	
The Approving Authority’s findings, including the basis of such findings, shall be stated in a written decision of approval, conditional approval or denial of the Site Plan Approval application. The written decision shall contain the name and address of the Applicant, identification of the land affected and its ownership, and reference by date and title to the plans that were the subject of the decision. 

e. 	
The decision of the Approving Authority, together with the detailed reasons therefore, shall be filed with the Town Clerk, the Board of Appeals and the Building Inspector a copy of the decision shall be mailed to the Applicant and to the owner if other than the Applicant by the Approving Authority certifying that a copy of the decision has been filed with the Town Clerk and that all plans referred to in the decision are on file with the Approving Authority. A notice of the decision shall be sent to parties in interest, the Oakley Neighborhood Association, c/o Town of Belmont Planning and Economic Development Manager, and to persons who requested a notice at the public hearing. 

f. 	
Effective date. If twenty (20) days have elapsed after the decision has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk without an appeal having been filed or if such appeal, having been filed, is dismissed or denied, the Town Clerk shall so certify on a copy of the decision. If the application is approved by reason of the failure of the Approving Authority to timely act, the Town Clerk shall make such certification on a copy of the application. A copy of the decision or application shall be recorded with the title of the land in question in the Middlesex County Registry of Deeds or the Middlesex Land Registry District, and indexed in the grantor index under the name of the owner of record or recorded and noted on the owner’s certificate of title. The responsibility and the cost of said recording and transmittal shall be borne by the Applicant. 



6. 	
Criteria for Approval. The Approving Authority shall approve the Development Project upon finding that it complies with the requirements of the OL and applicable Design Standards. 

7. 	
Criteria for Conditional Approval. The Approving Authority may impose conditions on a Development Project as necessary to ensure compliance with this Section 6C and applicable Design Standards, or to mitigate any extraordinary adverse impacts of the Development Project on nearby properties, insofar as such conditions are compliant with the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R and applicable regulations and do not Unduly Restrict opportunities for development. The Approving Authority may require construction of an approved Development Project to be phased for the purpose of coordinating the Development Project with any mitigation required to address extraordinary adverse Development Project impacts on nearby properties. 

8. 	
Criteria for Denial. The Approving Authority may deny an application for Site Plan Approval pursuant to this By-Law if the Board finds one or more of the following: 

a. 	
The Development Project does not meet the conditions and requirements set forth in the OL Zoning and applicable Design Standards. 

b. 	
The Applicant failed to submit information and fees required by the OL Zoning and necessary for an adequate and timely review of the design of the Development Project or potential Development Project impacts. 

c. 	
It is not possible to adequately mitigate significant adverse Development Project impacts on nearby properties by means of suitable conditions. 



9. 	
Time Limit. A project approval shall remain valid and shall run with the land indefinitely provided that construction has commenced within two (2) years after the decision issues, which time shall be extended by the time required to adjudicate any appeal from such approval. Said time shall also be extended if the project proponent is actively pursuing other required permits for the project or if there is good cause for the failure to commence construction, or as may be provided in an approval for a multi-phase Development Project. 

10. 
Appeals.	  Pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R, Section 11, provided a bond thereby is duly posted, any person aggrieved by a decision of the Approving Authority may appeal to the Superior Court, the Land Court, or the District Court within twenty (20) days after the Site Plan decision has been filed in the office of the Town Clerk. 


6C.13  Waivers 
The Approving Authority may authorize waivers with respect to the dimensional and other standards set forth in this Section 6C in the Site Plan Approval upon a finding that such waiver will allow the Development Project to achieve the affordability and/or physical character allowable under this By-Law. However, the Approving Authority may not waive any portion of the Affordable Housing requirements in Section 6C.11 except insofar as such waiver results in the creation of a number of Affordable Units in excess of the minimum number of required Affordable Units. 
6C.14  Fair Housing Requirement 
All Development Projects within the OL shall comply with applicable federal, state and local fair housing laws. 
6C.15  Annual Update 
On or before July 31 of each year, the Board of Selectmen shall cause to be filed an Annual Update with the Department of Housing and Community Development (DHCD) in a form to be prescribed by DHCD. The Annual Update shall contain all information required in 760 CMR 59.07, as may be amended from time to time, and additional information as may be required pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40S and accompanying regulations. The Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of all updates transmitted to DHCD pursuant to this By-Law, with said copies to be made available upon request for public review. 
6C.16  Notification of Issuance of Building Permits 
Upon issuance of a residential building permit within the OL, the Building Inspector shall cause to be filed an application to the DHCD in a form to be prescribed by DHCD, for authorization of payment of a one-time density bonus payment for each residential building permit pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R. The application shall contain all information required in 760 CMR 59.06 (2), as may be amended from time to time, and additional information as may be required pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40S and accompanying regulations. The Town Clerk shall maintain a copy of all such applications transmitted to DHCD pursuant to this By-Law, with said copies to be made available upon request for public review. 
6C.17  Date of Effect 
The effective date of this By-Law shall be the date on which such adoption is voted upon by Town Meeting pursuant to the requirements of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, Section 5 and Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40R; provided, however, that an Applicant may not proceed with construction pursuant to this By-Law prior to the receipt of final approval of this By-Law and accompanying Zoning Map by both the Department of Housing and Community Development and the Office of the Massachusetts Attorney General. 
6C.18  Severability 
The provisions of this Section are severable. If any provision of this Section is held invalid, the other provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full force. 
SECTION 6D. 	SINGLE AND TWO-FAMILY DWELLINGS IN THE GENERAL RESIDENCE ZONING DISTRICTS 
Note: §6D was adopted under Article14 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
6D.1 Purpose 
The purpose of this Section is to promote development of single and two-family dwellings that are compatible with the surrounding built environment in the General Residence Zoning Districts (GR).   
6D.2 Use Regulation and Authority 
Single and two-family dwellings in the General Residence Zoning Districts shall require Design and Site Plan Review from the Planning Board, pursuant to this Section and Section 7.3 of this Zoning By-Law. 
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for all single and two-family dwellings in the General Residence Zoning Districts that require a Special Permit. 
6D.3 Performance Standards 
a. 	
Scale of Building. The building shall be sited and constructed in a manner that is consistent with the scale of other structures in the neighborhood through the use of appropriate massing, front setbacks, and other architectural techniques such as variation in detail, form and siting. 

b. 	
Design of Building. The building shall be designed consistent with the prevailing character of buildings in the neighborhood including the use of appropriate materials and other architectural techniques such as style, roof design and pitch, window design, and color. Unless the Board finds that a different design is necessary to preserve the historic or architectural significance of an existing single-family dwelling (1) front doors for each of the dwelling units shall be facing the street and not permitted to face into the side yards; and (2) the front door accessing the second unit shall be setback no greater than 25% of the front setback of the unit closest to the street. 

c. 	
Height. The height of the building should be compatible with the style and character of the buildings in the surrounding neighborhood. 

d. 	
Proportions. The proportions and relationships of height to width between windows, doors, and other architectural elements should be compatible with the architectural style and character of the surroundings. 

e. 	
Building and Driveway Siting. The building and driveway shall be sited so as to work with the natural topography of the site. Re-grading should be kept to a minimum and shall be in keeping with the general appearance of the neighboring developed areas. The development shall be integrated into the existing terrain and surrounding landscape and shall maximize retention of open space; and, minimize tree, vegetation and soil removal, blasting and grade changes.  No more than one curb cut shall be allowed for lots with less than 70’ of frontage; except in situations where the Applicant can demonstrate that the second curb cut is in harmony with the surrounding neighborhood. 

f. 	
Circulation. Walkways, drives and parking shall be safe and convenient and not detract from the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties, sidewalks, and Town streets. 


6D -1 
g. 	
Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be minimized and only as needed to accomplish safety and design objectives and shall be arranged so as to minimize the impact on neighboring properties. 

h. 	
Open Space (landscape). The landscape shall be preserved in its natural state by minimizing use of any grade changes and vegetation and soil removal.  The open space shall be as extensive as is practicable and the landscape shall be designed so as to add to the visual amenities of the neighborhood for persons passing the site or overlooking it from nearby properties. Reasonable efforts shall be made to save significant trees and enhance the landscaping. 

i. 	
Relation of Structures and Spaces. The relation of a structure to the open space between it and adjoining structures should be compatible with such relations in the surrounding area. 

j. 	
Screening. Objectionable features shall be screened from abutting properties. Consideration shall be given to the need for vegetated buffers. The larger the house, the greater the buffer that will be required. 

k. 	
Drainage. The development shall comply with the Stormwater and Erosion Control By-Law (General By-Law Section 60-325). 

l. 	
Street Trees. During construction, street trees shall be protected to insure their survival. The number and size of curb cuts shall be minimal to protect the roots of the trees. Construction vehicles and staging areas shall be kept away from the drip line of the trees. Where feasible, the addition of street trees is encouraged. 

m. 	
Outdoor Mechanical Equipment. Heating, ventilation, air conditioning, electric generating, or other noise emitting equipment shall not be located within the front yard of the lot.  The front yard is defined as the area between a line obtained by extending the front elevation of the dwelling to each of the sidelines of the lot and the front line of the lot. Additionally, heating, ventilation, air conditioning, electric generating, or other noise emitting equipment shall not be located within the required side or rear setbacks and not visible from the street or from the adjacent properties. 


6D.4 Submission Requirements for Design and Site Plan Review 
In addition to the documents required to be submitted pursuant to Section 7.3, each application for Design and Site Plan Review shall be accompanied by ten copies of the following: 
1. 	
Scale drawings showing proposed architectural elevations and sections, 

2. 	
A site plan showing property boundaries, existing and proposed grades, the location of all existing and proposed structures, driveways and driveway openings, existing and proposed lighting, existing and proposed landscape features both vegetative and structural. 

3. 	
Photographs or other readily available data concerning the location and size of structures on lots adjacent to or visible from the lot under consideration in order to provide a neighborhood context for the development under consideration. 


The Planning Board may, in its discretion, waive any portions of the submission requirements or request additional information that directly relates to the purpose of this Section or to the Planning Board’s evaluation of the applicable standards under Section 6D.4. 
6D -2 
6D.5 Special Permit Standards 
a. 	
An application for a Special Permit under this Section shall comply with the procedures and requirements set forth in Section 7.4 of this Zoning By-Law. 

b. 	
Special Permit Standards 


Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 7.4.3, a Special Permit shall be issued if, upon submission of all required materials and documents and compliance with the procedures set forth in Section 7.4.4, the Planning Board finds that it is: 
1) 	Generally in harmony with the neighborhood; and 
2) 	Neither generates excessive traffic, parking, noise or density impacts on the abutters, or creates other detrimental effects on the neighborhood. 
Such Special Permit shall be subject to any limitations imposed pursuant to Sections 6D.8 and 7.4.5. 
c. 	Factors to Consider in Special Permit Decision 
In making any Special Permit decision pursuant to this Section, the Planning Board shall consider, in addition to those set forth in Section 7.4, the following: 
1. 	
Scale and design of the structure; 

2. 	
The siting of the structure and driveway; 

3. 	
Walkway, driveway and parking circulation; 

4. 	
Exterior lighting; 

5. 	
Open Space and screening; and, 

6. 	
Drainage. 


6D.6 Single-Family Dwellings as an Alternative to a Two-Family Dwelling 
Note: §6D.7 was adopted under Article7 at the 2015 Annual Town Meeting. 
In order to achieve the purposes of the General Residence Zoning Districts Zoning By-Laws [amended April 2014] of controlling density and preserving the character of the associated neighborhoods, as an alternative to the construction of a two-family dwelling on a lot with a minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet and that has lot frontage equal to or greater than 90 feet, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit for the construction of two single-family dwellings. 
6D.6.1 Standards for Single-Family Dwelling Alternative 
Notwithstanding the ‘Dimensional Regulations’ contained within Section 4.2 of this Zoning By-Law, each of the lots and the proposed dwellings shall meet the following standards: 
1. 	Each lot: 
a. 	Shall be at least 4,000 square feet and have at least 45 feet of lot frontage; and  
6D -3 
b. 	Comply with Sections 4.3.1, ‘Lot Width’, and 4.3.10, ‘Lot Shape’, of this Zoning By-Law. 
2. 	Each dwelling:  
a. 	
The open space shall not be less than 45%; 

b. 	
The length of the dwelling shall not exceed its width multiplied by 1.6 times; 

c. 	
The height shall not exceed 32 feet; and, 

d. 	
Each dwelling shall comply with the ‘Performance Standards’ listed in Section 6D.4. 


6D.6.2 Factors to Consider 
In granting a Special Permit to allow two single-family dwellings instead of a two-family dwelling, in addition to the applicable ‘Special Permit Criteria’ set forth in Section 7.4.3 of this Zoning By-Law, the Planning Board shall make the following findings: 
1. 	
The lot sizes and frontages of each lot on which the single-family dwellings will be constructed are comparable to those in the surrounding neighborhood; 

2. 	
The open space between and surrounding the dwellings is maximized; 

3. 	
Each dwelling is compatible with the surrounding neighborhood; 

4. 	
Each dwelling complies with the standards listed in Section 6D.7.1, ‘Standards for Single-Family Dwelling Alternative’; and, 

5. 	
This development (the lots and proposed dwellings) shall meet the ‘Special Permit Standards’ outlined in Section 6D.6. 


6D.6.3 Conditions of Approval 
In addition to the conditions that the Board may impose in granting a Special Permit under Section 6D.8, Conditions of Approval, the Planning Board may impose additional conditions and safeguards that it determines to be appropriate to assure compliance with the standards set forth in Section 6D.7.1, including, but not limited to conditions: 
1. 	
Prohibiting the further division or reduction in size of the lots that the single-family dwellings will be constructed on; 

2. 	
Prohibiting the further enlargement of the single-family dwelling beyond the standards established in this Section; 

3. 	
Prohibiting lot coverage of more than 25%; and, 

4. 	
Maintaining open space of at least 45%. 


6D -4 
6D.7 Conditions of Approval 
In granting a Special Permit under this Section, the Planning Board may impose such other conditions, safeguards and limitations on time or use that it determines to be appropriate to assure compliance with the applicable criteria set forth in this Section including, but not limited to conditions: 
a. 	
Specifying the required number of on-site parking spaces and their location; 

b. 	
Requiring installation of additional landscaping; and, 

c. 	
Requiring a performance guarantee to insure preservation of street trees. 


6D.8 Severability, Conflict with Other By-Laws 
1) 	To the extent that a conflict exists between this By-Law and other By-Laws of the Town of Belmont, the more restrictive provisions shall apply. 
2) 	If a court of competent jurisdiction holds any provision of this By-Law invalid, the remainder of the By-Law shall not be affected thereby.  The invalidity of any section or sections, or parts of any section or sections, of this By-Law shall not affect the validity of the remaining sections or parts of sections or the other By-Laws of the Town of Belmont. 
6D -5 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
6D -6 
SECTION 6E. MEDICAL MARIJUANA OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Note: §6E was adopted under Article 12 at the 2014 Annual Town Meeting. 
6E.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the Medical Marijuana Overlay District (MMOD) is to provide for the placement of Registered Marijuana Dispensaries (RMD), as they are authorized pursuant to state regulations set forth at 105 CMR 725.000, Implementation of an Act for the Humanitarian Medical Use of Marijuana, in locations suitable for lawful medical marijuana facilities and to minimize adverse impacts of RMDs on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, schools, playgrounds and other locations where minors congregate by regulating the siting, design, placement, security, and removal of RMDs. 
6E.2 Authority and Establishment 
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for a Registered Marijuana Dispensary. 
The boundaries of the MMOD are shown on the Zoning Map on file with the Town Clerk and include the underlying Local Business II and General Business Districts. Within the MMOD, all requirements of the underlying districts remain in effect, except where these regulations provide an alternative to such requirements.  Land within the MMOD may be used either for a RMD, in which case the requirements set forth in this Section shall apply or a use allowed in the underlying district, in which case the requirements of the underlying district shall apply. If the provisions of the MMOD are silent on a zoning regulation, the requirements of the underlying district shall apply.  If the provisions of the MMOD conflict with the requirements of the underlying district, the requirements of the MMOD shall control. 
Besides the zoning districts listed above, RMDs shall be allowed, subject to the provisions of this Section 6E, within the Belmont Uplands District.  RMDs shall not be allowed within the McLean or the Cushing Square Overlay Districts. 
6E.3 Use Regulations 
a. 	
The building or buildings in which RMD activities take place shall not be located within, on the same lot as, or on a lot immediately adjacent to a licensed pharmacy or within buildings that contain any pharmacy, medical doctor offices or the offices of any other professional practitioner authorized to prescribe the use of medical marijuana, which exist as of the effective date of this amendment to the Zoning By-Law. 

b. 	
The RMD shall establish policies and procedures to ensure that no marijuana is smoked, eaten or otherwise consumed or ingested on the Premises. 

c. 	
The hours of operation shall be set by the Planning Board, but in no event shall a RMD be open to the public, nor shall any sale or other distribution of marijuana occur upon the Premises or via delivery from the Premises, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 


6E-1 

6E.4 Physical and Locational Requirements 
a. 	
All aspects of the RMD must take place at a fixed location within a fully enclosed building (including, but not limited to, loading, refuse and service areas), or in the case of cultivation within a locked, limited access area in compliance with CMR 725.15(B)(1)(c), and shall not be visible from the ground outside the enclosure.  Outside storage of marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials is prohibited.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, all areas, in which the sales of marijuana products take place, must be visible through appropriate windows from public places. 

b. 	
All buildings housing RMDs shall be ventilated in such a manner that: 

i. 	Pesticides, insecticides or other chemicals or products used in the cultivation or processing shall not be dispersed into the outside atmosphere; and, 
ii. 	Odor from marijuana or its processing shall not be detected at the exterior of the RMD building or at any adjoining use or property. 

c. 	
Signage determined to be sufficient by the Planning Board shall be displayed in plain sight of clients at the entrance of the RMD facility stating that ‘Registration Card Issued by the MA Department of Public Health Required’ in text two inches in height. 

d. 	
RMD facilities may not be located within 300 feet of the following uses, but only if the uses exist as of the effective date of this amendment to the Zoning By-Law: 

1. 	
A dwelling unit; 

2. 	
School, including a public or private elementary or secondary school, or licensed child care facility; 

3. 	
Playground, public park, athletic field, or building used for athletic activities and events; or, 

4. 	
Library, public swimming pool or similar facility in which minors congregate. 



e. 	
The distance under this Section is measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the lot line of the protected uses identified in Section 6E.4 d. to the nearest point of the building in which the RMD is located. 


6E.5 Application 
In addition to the materials required under Section 7.4.4 of the Zoning By-Law, the application for a Special Permit RMD shall include: 
a. 	
Disclosure Statement -A notarized statement signed by the organization’s Chief Executive Officer and corporate attorney disclosing all of its designated representatives, including officers and directors, shareholders, partners, members, managers, directors, officers or other similarly-situated individuals and entities and their addresses.  If any of the above are entities rather than persons, the Applicant must disclose the identity of all such responsible individual persons for such entity; 

b. 	
Description of Activities -A narrative describing the type and scale of all activities that will take place on the proposed site, including, but not limited to cultivating and processing of 


6E-2 

marijuana  or marijuana infused products, on-site sales, off-site deliveries, distribution of educational materials, and other programs or activities; 
c. 	
Floor Plans -a floor plan of the premises of the proposed RMD that identifies the square footage available and describes the functional areas of the RMD, including areas for any preparation of marijuana-infused products; 

d. 	
Site Plans – A plan or plans depicting all proposed development on the property, including the dimensions of the building, the layout of parking, the location of pedestrian and vehicular points of access and egress, the location and design of all loading, refuse and service facilities, the location, type and direction of all outdoor lighting on the site, and any landscape design; 

e. 	
Service Area -A map and narrative describing the area proposed to be served by the RMD and the anticipated number of clients that will be served within that area.  This description shall indicate where any other RMD exists or have been proposed within the expected service area; 

f. 	
Transportation Analysis -a quantitative analysis, prepared by a qualified transportation specialist acceptable to the Planning Board, modeling the expected origin and frequency of client and employee trips to the site, the expected modes of transportation used by clients and employees, and the frequency and scale of deliveries to and from the site; 

g. 	
Context Map – a map depicting all lots and land uses within a 500 foot radius of the Premises, including but not limited to all of the protected uses identified in Section 6E.4 e. above; 

h. 	
Building Elevations and Signage – Architectural drawings of all exterior building facades and all proposed signage, specifying materials and colors to be used; 

i. 	
Registration Materials: Copies of registration materials issued by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health for the purpose of seeking registration, to confirm that all information provided to the Planning Board is consistent with the information provided to the Massachusetts Department of Public Health: 


1. 	
Its registration as an RMD; 

2. 	
Proposed waste disposal procedures;  

3. 	
A description of any waivers from DPH regulations issued to the RMD; and, 


j. Letters from the Police and Fire Departments indicating that they have reviewed the application materials and approve the safety and security measures of the RMD. 
6E.6 Special Permit Criteria 
In granting a Special Permit for a RMD, in addition to the general criteria for issuance of a Special Permit as set forth in Section 7.4.3 of this Zoning By-Law, the Planning Board shall find that the following criteria are met: 
1. 	The RMD is located to serve an area that currently does not have reasonable access to medical marijuana, or if it is proposed to serve an area that is already served by other RMD, it has been established by the Massachusetts Department of Public Health that supplemental service is needed. 
6E-3 

2. 	
The RMD meets all of the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and will be in compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations. 

3. 	
The Premises have been designed to be compatible with other buildings in the area and to mitigate any adverse visual or design impacts that might result from required security measures and restrictions on visibility into the building’s interior. 

4. 	
The RMD provides a secure indoor waiting area for individuals and clients. 

5. 	
The site is designed such that it provides convenient, safe and secure access and egress for clients and employees arriving to and leaving from the site using all modes of transportation, including drivers, pedestrians, bicyclists and public transportation users. 

6. 	
Traffic generated by client trips, employee trips, deliveries to and from the RMD, and parking and queuing especially during peak periods at the RMD, shall not create a substantial adverse impact on nearby residential uses. 


6E.7 Special Permit Conditions 
The Planning Board shall impose conditions reasonably appropriate to improve site design, traffic flow, public safety, air quality, and preserve the character of the surrounding area and otherwise serve the purpose of this Section.  In addition to any specific conditions applicable to the Applicant’s RMD, the Planning Board shall include the following conditions in any Special Permit granted under this Section: 
a. 	
Hours of Operation, including dispatch of home deliveries. 

b. 	
The Special Permit shall lapse within five years of its issuance.  If the permit holder wishes to renew the Special Permit, an application to renew the Special Permit must be submitted at least 120 days prior to the expiration of the Special Permit. 

c. 	
The Special Permit shall be limited to the current Applicant and shall lapse if the permit holder ceases operating the RMD. 

d. 	
The Special Permit shall lapse upon the expiration or termination of the Applicant’s registration by DPH. 

e. 	
The permit holder shall provide to the Inspector of Buildings, Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments, and the Board of Health, the name, telephone number and electronic mail address of a contact person in the event that such person needs to be contacted after regular business hours to address an urgent issue. Such contact information shall be kept updated by the permit holder. 

f. 	
The designated contact person(s) shall notify in writing the Police and Fire Departments, Inspector of Buildings, Board of Health, and the Planning Board within a minimum twelve (12) hours following a violation, a potential violation, or any attempts to violate any applicable law, or any criminal, potential criminal, or attempted criminal activities as a RMD permitted under this Section. 

g. 	
The designated representatives shall file an annual report (annually from the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy) with the Office of Community Development providing a copy of all current applicable state licenses for the RMD and to demonstrate continued compliance with the conditions of the Special Permit. 


6E-4 

6E.8 Exemption from RMD Special Permit Requirement 
RMDs that demonstrate that they are protected pursuant to the agricultural exemption under G.L. c.40A §3 are not required to obtain a Special Permit, but shall apply for Site Plan Approval pursuant to Section 7.3 of the Zoning By-Law. 
6E.9 Severability 
If any provision of this Section shall be found invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall be construed as narrowly as possible, and the balance of the Section shall be deemed to be amended to the minimum extent necessary, so as to secure the purposes thereof, as set forth in Section 6E.1. 
6E-5 

This page is left intentionally blank. 
6E-6 

Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/13/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
SECTION 6F ADULT USE MARIJUANA ESTABLISHMENT 
OVERLAY DISTRICT 

Note: §6F was adopted under Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
6F.1 Purpose 
The purpose of the Adult Use Marijuana Establishment Overlay District (AUMEOD) is to provide for the placement of Adult Use Marijuana Establishments (AUME), as they are authorized in accordance with the “Act to Ensure Safe Access to Marijuana,” adopted as Chapter 55 of the Acts of 2017. The AUMEs will be in locations suitable to minimize adverse impacts of AUMEs on adjacent properties, residential neighborhoods, historic districts, schools, playgrounds, and other locations where minors congregate by regulating the siting, design, placement, security, and removal of AUMEs. 
6F.2 Authority and Establishment 
The Planning Board shall be the Special Permit Granting Authority for Adult Use Marijuana Establishment (AUME) Special Permits.  
The boundaries of the AUMEOD are shown on the Zoning Map on file with the Town Clerk and include the underlying Local Business II. Within the AUMEOD, all requirements of the underlying districts remain in effect, except where this Section provides an alternative to such requirements. Land within the AUMEOD may be used either for (1) an AUME, in which case the requirements set forth in this Section 6F shall apply; or (2) a use allowed in the underlying zoning district, in which case the requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply. If the provisions of the AUMEOD are silent on a zoning regulation, the requirements of the underlying zoning district shall apply.  If the provisions of the AUMEOD conflict with the requirements of the underlying zoning district, the requirements of the AUMEOD shall control. 
An AUME proposed to be sited in the South Pleasant Street Overlay District ("SPSOD") described in Section 6G of this By-Law, shall be also be subject to the SPSOD "Design Standards" in Section 6G.3.3 if the project proposes to use any of the provisions of Section 6G.3.1 of the SPSOD to enlarge or enhance the AUME. 
Note: §6F.2 was amended by Article 4 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting 
6F.3 Use Regulations 
a. 	
Uses under this Section may only be involved in the uses and activities permitted by the definition as limited by state law, and may not include other businesses or services in the same building. 

b. 	
No marijuana shall be smoked, eaten, or otherwise consumed or ingested on the Premises. 

c. 	
The hours of operation shall be set by the Planning Board, but in no event shall a building be open to the public, nor any sale or other distribution of marijuana occur upon the Premises between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 


Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/13/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
6F.4 Physical and Locational Requirements 
a. 	
All aspects of the AUME must take place at a fixed location within a fully enclosed building and shall not be visible from the exterior of the business. 

b. 	
Outside storage of marijuana, related supplies, or educational materials is prohibited. 

c. 	
The proposed use shall not display signage or other marketing materials on the exterior of the building or in any manner visible from the public way that, in the opinion of the Planning Board, may promote or encourage the use of marijuana or other drugs by minors. Symbols and logos used to identify marijuana shall be prohibited in accordance with state law. 

d. 	
AUMEs may not be located within 500 feet of a school, including a public or private elementary or secondary school.  The distance under this Section is measured in a straight line from the nearest point of the property line of the protected uses identified in this Section to the nearest point of the building in which the proposed AUME is to be located. 


6F.5 Application 
In addition to the materials required under Section 7.4.4 of this Zoning By-Law, the application for a Special Permit AUME shall include: 
a. 	
Disclosure Statement – An affidavit(s) signed by the organization’s Chief Executive Officer disclosing all of its designated representatives, including officers and directors, shareholders, partners, members, managers, directors, officers or other similarly-situated individuals and entities and their addresses.  If any of the above are entities rather than persons, the Applicant must disclose the identity of all such responsible individual persons. 

b. 	
Evidence that the Applicant has site control and the right to use the site for a facility in the form of a deed or valid purchase and sale agreement, or in the case of a lease, a notarized statement from the property owner or a redacted copy of the lease agreement. 

c. 	
Description of Activities -A narrative providing information about the type and scale of all activities that will take place on the proposed site, including, but not limited to on-site sales, distribution of educational materials, and other programs or activities. 

d. 	
Floor Plans -A detailed floor plan of the proposed AUME that identifies the square footage available and describes the functional areas of the AUME. 


Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/13/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
e. 
Site Plans -Detailed site plans that include the following information: 

f. 	
Transportation Analysis -A quantitative analysis, prepared by a qualified transportation specialist acceptable to the Planning Board, modeling the expected origin and frequency of customer and employee trips to the site, the expected modes of transportation used by customers and employees, and the frequency and scale of deliveries to and from the site. 

g. 	
Context Map – A map depicting all properties and land uses within a 500-foot radius of the project site, including but not limited to all facilities identified in Section 6F.4 d above. 

h. 	
Building Elevations and Signage – Architectural drawings of all exterior building facades and all proposed signage, specifying materials and colors to be used. 

i. 	
Registration Materials – Copies of registrations and licenses and a copy of a signed Host Agreement with the Town of Belmont, in accordance with MGL c. 94G and subsequent regulations, to the Planning Board prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy. Required licenses include: the state license from the Cannabis Control Commission (CCC) and the Sales Permit from the Town of Belmont Board of Health. 

j. 	
Disposal Plan – A plan indicating how the unused and expired marijuana products will be disposed consistent with applicable state and local regulations.   


i.  Compliance with the requirements for parking and loading spaces, for frontage, yards, and  
heights and coverage of buildings, and all other provisions of this Zoning By-Law;  
ii.  Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement on the site and for the  
location of driveway openings in relation to street traffic;  
iii.  Convenience and safety of vehicular and pedestrian movement off the site, if vehicular and  
pedestrian traffic off-site can reasonably be expected to be substantially affected by on-site  
changes;  
iv.  Adequacy as to the arrangement and the number of parking and loading spaces in relation to  
the proposed use of the building,;  
v.  Design and appearance of proposed buildings, structures, freestanding signs, screening’ and  
landscaping; and  
vi.  Adequacy of water supply, surface and subsurface drainage, and exterior lighting of the  
Premises.  

6F.6 Special Permit Criteria 
In granting a Special Permit for an AUME, in addition to the general criteria for issuance of a Special Permit as set forth in Section 7.4.3 of this Zoning By-Law, the Planning Board shall find that the following criteria are met: 
a. 	
The AUME meets all of the permitting requirements of all applicable agencies within the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and the Town of Belmont and will be in compliance with all applicable state and local laws and regulations. 

b. 	
The building and site have been designed to be compatible with other buildings in the area and to mitigate any adverse visual or economic impacts that might result from required security measures and restrictions on visibility into the building’s interior. 


Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/13/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
c.  The AUME provides a secure vestibule for checking proper identification and provides a secure indoor waiting area and adequate security measures to ensure that no individual participant will pose a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, and that the storage of marijuana is adequately secured in enclosed, locked facilities.  
d.  The site is designed to provide convenient, safe, and secure access and egress for customers and employees arriving to and leaving from the Premises using all modes of transportation.  
e.  Loading, refuse, and service areas are designed to be secure and visually shielded from abutting uses.  
f.  Traffic generated by customer trips, employee trips, deliveries to and from the AUME, and parking and queuing, especially during peak periods at the AUME, shall not create a substantial adverse impact on nearby residential uses.  
6F.7  Special Permit Conditions on AUMEs   

The Planning Board may impose conditions reasonably appropriate to improve site design, traffic flow, public safety, preserve the character of the surrounding area, and otherwise serve the purpose of this Section 6F.  In addition to any specific conditions applicable to the applicant’s AUME, the Planning Board shall include the following conditions in any Special Permit granted under this Section: 
a. 	
Hours of Operation. 

b. 	
The Special Permit shall lapse within five years of its issuance.  If the Special Permit holder wishes to renew the Permit, an application to renew the Special Permit must be submitted at least 120 days prior to the expiration of the Special Permit. 

c. 	
The Special Permit shall be limited to the current applicant and is not transferable and shall lapse if the permit holder ceases operating the AUME. 

d. 	
The Special Permit shall lapse upon the expiration or termination of the applicant’s state license from the CCC or Sales Permit from the Town of Belmont’s Board of Health. 

e. 	
The permit holder shall provide to the Inspector of Buildings and Chief of the Police Department, the name, telephone number, and electronic mail address of a contact person in the event that such person needs to be contacted after regular business hours to address an urgent issue. Such contact information shall be kept updated by the permit holder. 

f. 	
The designated representatives shall file an annual report (one year from the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy) with the Office of Community Development providing a copy of all current applicable state licenses for the AUME and to demonstrate continued compliance with the conditions of the Special Permit. 


Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/13/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
6F.8 Exemption from AUME Special Permit Requirement 
AUMEs that demonstrate that they are protected pursuant to the agricultural exemption under MGL c. 40A, §3, are not required to obtain a Special Permit, but shall apply for Design and Site Plan Approval pursuant to Section 7.3 of this Zoning By-Law. 
6F.9 Severability 
If any provision of this Section 6F shall be found invalid for any reason, such invalidity shall be construed as narrowly as possible, and the balance of the Section shall be deemed to be amended to the minimum extent necessary, so as to secure the purposes thereof, as set forth in Section 6F.1. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/13/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
6G. SOUTH PLEASANT STREET OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Note: §6G was adopted under Article 3 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
6G.1 General 
6G.1.1 Purpose 
In recognition of the unique location, function, and character of land uses in the South Pleasant Street commercial area, the South Pleasant Street Overlay District (SPSOD) is intended to: 
a) 	encourage revitalization of South Pleasant Street; 
b) 	promote the redevelopment of under-utilized properties in a coordinated and well-planned manner; 
c) 	promote mixed-use development, incorporating retail, restaurant, office, and residential uses; 
d) 	foster the development of a more pedestrian-oriented built environment; 
e) 	allow the uses and dimensional regulations of the Local Business I (LB-I) in the South Pleasant Street Local Business II (LB-II) area without altering the underlying LB-II zoning that are located wholly or partially within the SPSOD; 
f) 	provide for the demonstrated needs of the Town by making provisions for housing to be occupied by elderly persons who otherwise would not have such housing opportunities within the Town; and 
g) 	provide a type of housing for the elderly that reduces burdens of property maintenance and which reduces demands on municipal services. 
6G.1.2 Boundaries of South Pleasant Street Overlay District 
The South Pleasant Street Overlay District (SPSOD) boundaries are shown on the South Pleasant Street Overlay District Map and is generally described as the area on South Pleasant Street east of and including the White Street Extension, south of the Lone Tree Hill Conservation Land, and north of the railroad tracks, including those parcels in the underlying Local Business II Zoning District.  The SPSOD boundaries shall be shown on the Town of Belmont Zoning District Map. 
6G.1.3 Applicability and Authority 
The SPSOD shall be considered as overlaying other existing zoning districts.  The SPSOD confers additional development options to be employed at the discretion of the property owner(s), subject to the requirements of Design and Site Plan Review in accordance with Section 6G.3.  The Planning Board may waive some or all of the dimensional and parking requirements of this Section if, in its determination, such waiver will result in improved design. 
The Planning Board is the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for SPSOD developments requiring a Special Permit. SPSOD development projects will also be eligible for a Special Permit to increase building height and to exceed otherwise applicable square footage limitations. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
6G.2 Uses 
6G.2.1 Uses Permitted in the South Pleasant Street Overlay District 

The uses allowed within the Local Business I District (LB-I), as outlined in Section 3, Use 
Regulations, shall be allowed within a SPSOD development project. 
Uses permitted by Special Permit in the LB-I as outlined in Section 3 shall also require a Special 

Permit in the SPSOD and shall be subject to the requirements of Sections 7.4.3 and 6G.3: 
6G.2.2 Additional Uses Permitted by Special Permit in the SPSOD 
a) Age-Restricted Housing Development. 
A development that provides independent housing for households including at least one member 55 

years of age or older (“Occupant”) and may include any one of the following: 

1. 	
A spouse, under 55 years of age, of an Occupant may reside in the Occupant’s unit; 

2. 	
A spouse who survives the Occupant; 

3. 	
A spouse where the Occupant has moved out of the unit and into a long-term care facility; 

4. 	
A child, brother, or sister of an Occupant or spouse who has a mental or physical disability and is dependent upon said Occupant or spouse for daily care; or 


Note: §6G.2.2 was amended by Article 3 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
5. 	A paid caregiver providing medical or health care to an Occupant or spouse. 
b) 	Assisted Living Facility. 
An Assisted Living Facility may include associated dining facilities, common rooms, activity and recreation rooms, and offices that provide for the benefit of their residents. Assisted Living Facilities may also provide, without limitation, meals served in a common dining room or delivered to rooms; housekeeping or laundry services; transportation services; emergency response services; assistance with eating, bathing, dressing, toileting, and walking; security; exercise programs; medication reminders; and social and recreational activities. 
c) 	Accessory Uses. 
Age-Restricted Housing Developments and Assisted Living Facilities may provide convenience retail and personal services if said uses do not have any exterior signs and do not comprise more than 2,500 square feet. These accessory uses shall not render this development a Mixed-Use Residential Development under Section 6.10, Inclusionary Housing, of this Zoning By-Law, used for calculating the number of required affordable housing units. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
6G.2.3 The following are expressly prohibited uses in a SPSOD development project: 
a) Commercial surface parking lot and related facilities; 
b) Banks, credit unions, and similar establishments; 
c) Drive-through establishments; or 
d) Adult entertainment establishments.  
6G.2.4 Existing Zoning District 
The SPSOD does not in any manner remove or alter the zoning rights permitted by the underlying, 

existing zoning district. 

6G.3 Performance and Design Standards 
All development projects proposed within the SPSOD require Design and Site Plan Review by the Planning Board to ensure conformance with the following Performance and Design standards: 
6G.3.1 Performance Standards 
Dimensional Regulations -the following dimensional regulations, as generally allowed within the LB-I District, (Section 4.2, Schedule of Dimensional Regulations) shall be allowed within a SPSOD development project. 
a) 	Setbacks 
1. 	
Front: The maximum front setback shall be five feet for the front and street side façades. 

2. 	
Side: The minimum side setback shall be six feet. 

3. 
Rear: The minimum rear yard setbacks shall be six feet. 
The Planning Board may modify all setback requirements if, in its opinion, such waiver will result 



in improved design. 
b) Height of Structures 

1. 	In Feet: 
The maximum height of buildings is 28 feet above ambient sidewalk grade. 
A building height of up to 40 feet to the highest point of the building may be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board, provided that all of the mechanical systems are contained within the building. 
2. 	In Stories: The maximum height of buildings is two stories. A building height of up to three stories may be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning 
Board. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
c) 	Floor Area Ratio (FAR) The maximum allowed FAR shall be 1.25. A FAR of 1.5 may be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board. For Special Permits under this Section, the Planning Board shall take into account the criteria 
provided in Sections 4.4 and 7.4.3 and subject to Section 6G.3 6G.3.2 Parking Requirements a) The parking requirements for uses within the SPSOD shall be provided in accordance with 
Section 5.1 of this Zoning By-Law. b) Reduction of Parking The Planning Board may reduce the on-site parking requirements for all uses in a SPSOD 
development project, based upon a consideration of: 
1. 	
Availability of shared parking on another property within 300 feet; however, parking spaces for one use shall not be considered as providing the required spaces for any other use, except when it can be clearly demonstrated that the need for parking occurs at different times. The Planning Board may require a written shared parking agreement to be submitted as part of the Design and Site Plan Review application.  The agreement shall address issues such as the times of use, maintenance, striping, and snow plowing of the shared parking area. 

2. 	
Uses within ½ mile of public transportation may be entitled to a 10% reduction in required parking. 

3. 
Other factors supporting the reduction in the number of required parking spaces such as, but not limited to, staggered hours or other opportunities for shared parking among different uses. 


c) 	Bicycle Parking 
The following requirements apply to any new developments: 
1. 	
Residential -at least one bicycle parking or storage space shall be provided per dwelling unit. 

2. 	
Business -at least two bicycle parking spaces shall be created per business establishment. 


For business establishments over 10,000 square feet gross floor area (GFA), one additional bicycle parking space shall be provided for every additional 1,000 square feet GFA. 
Assisted Living Facilities and Age-Restricted Housing Developments shall be exempt from the residential bicycle parking requirement, and instead shall provide one bicycle parking space per five vehicular parking spaces. 
Any property owner required to have bicycle parking may elect to establish a shared bicycle parking facility with any other property owner in close proximity to each development utilizing the shared parking. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
6G.3.3 Design Standards 
a) 	General Guidelines 
The Planning Board shall consider the architectural and aesthetic compatibility of the proposed development project with the character of the Town of Belmont, taking into account appropriate scale, massing, and location of buildings on the lot, roof slopes, street façade, exterior building materials, historic significance, and similar factors. The following objectives and criteria shall be considered in reviewing development projects in the SPSOD: 
1. 	
Appropriateness of the proposed design and materials of proposed buildings; 

2. 	
Adequacy of the site in terms of the size of the proposed use(s); 

3. 	
Adequacy of the provision of open space; 

4. 	
Impact on traffic and pedestrian flow and safety; 

5. 	
Adequacy of utilities, including sewage disposal, water supply, and storm water drainage; 

6. 	
Impact of the proposal on the existing mix of structures and businesses in the SPSOD; 

7. 	
Determination that there will be no significant hazard to vehicles or pedestrians within the site or on adjacent streets or sidewalks; 

8. 	
Adequacy of the arrangement of parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the buildings; 

9. 	
Appropriateness of the proposed methods of disposal of refuse and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted on the site, including size, location, and landscape screening of dumpsters or other trash receptacles; and 


10. Adequacy of landscaping/site improvements. b) Building Design The detailed design standards below are intended to promote high quality development.  To provide 
additional guidance, the Planning Board may promulgate more detailed design guidelines. 
1. 	
Scale 

The size and detailing of buildings shall be pedestrian-oriented and shall be designed to reduce the visual perception of bulk and mass, particularly as viewed from the residential neighborhoods southeasterly of the SPSOD. The façade should have both horizontal and vertical elements to break down the scale and enhance the appearance. 

2. 	
External Materials and Appearance 


Buildings shall be designed to avoid use of reflective materials such as porcelain enamel, sheet metal, mirrored glass, or plastic. 
Predominant wall finishes shall be or have the appearance of wood, brick, or stone. Window openings shall be maximized in order to increase visibility into storefronts and add vibrancy to the commercial area. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
3. 	Architectural Details 
Architectural features shall be compatible with other structures in the Town’s commercial areas.  Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques shall be utilized in the design of new buildings or additions. 
All mechanical systems shall be contained within the building. 
The Planning Board may waive some or all of the dimensional and parking requirements of this Section if the proposed project effectively retains the architectural integrity of buildings contained on the list entitled Belmont's Significant Historic Buildings Subject to Demolition Delay Bylaw as previously reviewed and determined by the Historic District Commission pursuant to the procedures outlined in Section 60-320 of the Town’s General Bylaws. 
4. 	
Interior Layout for Age-Restricted Housing Developments 

Dwelling units in Age-Restricted Housing Developments shall contain no more than two bedrooms. Any separate room in any unit which is not a living room or equipped kitchen and is shown on a plan as being for other than bedroom use but which, because of location, size, or arrangement, could be used or adapted for use as a bedroom shall be considered as a bedroom for purposes of this provision.  No attic, loft, or other storage or similarly usable space shall be used as or altered to create bedroom space, nor shall the construction or other aspects facilitate such use or alteration. 

5. 	
Signs and Awnings 

The signs and awnings shall be subject to Section 5.2 of this Zoning By-Law. 

6. 	
Vehicle and Pedestrian Features 


Buildings and site plans should be designed to enhance the pedestrian environment and foster the creation of a walkable built environment along South Pleasant Street.  The following vehicle and pedestrian guidelines apply to SPSOD development projects: 
i. 	Curb cuts shall be allowed only at the discretion of the Planning Board. 
ii. 	The Planning Board may allow or require pedestrian and vehicular access to existing or future development on abutting properties in order to facilitate pedestrian access and to minimize curb cuts. 
iii. 	The provision of parking shall take into consideration the extent to which the design maximizes pedestrian flow within the development and maximizes the efficient use of existing and proposed parking facilities. 
iv. 	
Parking lots and driveways shall have landscaped buffer zones separating cars from pedestrians.  The Planning Board shall determine an adequate buffer zone for each project. 

v. 	
Where possible, surface parking lots shall not be placed along Pleasant Street and shall be concealed behind buildings and not visible from Pleasant Street. 


vi. 	Underground parking is strongly encouraged where feasible. 
vii. 	Parking Structures. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
The following design guidelines shall be considered for projects containing structured 
parking: 

a. 	
Compatibility with the proposed building(s) and surrounding neighborhood with regard to architecture, size, scale, and intensity and mass; 

b. 	
Promote a pedestrian-friendly street presence; 

c. 	
Located to the rear or side of the primary structure such that the primary street frontage holds the principal building which then screens to the extent possible the parking structure; 

d. 	
Access points whenever possible should be on the secondary or side streets, or accessed via a side driveway, versus the primary street frontage; 

e. 	
All ingress/egress points shall be designed to ensure adequate emergency vehicle access to the parking structure; 

f. 	
Exterior landscaping shall be provided to screen the structure; 

g. 	
Avoid designing entire sides or substantial lengths of the parking structure walls to be open with no fenestration and avoid long runs of openings that do not conform to or replicate window patterns consistent with the primary building; 

h. 	
Architectural articulation shall be on all sides of the parking structure and of materials compatible with the primary building; and 

i. 	
Pedestrian warning devices should be located at all entrances and exits that intersect pedestrian walkways. 


7. 	Lighting 
The following lighting requirements shall apply to buildings within a SPSOD development project: 
i. 	Exterior signs should have lights for visibility at night. 
ii. 	Landscaped paths and walkways should always be comfortably and safely lit. Consider low-placed lamps, wall sconces, and pedestrian-scale pole-mounted fixtures. 
iii. 	Awnings and canopies may be illuminated from within to make them glow at night. 
iv. 	
Lighting shall be appropriately screened so as to prevent them from creating glare in the eyes of people on the sidewalks, in buildings, or in cars. 

v. 	
Exterior light fixtures shall be shielded from view or blended into the building’s lines. Decorative fixtures may be exposed as a design element. 


vi. 	Building entries and display windows shall be lit with warm-toned lighting. 
vii. 	To highlight landscaping, up-light into trees or strings of lights among branches may be required. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
viii. Electrical conduits shall be concealed within the moldings and lines of the building. 
ix. 	There shall be no flashing signs. 
8. 	Landscaping and Off-Site Improvements 
The Applicant may be required to install street furniture and landscaping on public property 
abutting and within the proximity of the proposed development project to ensure the integrity 
of design in the SPSOD and to promote the development of a pedestrian-oriented building 
environment that enhances connectivity to both the Waverley Square and Belmont Center 
commercial areas and transit stops. Site improvements, such as window boxes or potted 
plants, may be installed outside development project storefronts, provided that they do not 
conflict with Massachusetts Architectural Access Board regulations. 

Street furniture includes benches, planters, trash receptacles, lamps, bike racks, and signs. 
If a front setback is provided, those portions of the front yard not occupied by public amenities 
shall be landscaped to enhance the streetscape. 

The following landscaping and site improvement guidelines apply to the SPSOD: 

i. 	All site open space (yards, parking lots, setbacks) should be planned carefully, with appropriate plantings or landscaping.  Open space shall be appropriately usable and open and may consist of landscaped gardens, plazas, sitting areas, sidewalks or similar features. 
ii. 	Open spaces may be utilized to break up a block of buildings in order to provide visual relief. 
iii. 	Street furniture shall be provided for public use. 
iv. 	
Street furniture should be made of solid wood, metal, or recycled plastic lumber to ease maintenance. 

v. 	
Trash receptacles shall be provided at all gathering places and properly maintained. 


vi. 	Window boxes, gardens, or hanging planters shall be located in appropriate locations. 
vii. 	Landscaping and plantings shall be maintained so as not to interfere with entry to stores or block visibility of signs, or sight lines for drivers exiting or crossing sidewalks. 
Note: §6G.3.3 b) 8. Vii was amended by Article 3 at the 2018 Special Town Meeting. 
viii. Climate requirements, growth potential, and adaptability to the urban environment shall be considered when selecting plant types and species. 
ix. 	Landscaping shall be installed to screen dumpsters, transformers, air conditioning equipment, and other similar building equipment. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
6G.4 Submittal Requirements 
Any Applicant seeking Design and Site Plan Review or a Special Permit for a SPSOD development shall submit 10 copies of the application, and an electronic copy (e.g. pdf), in such form as the Planning Board may require which shall include the following: 
a) 	Development plans bearing the seal of a Massachusetts registered professional (architect, landscape architect, civil engineer, or similar professional as appropriate); 
b) 	Narrative description of the proposed work affecting the exterior of the building or structure, including a description of the materials to be used; 
c) 	Site plans and specifications showing total square footage and dimensions of all buildings and site improvements, including: 
1. 	
New buildings, additions, adjacent structures; 

2. 	
Streets, sidewalks and crosswalks; 

3. 	
Existing and proposed open spaces, including, existing and proposed walls, fences, outdoor lighting, street furniture, new paving and ground surface materials; 

4. 	
Points of vehicular and pedestrian access/egress; 

5. 	
All utilities, easements or service facilities, insofar as they relate to the project; and 


6. Proposed site grading, including existing and proposed grades at property lines. d) A certified plot plan less than 6 months old; e) Architectural Layout Plans at a scale of 1/8” = 1’ or appropriate scale. All spaces within the 
proposal must be properly labeled and all dimensions must be clearly shown; 
f) 	Site perspective, sections, elevations 1/8” = 1’; 
g) 	Detailed description of the proposed use of the building, including hours of operation, numbers of 
employees, method and types of deliveries, etc; 
h) 	Summary of building statistics indicating the number of dwelling units, distinguishing units by number of bedrooms and any special occupancies (affordable, handicapped, etc.), the maximum number of bedrooms, floor area, square footage of each dwelling unit; 
i) 	A proposed development schedule showing the beginning of construction, the rate of construction 
and development, including phases, if applicable, and the estimated date of completion; 
j) 	Detailed plans for disposal of sanitary sewage; 
k) 	Detailed plans for landscaping; 
l) 	Parking plan; 
m) Plan for lighting, including the type of fixtures, and the off-site overspill (foot candles) of the 
lighting; n) Signage plans; 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
o) 	The proposed method of storm water removal accompanied by calculations for a 20-year storm event; and 
p) 	For Age-Restricted Housing Developments, the following are also required: 
1. 	
All condominium deeds, trust or other documents that incorporate the applicable age restriction and comply with all federal, state, and local laws. Covenants and deed restrictions shall provide that the dwelling units shall be occupied by persons 55 years of age and older except for guest visiting for short duration not to exceed thirty days in a calendar year. 

2. 	
The manner in which the Management Organization or Homeowners Association shall certify to the Town when any unit is sold or rented and that the provisions of this Section 6.G will be met. 


The Planning Board may also require the following prior to acting on the application: 
i. 	Materials for the proposed buildings; 
ii. 	An estimate of municipal revenues and costs expected to be generated by the project, including anticipated real estate valuation and public service needs; and 
The Planning Board may request additional information necessary in their deliberations relative to the application for the Special Permit. 
6G.5 Procedures 
6G.5.1 Design and Site Plan Review 
Applicants for Design and Site Plan Review under this Section 6G shall pay a review fee in an amount to be determined by the Planning Board to cover the reasonable costs for the employment of any independent consultants to assist in the review of the application. Consultants shall be qualified professionals in the relevant fields of expertise as determined by the Planning Board. 
Applications shall follow the procedures below and as specified in Section 7.3.3 of this Zoning By-Law. Where there is a conflict in procedures, those specified below shall prevail. The Planning Board, or its designee, shall review a submitted application for completeness and shall notify the Applicant within thirty days of its submission whether the application is complete or, if not, what items are missing.  If the Planning Board fails to so notify the Applicant within such time, the application shall be deemed complete; provided that nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit the ability of the Planning Board to require additional information.  The time for holding a public hearing shall not commence until the Planning Board has received a complete application. 
An application for Design and Site Plan Review hereunder shall be approved if such application, as affected by such reasonable conditions as the Planning Board may impose, is consistent with the objectives in this Section and all other requirements of this Zoning By-Law.  The Planning Board may impose such reasonable conditions as it shall deem appropriate to assure the continuing consistency of the development project with the purposes of Section 6G. 
Applications may be denied when: 
a) 	Applications are incomplete; or 
b) 	Proposed developments inconsistent with the standards and criteria set forth in Section 6G shall be denied in writing and shall set forth the reasons for denial. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
Proposed amendments to approvals under this Section shall follow the procedures set forth for initial applications.  
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Section 6G to the contrary, Design and Site Plan Review shall not be required for alterations or repairs to an existing building in a previously approved SPSOD development project that do not increase the height, bulk, or footprint thereof, that are not being performed to provide for its use for a substantially different purpose, and that do not violate the conditions contained within any prior Design and Site Plan Approval applicable to such building. 
6G.5.2 	Special Permit Application 
All applications for Special Permits in the SPSOD shall follow the sections of the Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law that are applicable to the application procedures. 
6G.5.3 	Additional Special Permit Conditions for Age-Restricted Housing Developments and Assisted Living Facilities 
In granting a Special Permit under this Section, the Planning Board may impose such other conditions, safeguards, and limitations on time or use that it determines to be in compliance with the applicable criteria set forth in this Section including, but not limited to the following conditions: 
a) Deed Restrictions 
All dwellings in the development shall be subject to an age restriction described in a deed/deed rider, restrictive covenant, the deed of the trust, master deed or articles of incorporation, or other document approved by the Planning Board that shall be recorded in the chain of title with the Registry of Deeds or Land Court.  The age restriction shall limit the dwelling units to occupancy by seniors, age 55 or older; or their spouses of any age; provide for reasonable time-limit guest visitation rights; and may authorize special exceptions that allow persons of all ages to live in the dwelling unit together with a senior resident, if the Planning Board so approves and specifies in its Special Permit. Except in the event of the death of the qualifying occupant of a dwelling unit, or foreclosure or other involuntary transfer of a dwelling unit, a two-year exemption shall be allowed to facilitate the transfer of dwelling units to another eligible household. Deed restrictions, including age restrictions, shall run with the land in perpetuity and shall be enforceable by an association of owners or any owner(s) of dwelling units in the Development and by the Town of Belmont.  
Furthermore, the continuing observance and enforcement of the age restriction described herein shall be a condition of compliance with the SPSOD. Exceptions to this requirement shall be allowed only in the case where eligible residents are deceased, and there is no surviving eligible residents, and the units are owned and occupied by the deceased eligible residents’ surviving spouse. 
b) Local Preference 
The Planning Board shall require that Belmont residents be given preference in the purchase or rental of dwelling units within the SPSOD. Such preference shall be for thirty percent of the dwelling units in the development and shall be for at least one year from the issuance of the first Certificate of Occupancy for any residential building or portion thereof. 
6G.5.4 	Coordination with Other Provisions of By-Law 
This Section 6G together with the rest of this By-Law constitutes the zoning regulations for the SPSOD. Where conflicts exist between this Section 6G and the rest of this By-Law, the provisions of this Section shall govern. 
Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law As amended through 11/131/2018 Approved 04/10/2019 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 7. ADMINISTRATION 
7.1 Enforcement and Penalty 
7.1.1 Enforcement 
The Building Inspector shall enforce this By-Law in the manner and with the powers as provided in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A and this By-Law. The Chief of the Fire Department shall refer to the Building Inspector all violations of this By-Law that are discovered in the course of inspections by that department or otherwise. 
If the Building Inspector is requested in writing to enforce a provision or provisions of this By-Law against any person allegedly in violation of the same and such officer declines to act, he shall notify, in writing, the party requesting such enforcement of any action or refusal to act, and the reasons therefore, within 14 days of receipt of such request. 
7.1.2 Penalty 
Any person violating any provision of this By-Law shall be subject to a fine not exceeding $300.00 for each offense. Each day or part thereof that any violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
Note: §7.1.2 was amended by Article 29 at the 1992 Annual Town Meeting. 
7.1.3 Non-Criminal Disposition 
Note: §7.1.3 was adopted under Article 28 at the 1992 Annual Town Meeting. 
In addition to the procedure for enforcement described above, the provisions of this By-Law may also be enforced by non-criminal disposition as provided in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40, Section 21D (Section 21D). The penalty for such violation shall be $50.00 for the first offense, $100.00 for the second offense and $200.00 for the third and each subsequent offense. Each Day or part thereof shall constitute a separate offense. 
“Enforcing person” as used in this Section 7.1.3 shall mean the Building Inspector and any other Town employee designated by the Board of Selectmen as an enforcing person. 
Any enforcing person taking cognizance of a violation of this By-Law or any rule or regulation adopted hereunder shall give the offender a written notice to appear before the clerk of the district court having jurisdiction thereof for the non-criminal disposition thereof in accordance with the provisions of Section 21D. The provisions of Section 21D are incorporated herein by reference. 
7.2 Compliance 
7.2.1 Conformity Required 
Buildings or structures may not be erected, substantially altered, moved or changed in use and land may not be substantially altered or changed in principal use without certification by the Building Inspector that such action is in compliance with then applicable zoning, or without review by him regarding whether all necessary permits have been received from those governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal, state, or local law. Issuance of a Building Permit or Certification of Use and Occupancy, where required under the Commonwealth of Massachusetts State Building Code, may serve as such certification. 
7.2.2 Vested Rights Limitation 
Construction or operations under a Building or Special Permit shall conform to any subsequent amendment of this By-Law unless the use or construction authorized by the Permit is commenced within a period of not less than six months after the issuance of the Permit and in cases involving construction, unless such construction is continued through to completion as continuously and expeditiously as is reasonable. 
7.3 Design and Site Plan Review 
Note: §7.3 was amended by Article 16 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
7.3.1 Purpose 
a) 	To maintain the integrity and character of all zoning districts and adjoining zones by insuring that proposed development fulfills the purposes and complies with the requirements of the Belmont Zoning By-Law (“these By-Laws”). 
b) 	To insure that development which is subject to this review is planned and designed to minimize impacts on its abutters, the neighborhood and the environment. 
c) 	To provide an orderly review procedure where site plans of proposed projects can be approved with reasonable conditions which will further the purposes of these By-Laws. 
7.3.2 Applicability 
The Planning Board shall hear and decide all petitions for Design and Site Plan Review in accordance with the provisions of this Section 7.3. 
a) 	Design and Site Plan Review is required for any new building, addition or change in use of a predominantly non-residential building greater than 2,500 gross square feet gross floor area in any zoning district, or a proposal that results in the need for six (6) or more parking spaces on the lot or if the proposal reduces the number of on-site parking spaces or changes to the configuration of off-street parking, screening, egress, utilities, drainage or lighting. 
b) 	For addition or alterations of less than 2,500 gross square feet, the Planning Board may waive any or all of these requirements. 
c) 	Design and Site Plan Review is not required for those uses which require a Special Permit (for use) from either the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals. If a Special Permit is required per Section 1.5 of these By-Laws, it shall be obtained prior to the submittal of an application for Design and Site Plan Review. 
7.3.3 Application Procedures 
Each application for Design and Site Plan Review shall be submitted to the Office of Community Development (OCD) during regular business hours and shall contain all of the information noted below. Applicants are encouraged to meet with OCD staff planners, abutters to the proposal and informally with the Planning Board to discuss the proposal prior to submittal. 
• 	
A completed application form and the applicable fees to address the administrative, advertising and review costs of the Town, 

• 	
An original and thirteen (13) copies of the application package and plans, and 

• 	
Site information as required in Section 7.3.4 below. 


a) 	Within ten (10) days of receipt of the application package, the Office of Community Development shall provide copies to the Board of Selectmen, Board of Health, Zoning Board of Appeals, Department of Public Works and the Fire and Police Departments requesting written comments prior to the hearing date. The application may also be provided to other appropriate boards or committees (the Traffic Advisory Committee or Conservation Commission for example). Comments received by OCD shall be made available to the Applicant upon request prior to the hearing. 
b) 	The Planning Board shall hold a public hearing within 45 days of OCD receiving the application. Notice of the public hearing shall be placed in a newspaper of general circulation, by posting at Town Hall and the OCD website at least seven 
(7) days before the hearing.  Notice shall be sent by mail to the Applicant and abutters (within 300 feet) prior to the hearing date. 
c) 	Within 20 days following the close of the public hearing, the Planning Board shall act on the application. Approval shall require a majority vote of the five (5) members.  The associate Planning Board member shall sit on the Board for the purposes of acting on a Design and Site Plan Review application, in the case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest, on the part of any member of the Planning Board or in the event of a vacancy on the Board. This time period may be extended at the request of the Applicant. 
Note: §7.3.3 c) was amended by Article 6 at the 2010 Special Town Meeting. 
d) 	The Design and Site Plan Review application shall be approved provided that all of the requirements of these By-Laws are fulfilled.  The Board may attach reasonable conditions to any approval. An approval does not relieve the applicant of the responsibility of obtaining other required approvals and/or permits from local boards, state or federal agencies. 
e) 	If the Design and Site Plan Review application does not conform to the requirements of these By-Laws, the Planning Board shall identify these deficiencies in writing and may deny approval. A new application and hearing process will then be required for further consideration of the proposal. 
f) 	Any appeal may be filed with Zoning Board of Appeals (ZBA) in conjunction with an appeal from the denial or grant of a Building Permit for the subject site. 
g) 	No Building Permit shall be issued to the Applicant (or his/her designee) until the Planning Board has filed its written decision with the Town Clerk or after 20 days has elapsed from the close of the public hearing without a decision being filed. 
7.3.4 Design and Site Plan Review Submittal Requirements 
Each application for Design and Site Plan Review shall include the following information unless, prior to submittal, the Planning Board has determined that certain materials are not germane to the decision being made, and authorizes their omission: 
a) 	Site plans at a scale of 1”=20’ prepared and stamped by a professional engineer (P.E.) or a Registered Professional Land Surveyor (RPLS).  (The Board may approve another scale or waive the PE/RPLS requirement in specific circumstances.)  The plans shall show all new buildings, additions, adjacent structures, streets, sidewalks and crosswalks and all existing and proposed open spaces.  Site development details shall include existing and proposed walls, fences, outdoor lighting, street furniture, new paving and ground surface materials.  Points of vehicular and pedestrian access/egress shall be shown. All utilities, easements or service facilities, insofar as they relate to the project, shall be shown. Proposed site grading, including existing and proposed grades at property lines shall be shown. 
b) 	Building elevations or drawings shall be provided at a scale of 1/8” = 1’ or other appropriate scale. 
c) 	A brief narrative describing the proposal and its potential impacts on its abutters and the neighborhood.  The narrative should address issues such as the hours of operation, the number of seats for restaurants, clubhouses, or places of public assembly, anticipated number and frequency of events at clubhouses, places of public assembly, or anticipated pupil enrollment and use schedule for schools for profit, number of parking spaces, the square footage of the site and buildings, and potential impacts on open spaces.  For multi-family proposals the number, type and size of dwelling units should be discussed. The Planning Board may, at its discretion, require an estimate of municipal revenues and costs expected to be generated by the project, including anticipated real estate valuation and public service needs. 
d) 	The proposed method of stormwater removal accompanied by calculations for a 20-year storm event. All efforts shall be made to meet the most current Department of Environmental Protection Stormwater Management Design Guidelines. 
7.3.5 Approval Guidelines: 
a) 	At its discretion, the Planning Board may require the completion of a Development Impact Report pursuant to Section 7.5 of these By-Laws prior to acting on the application.  The Applicant may also be required to receive an Order of Conditions from the Conservation Commission and/or approval from the Board of Health prior to the Planning Board acting upon an application. 
b) 	The following criteria and requirements must be fulfilled: 
• 	
The dimensions of the proposed building(s), lot and lot coverage shall comply with the requirements provided in table form per Section 4 of these By-Laws, 

• 	
The arrangement of parking and loading spaces, internal traffic circulation and traffic controls in relation to the proposed uses of the building(s) and adjacent uses shall comply with Section 5.1 of these By-Laws, 

• 	
All Signs shall comply with Section 5.2 of these By-Laws, 

• 	
All Landscaping requirements shall comply with Section 5.3 of these By-Laws, 

• 	
The method to dispose of refuse and other waste if it is not within the structure shall be defined. Screening of exterior dumpsters or similar trash receptacles shall comply with Section 5.3 of these By-Laws, and 

• 	
All Environmental Controls shall comply with Section 5.4 of these By-Laws. 


c) 	The Board may require that some or all of any conditions of Approval be secured by a deposit of money or an Irrevocable Letter of Credit in the Town’s favor. This performance guarantee shall bear a reasonable relationship to the expected costs of completing the specified work being secured. 
d) 	Design and Site Plan Review Approval shall lapse if on-site construction is not commenced within two (2) years from the date of Approval. If the Approval lapses, a new submittal and hearing will be required. 
e) 	Upon completion of the project, the developer shall submit “as-built” plans to Office of Community Development for review. Upon acceptance of the plans by Office of Community Development and the Planning Board, the developer may submit a written request for a release of the performance guarantee. This provision may be waived by the Planning Board in certain circumstances. 
7.3.6 Revisions to an Approved Site Plan: 
a) 	The Applicant, property owner, Building Commissioner or the Planning Board may petition to change or modify a Design and Site Plan Approval.  This may occur in the event of unforeseen site characteristics, infrastructure or economic problems or other unexpected circumstances. 
b) 	All proposed changes shall be reviewed and discussed by the Planning Board at a regularly scheduled meeting prior to the initiation of such on the property. Minor changes, as determined by the Planning Board, may be approved without a public hearing. 
• 	
The Planning Board reserves the right to require a new hearing at the expense of the Applicant if it determines that a proposed change or modification is major and/or significant. 

• 	
All approved changes or modifications shall be detailed in writing by the Planning Board. All changes or modifications shall be shown on a revised plan and if approved, shown on the “as-built” plans. 


7.4 Special Permits 
Note: §7.4 was adopted by Article 17 at the 2005 Annual Town Meeting. 
7.4.1 Special Permit Granting Authority 
At various places in this By-Law, authority for acting on particular Special Permits is assigned to the Planning Board or the Board of Appeals. Where no Board is specifically designated, the Board of Appeals shall act as the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA). 
Pursuant to Chapter 40A, Section 9 of the General Laws, the Planning Board shall have an associate member for the purposes of acting on a Special Permit application in the case of absence, inability to act, or conflict of interest, on the part of any member of the Planning Board or in the event of a vacancy on the Board. Said associate member shall be appointed by the Board of Selectmen. 
Note: §7.4.1 was amended by Article 6 at the 2010 Special Town Meeting. 
7.4.2 Applicability 
a) 	Special Permits are required for 
1. 	
Specified expansions, alterations and/or changes to non-conforming structures and uses as defined in Section 1.5.  The criteria listed therein shall apply to those petitions. 

2. 	
Those uses noted in Section 3.3 and, 

3. 	
Where otherwise specifically provided for within these By-Laws. 


b) 	Where a Special Permit is required to allow a use, no Design and Site Plan Review pursuant to Section 7.3 is necessary from the Planning Board. 
7.4.3 Special Permit Criteria 
The following shall be the basis for decisions on Special Permits, except as may be more specifically provided elsewhere in this By-Law. Special Permits shall be granted only if the Special Permit Granting Authority determines that the proposal’s benefits to the Town will outweigh any adverse effects for the Town or the vicinity, after consideration of the following preferred qualities, among other things: 
a) 	Location 
1. 	
There shall be adequate provisions for water, sewerage, stormwater drainage for the proposed use and no additional adverse impacts should be created. 

2. 	
The site should be able to accommodate the proposed use without substantial environmental impacts, impacts to valuable trees or other natural resources. 

3. 	
The site should be able to accommodate the proposed use without substantial impacts on municipal infrastructure and with minimum traffic impacts on abutting residential neighborhoods. 


b) 	Activity Type and Mix 
1. 	Residential proposals should serve housing needs of local residents, broaden the diversity of housing within the Town and/or provide affordable housing opportunities pursuant to Section 6.10 of these By-Laws. 
Note: §7.4.3 b) 1 was amended by Article 26 at the 2003 Annual Town Meeting. 
2. 	
The use should complement the character and the scale of existing buildings/uses/activities in the neighborhood and not create undesirable impacts. 

3. 
The use shall be beneficial to the Town and fulfill a need. 
c) Visual Concerns 



1. 	
Views from public ways and developed properties should be considerately treated in the site arrangement. 

2. 	
The visual impact of parking and service areas should be minimized and should be screened from abutting premises. 

3. 	
Departure from the architectural scale of buildings on abutting and nearby premises should be minimized, except where the departure would serve a town purpose. 


d) 	Access 
1. 	
Vehicular and pedestrian access/egress should be safe and convenient and shall be designed to minimize impacts on the abutting public ways. 

2. 	
Pedestrian and vehicular movement within the site should be safe and convenient, and arranged to minimize impacts on abutters. 


e) 	Process 
1. 	
A proposal that has been developed in consultation with municipal staff and those likely to be substantially impacted by it is preferred. 

2. 	
Mitigation to ameliorate negative impacts is required. 


f) 	Special Permit applications for use shall comply with the criteria within Section 7.3.5 Design and Site Plan Review. 
At the time of application, the Applicant shall submit documentation regarding each of the above considerations which are germane, including information regarding consultative efforts made with municipal staff, neighborhood groups or other affected parties. 
7.4.4 Procedures 
a) 	It is recommended that the Applicant meet with municipal staff and abutters to the proposal prior to the application being filed. 
Each application for Special Permit shall be filed with the Town Clerk. Ten (10) copies of said application and supporting plans or other materials, including one having the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed forthwith by the petitioner with the Office of Community Development. 
b) 	The Office of Community Development shall refer the application to the SPGA and the Planning Board (if not acting as the SPGA), Board of Selectmen, Board of Health, Fire and Police Departments, Department of Public Works and/or other boards or authorities, as appropriate, for technical review and comment.  Failure of a department or board to make recommendation within 35 days of receipt of the application shall be deemed a lack of opposition thereto. 
c) 	The Special Permit Granting Authority shall hold a public hearing within 65 days of the filing of the application and shall render a decision within 90 days from the date the public hearing is closed. The required time limits for a public hearing and for rendering a final decision may be extended by written agreement between the petitioner and the Special Permit Granting Authority. A copy of such agreement shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk. 
• 	Failure of the Special Permit Granting Authority to take final action within 90 days from the date of the close of the public hearing or within any extended time, if applicable, shall be deemed to be a grant of the Special Permit subject to the procedures found in MGL, Chapter 40A, Section 9. 
7.4.5 Special Permit Limitations 
A Special Permit, if granted, shall be subject to any general or specific rules prescribed herein, and may be made subject to appropriate conditions, safeguards, and limitations on time or use. A Special Permit shall lapse within a two-year period or a shorter period if so specified by the Board, not including any time required to pursue or await the determination of an appeal pursuant to MGL, Chapter 40A, Section 17 if a substantial use thereof has not sooner commenced except for good cause or, in the case of a permit for construction, if construction has not begun within the period except for good cause. 
7.5 Development Impact Report 
Note: §7.5 was adopted under Article 13 at the 2003 Special Town Meeting. 
7.5.1 Purpose 
The purpose of a Development Impact Report (DIR) is to enable the applicable board and municipal officials to identify the environmental/social/physical and/or infrastructure impacts of the requested activity and to determine if the impacts can be mitigated.  The DIR shall identify the methods to be used to mitigate and to minimize adverse impacts on the neighborhood and the Town. 
7.5.2 Applicability 
A DIR may be required by the Planning Board or Zoning Board of Appeals during a review of any application for a non-residential or multi-family structure or use which could have significant, deleterious environmental, physical or social impacts on the neighborhood and/or the Town and its infrastructure. This provision is adopted pursuant to Section 53G, Chapter 44, MGL and as such, the DIR shall be at the expense of the Applicant. 
a) 	At their discretion, the Planning Board or the Zoning Board of Appeals may require a DIR upon the submittal of any application for a Special Permit, Design and Site Plan Review Approval or a Comprehensive Permit. 
b) 	If the Applicant is required to file an Environmental Impact Report with the MEPA Unit of the Executive Office of the Environmental Affairs, the Draft or Final Environmental Impact Report may be submitted to fulfill the requirements of this Section. This decision is at the discretion of the Board reviewing the application. 
7.5.3 Consultant Selection and Requirements 
a) 	The appropriate Board shall develop a Scope of Work to guide the completion of the DIR. This Scope may be coordinated with other boards and/or professional staff. Upon the completion of the Scope of Work, the Board shall send out a “Request for Proposal” to at least three (3) qualified consulting firms. The Board shall review all responses and choose the optimum proposal. 
1. 	
The selected consultant must have an educational degree in or related to the field at issue, or 

2. 	
Have three or more years of practice in the field at issue, and 

3. 	
Provide suitable references for similar activities in other communities. 


b) 	The Applicant may appeal the selection of the consultant to the Board of Selectmen if they believe that the selected consultant has a conflict of interest or does not possess the minimum required qualifications.  The time required for action on the application is extended pending the appeal.  The Selectmen have one (1) month from the date of the appeal to render a decision. 
c) 	The Applicant shall then be required to make a payment to the Town of Belmont in the exact sum of the proposal selected. This money shall be placed in a separate, interest bearing escrow account administered by the Town Treasurer pursuant to Section 53G, Chapter 44, MGL. An annual report on such accounts shall be 
submitted by the Treasurer to the Town Administrator. 
7.5.4 Contents of the Scope of Work 
The appropriate Board may waive or add to the list of concerns noted below pursuant to the specifics of each application.  It is recommended that the Applicant work with the Board to participate in the preparation of the Scope.  The contents could include the following: 
a) 	Physical Environment 
1. 	
Provide a description and impact analysis that the development will have on the general topography, vegetation, geologic, scenic and historical features and open space of the site. 

2. 	
Provide a description and impact analysis on properties abutting the site.  This analysis may include traffic, lighting, noise, shadowing and emissions impacts. 

3. 	
Identify historic archeological sites, geological, botanical, existing or potential trails and accesses to open space areas and how they will be maintained or enhanced. 


b) 	Surface Water 
1. 	Provide a narrative on the following: 
i. 	the methods and degree to which water is recycled back into the ground. Estimate increase of peak run-off and volume of run-off over a 24-hour period caused by altered surface conditions; 
ii. 	the maintenance and improvement of the flow and quality of surface waters including Best Management Practices (BMP) to be employed; and, 
iii. 	methods to prevent flooding onto adjacent properties. 
2. 	Describe the location, extent and type of existing water bodies or wetlands on the site and the proposed alterations to such, including both existing and proposed surface drainage characteristics within and adjacent to the site. 
c) 	Erosion Controls 
1. 	Describe the erosion control and soil stabilization methods, timing and locations to be used during construction. 
i. 	approximate the size and location of land to be cleared at any given time and the length of time soil will be exposed; 
ii. 	identify methods for protecting soil stockpiles; and 
iii. 	detail any other erosion control issues. 
2. 	Evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed soil erosion control methods on the site and on the surrounding areas. Also review the permanent methods to be used to control erosion and sedimentation. 
d) 	Town Services and Infrastructure 
1. 	
Estimate traffic flow at peak periods employing ITE standards and procedures. Detail the proposed on-site and projected off-site circulation patterns to the project.  Detail pedestrian and bicycle movements and any proposed enhancements.  Are new traffic controls (re: signals, signage, striping, etc.) or upgrades to existing controls necessary? 

2. 	
Estimate the effect/impacts of the project on police and fire protection services, public works, educational services, sewer capacity, and the water supply system. 


e) 	The appropriate Board may require the submission of information which could be required by the MEPA Unit if an EIR were required under applicable MEPA regulations. 
7.5.5 Results of the DIR Process 
a) 	The selected consultant shall complete the Scope of Work developed in Section 
7.5.4 above and submit ten (10) copies of a written report to the appropriate Board and the Applicant. This Report and any accompanying maps shall also be submitted in electronic format. 
b) 	The Board shall employ the Report in reaching its decision on the application. Mitigation recommendations from the Report may be incorporated into a final decision on the application.  If the DIR demonstrates that one or more of the decision-making criteria, objectives or standards cannot be met, the DIR may be the basis for disapproval of the application. 
c) 	Upon the satisfactory completion of the Scope of Work, the consultant shall be compensated the agreed upon fee and the Applicant shall receive any remaining interest from the account. In no case shall the fee exceed the agreed upon amount unless authorized in advance by the Applicant and the appropriate Board. 
7.6 Board of Appeals 
7.6.1 Membership 
There shall be a Board of Appeals consisting of five regular and three associate members to be appointed by the Board of Selectmen as provided in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A. All members shall be residents of the Town. In making the appointments, the Board of Selectmen shall consider those persons best qualified to carry out the statutory responsibilities of the Board. One regular member shall be appointed each year for a term of five years. One associate member shall be appointed each year for a term of three years. In case of absence, inability to act or conflict of interest on the part of any member or in the event of a vacancy on the Board, the chairperson of the Board of Appeals may designate an associate member to serve. Any member may be removed for cause by the Board of Selectmen upon written charges and after a public hearing. Vacancies shall be filled for unexpired terms in the same manner as in the case of original appointments. No regular or associate member of the Board of Appeals shall represent before such Board any party or interest in any matter pending before it. 
7.6.2 Powers 
The Board of Appeals shall act as a Permit Granting Authority and a Special Permit Granting Authority and shall have the following powers in accordance with the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A and this By-Law. 
• 	
Appeals -To hear and decide an appeal taken by any person aggrieved by reason of his (her) inability to obtain a permit or enforcement action from the Building Inspector under the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A and/or this By-Law, by the Metropolitan Area Planning Council or by any person including an officer or board of the Town of Belmont or of an abutting town aggrieved by an order or decision of the Building Inspector in violation of any provision of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A or of this By-Law. 

• 	
Special Permits -To hear and decide on application for Special Permits as provided in this By-Law in cases where the Board of Appeals is designated as Special Permit Granting Authority. 


Pursuant to the provisions of Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 44, Section 53G, the Board of Appeals shall promulgate rules requiring any applicant for a Special Permit pursuant to Section 6.8.5 to pay a review fee, in an amount to be determined by the Board of Appeals, to cover the reasonable costs of the Board of Appeals for the employment of any independent consultants determined to be needed to assist in the review of the Special Permit application. Such consultants shall be qualified professionals in the relevant fields of expertise determined by the Board of Appeals. 
Note: §7.6.2 was amended by Article 33 at the 1998 Annual Town Meeting. 
• 	Variances -To hear and decide a petition with respect to particular land or structures for a Variance from the terms of this By-Law, where the Board specifically finds that: 
1. 	
Owing to circumstances relating to soil conditions, shape or topography of such land or structures and especially affecting such land or structures but not affecting generally the zoning district in which it is located, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this By-Law would involve substantial hardship, financial or otherwise, to the petitioner or appellant, and 

2. 	
The desired relief may be granted without substantial detriment to the public good, and 

3. 	
Without nullifying or substantially derogating from the intent or purposes of this By-Law. 


Variances authorizing a use or activity not otherwise permitted in a particular zoning district may be granted only for accessory uses, and uses within existing structures without extension thereof except that the Board of Appeals upon petition may modify a Use Variance granted prior to January 1, 1976. 
Note: §7.6.2 was amended by Article 36 at the 1991 Annual Town Meeting. 
In acting on Variances, the Board of Appeals may impose conditions, safeguards and limitations both of time and use, including the continued existence of any particular structures but excluding any condition, safeguard or limitation based upon the continued ownership of the land or structure to which the Variance pertains by the Applicant, petitioner or any owner. If the rights authorized by a Variance are not exercised within one year of the date of the authorization, they shall lapse and may be reestablished only after a new notice and hearing. 
7.6.3 Procedure 
a) 	Hearing. In the case of every appeal made to the Board of Appeals, every petition for a Variance and every application for a Special Permit to said Board under the provisions of this By-Law, the Board shall hold a public hearing thereon. Notice of the hearing shall be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the Town once in each of two successive weeks, the first publication to be not less than 14 days before the day of the hearing. Notice shall be sent by mail, postage prepaid, to parties in interest including the petitioner, abutters, owners of land directly opposite on any public or private street or way, owners of land within 300 feet of the property line including owners of land in another municipality all as they appear on the most recent applicable tax lists, the Planning Board and the Planning Board of every abutting municipality. The Assessors shall certify to the Board the names and addresses of the parties in interest. 
b) 	Filing. A petition for a Variance and an application for a Special Permit to the Board of Appeals shall be filed by the petitioner with the Town Clerk and a copy of said petition or application, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed forthwith by the petitioner with the Board of Appeals. A notice of appeal from a decision of the Building Inspector shall specify the grounds for such appeal and shall be filed by the petitioner with the Town Clerk, and a copy of said notice of appeal, including the date and time of filing certified by the Town Clerk, shall be filed forthwith by the petitioner with the office or board whose order or decision is being appealed and to the Board of Appeals. 
Any such petition, application or appeal shall include ten copies of said petition, application or appeal and any supporting plans or other materials. If Design and Site Plan Review is required, a total of fifteen (15) copies of the petition, application or appeal and supporting plans or other material shall be required. 
Note: §7.6.3 b) was amended by Article 34 at the 1995 Annual Town Meeting. 
c) 	Time limits. The Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing on any appeal, petition for a Variance, or application for a Special Permit, within 65 days of the Board’s receipt of the notice of appeal, petition or application. The decision of the Board shall be made within 100 days after the date of filing of an appeal or petition, except in regard to applications for Special Permits, on which the Board shall render a decision within 90 days from the date of the public hearing. 
The required time limits for a public hearing and for rendering a decision may be extended by written agreement between the petitioner and the Board of Appeals. A copy of such agreement shall be filed in the Office of the Town Clerk. 
Failure by the Board of Appeals to act within 100 days after the date of the filing of the appeal or petition as the case may be, or within such extended time as is applicable, and failure by the Board to render a decision within 90 days of the required public hearing on a Special Permit application or within such extended time as is applicable, shall be deemed to be the grant of the appeal, petition or 
application, subject to the following requirements: 
1. 	
The petitioner who seeks such approval by reason of the failure of the Board to act within the time prescribed shall notify the Town Clerk, in writing, within 14 days from the expiration of said 100 days in the case of appeals and Variance petitions, and said 90 days in the case of Special Permit applications, or any extended time if applicable, of such approval and that notice has been sent by the petitioner to parties in interest. 

2. 	
The petitioner shall send such notice to parties in interest by mail, and each such notice shall specify that appeals, if any, shall be made pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40A, Section 17, and shall be filed within 20 days after the date the Town Clerk received such written notice from the petitioner that the Board failed to act within the time prescribed. 

3. 	
After the expiration of 20 days without notice of appeal to a Court of competent jurisdiction, or, if appeal has been taken, after receipt of certified records of the Court indicating that such approval has become final, the Town Clerk shall issue a certificate stating the date of approval, the fact that the Board failed to take final action and that the approval resulting from such failure has become final, and such certificate shall be forwarded by the Town Clerk to the petitioner. 


d) 	Documentation. Upon the granting for a Variance or Special Permit, or any extension, modification or renewal thereof, the Board shall issue to the owner and to the Applicant if other than the owner a copy of its decision, certified by the Board containing the name and address of the owner, identifying the land affected, setting forth compliance with the statutory requirements for the issuance of such Variance or Special Permit and certifying that copies of the decision and all plans referred to in the decision have been filed with the Planning Board and Town Clerk. 
No Variance or Special Permit, or any extension, modification or renewal thereof, shall take effect until a copy of the decision bearing the certification of the Town Clerk that 20 days have elapsed after the decision has been filed in the Office of the Town Clerk and no appeal has been filed or that if such appeal has been filed, that it has been dismissed or denied, and if it is a Variance or Special Permit which has been approved by reason of the failure of the Board to act thereon within the time prescribed, a copy of the application for the Special Permit or petition for the Variance accompanied by the certification of the Town Clerk stating the fact that the Board failed to act within the time prescribed and no appeal has been filed and that the grant of the application or petition resulting from such failure to act has become final or that if an appeal has been filed, that is has been dismissed or denied, is recorded in the Registry of Deeds for the county and district in which the land is located and indexed in the grantor index under the names of the owner of record or is recorded and noted on the owner’s certificate of title. The fee for recording or registering shall be paid by the owner or Applicant. 
7.7 Repetitive Petitions 
7.7.1 To Town Meeting 
No proposed change in this By-Law which has been unfavorably acted upon by the Town Meeting shall be considered by the Town Meeting within two years after the date of such unfavorable action unless adoption of the proposed change has been recommended in the final report of the Planning Board to the Town Meeting. 
7.7.2 To Board of Appeals or other SPGA 
No appeal, application or petition which has been unfavorably and finally acted upon by the Board of Appeals or other Special Permit Granting Authority shall be acted favorably upon within two years after the date of final unfavorable action unless: 
1) 	all but one of the members of the Planning Board consent to a re-petition after notice is given to parties in interest of the time and place of the proceedings to consider consent, and 
2) 	the Board of Appeals or other SPGA finds specific and material changes in the conditions upon which the previous unfavorable action was based, described such changes in its records and similarly consents. 
7.8 Amendment 
This By-Law may be amended from time to time at an Annual or Special Town Meeting. An amendment may be initiated by the submission to the Board of Selectmen of a proposed change by the Board of Selectmen, the Board of Appeals, an individual owning land in the Town to be affected by the amendment, registered voters of the Town pursuant to Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 39, Section 10, the Planning Board and the Metropolitan Area Planning Council. Within 14 days of the receipt of the proposed change, the Board of Selectmen shall submit it to the Planning Board. A public hearing shall be held by the Planning Board within 65 days after the proposed change is submitted to the Planning Board. The Town Meeting shall not act upon any zoning amendment until the same has been reported on by the Planning Board as herein provided or until 21 days has elapsed after the Planning Board hearing without submission of such report. 
Any petition for the alteration of the boundaries of any zoning district shall be accompanied by an accurate plan, size 20” by 30”, at a scale no smaller than 80 feet to the inch showing the changes proposed by the petition. The Planning Board in its report to the Town on any petition to alter the boundaries of any zoning district or on its own initiative shall file with the Town a similar plan showing the changes recommended. No action shall be taken by the Town except as to acceptance without amendment of the plan filed by the petitioner, or plan filed by the Planning Board as aforesaid, or on some modification of either plan, made or approved by the Town Engineer. 
7.9 Validity 
The invalidity of any section or provision of this By-Law shall not invalidate any other section or provision hereof. 
7.10 Effective Date 
The effective date of an amendment to this By-Law shall be the date on which such amendment was adopted by a favorable two-thirds vote of Town Meeting, subject to its publication in a Town bulletin or pamphlet and posting or publication in a newspaper as provided in Massachusetts General Law, Chapter 40, Section 32. 
This page is left intentionally blank. 
SECTION 8. CUSHING SQUARE OVERLAY DISTRICT 
Note: §8 was adopted under Article 3 at the 2006 Special Town Meeting. 
8.1 General 
8.1.1 Purpose 
In recognition of the unique location, function and character of land uses in the Cushing Square commercial area, the Cushing Square Overlay District (CSOD) is intended to: 
a) 	encourage revitalization of the Square; 
b) 	promote the redevelopment of under utilized properties in a coordinated and well-planned manner; 
c) 	promote mixed-use development, incorporating retail, restaurant, office, and residential uses; 
d) 	improve the design of new and renovated buildings by providing greater flexibility while remaining sensitive to abutting residential districts, environmental impacts, and historic preservation; 
e) 	improve the streetscape, including but not limited to, such features as trees, shrubs, and other plantings, as well as walkways, plazas, benches, and other site furnishings and lighting; and 
f) 	encourage development of a more pedestrian-oriented and safer Square. 
8.1.2 Boundary of Cushing Square Overlay District 
The CSOD boundary is shown on the Cushing Square Overlay District Map and is generally described as the area surrounding the intersection of Trapelo Road and Common Street including all of the underlying Local Business I Zoning District and also including parcels 12-207 and 12-211A as listed on the Town’s Tax Assessors Map.  The CSOD boundaries shall be superimposed on the Town of Belmont Zoning District Map so as to indicate the extent of the CSOD. 
8.1.3 Applicability 
The CSOD shall be considered as overlaying other existing zoning districts. The CSOD confers additional development options to be employed at the discretion of the property owner, subject to the requirements of this Section 8.  CSOD development projects shall be subject to a Design and Site Plan Review in accordance with Section 8.3.  Certain CSOD development projects will also be eligible for a Special Permit to increase building height and/or to exceed otherwise applicable square footage limitations. 
a. 	Existing Zoning Districts 
The CSOD does not in any manner remove or alter the zoning rights permitted by the underlying, existing zoning districts. 
8.1.4 Eligibility 
Projects allowed by-right under the underlying, existing zoning are not eligible to apply under the CSOD unless meeting the requirements of Section 8.2.1 d). 
8.1.5 Authority 
The Planning Board shall have Design and Site Plan Review authority for all projects in the CSOD. As part of its Design and Site Plan Review authority under this Section, the Planning Board may waive some or all of the dimensional and parking requirements of this Section if, in its determination, such waiver will result in an improved design.  In addition, the Planning Board is also the Special Permit Granting Authority (SPGA) for CSOD developments requiring a Special Permit. 
8.2 Uses 
8.2.1 Uses Permitted in the Cushing Square Overlay District 
The following uses shall be allowed within a CSOD development project.  Uses in excess of the sizes permitted below may be allowed by Special Permit subject to the requirements of Section 7.4.3 and Section 8.3: 
a) 	Retail sales and services up to 12,000 square feet but not including banks, credit unions or similar establishments; 
b) 	Office, but not including banks, credit unions or similar establishments; 
c) 	Restaurant up to 12,000 square feet, but not including fast food or take out restaurants; 
d) 	Mixed use development projects consisting of a combination of retail sales, office, restaurant, movie theater, art gallery or commercial off-street parking facility uses provided that the development project also includes a residential component and will be subject to the requirements of Section 6.10 and Section 8.3; 
e) 	Movie theaters up to 10,000 square feet; 
f) 	Art galleries up to 10,000 square feet; and 
g) 	Commercial parking lot or facility. 
8.2.2 The following are expressly prohibited uses in a CSOD development project 
a) 	Exterior mounted or stand alone automated banking facility; 
b) 	Banks, credit unions and similar establishments; 
c) 	Drive-through establishments; 
d) 	Adult entertainment establishments; or 
e) 	Storage trailers and outdoor storage of goods associated with a commercial use unless use of such structure is necessary during construction. 
8.2.2.1 Existing Uses 
Any use otherwise permitted in the underlying district and which already exists on the premises proposed for a CSOD development project shall be allowed to remain as part of the development project. 
8.3 Performance and Design Standards 
All development projects proposed within the CSOD require Design and Site Plan Review by the Planning Board to ensure conformance with the following Performance and Design standards: 
8.3.1 Performance Standards 
A) 	Mixed Uses 
The mix of uses shall be balanced and compatible and shall contribute to a vibrant atmosphere, including first floor street-front uses comprised of retail, restaurants, and services. 
1. 	Ground Floor Uses 
The ground floor of any building shall be reserved for allowed business uses except as specified below: 
i. 	office use shall not exceed 2,500 square feet on the ground floor; and 
ii. 	residential uses shall be allowed on ground floors of buildings where the building façade does not front on Trapelo Road or Common Street and the Planning Board has determined that the street front residential use will not have an adverse impact on the continuity of the commercial street-front uses of other properties. 
2. 	Uses Above Ground Floor Above the ground floor uses shall be residential use with the following exceptions: 
i. 	retail uses may be permitted on the second floor; and 
ii. office uses may be permitted on the second and third floors. 
B) Dimensional Regulations 

1. 	Setbacks 
i. 	Front: The maximum front setback shall be zero (0) feet for the front and street side façades. 
ii. 	Side: The minimum side setback shall be zero (0) feet. When abutting a residential district, the minimum side setback shall be 20 feet. 
iii. 	Rear: Rear yard setbacks shall be 20 feet. 
The Planning Board may modify all setback requirements if, in its opinion, such waiver will result in improved design. 
2. 	Height of Structures 
The maximum height of buildings is 28 feet and two stories, above ambient sidewalk grade. 
A building height of up to 36 feet and three stories, may be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board taking into account the criteria provided in Section 4.4 and Section 7.4.3 and subject to Section 8.3. 
A building height of up to 48 feet and four stories, may be allowed by Special Permit from the Planning Board subject to Section 8.4. 
Development projects which abut a residential district may be required to reduce building mass by providing additional setbacks on upper stories of buildings to minimize any impact to surrounding residential properties. 
3. 	Floor Area Ratio (FAR) 
Size of Proposed Site  Maximum Allowable Floor Area Ratio  
• Less than 15,000 square feet • Greater than or equal to 15,000 square feet  Not Applicable • 2.75 for three-story buildings • 3.0 for buildings greater than three stories  

Calculation of floor area ratio shall not include areas contained within the cellar as defined in Section 1.4. 
8.3.2 Parking Requirements 
A) 	Parking spaces shall be provided for new and/or expanded building area in the CSOD, as follows: 
i. 	Residential: One parking space for each dwelling unit. 
ii. 	Restaurant: One parking space per every 4 persons seating capacity. Requirements for outdoor café parking can be modified during Design and Site Plan Review. 
iii. 	Other service establishments, retail businesses and offices: One parking space per 550 square feet of ground floor gross floor area, plus one space per 800 square feet gross floor area on other floors. Excluded from these calculations shall be floor area used for parking or loading. 
iv. 	
Other uses: A number of spaces to be determined by the Planning Board.  The Planning Board may consider evidence from similar uses under similar circumstances. 

v. 	
Mixed Use Development: The total number of spaces shall be determined by adding each separate use together. 


B) 	Reduction of Parking 
The Planning Board may reduce the on-site parking requirements for all uses in a CSOD development project, based upon a consideration of: 
i. 	Availability of shared parking on another property within 300 feet; however, parking spaces for one use shall not be considered as providing the required spaces for any other use, except when it can be clearly demonstrated that the need for parking occurs at different times.  The Planning Board may require a shared parking agreement to be submitted as part of the Design and Site Plan Review application.  The agreement shall address issues such as the times of use, maintenance, striping, and snow plowing of the shared parking area. 
ii. 	Other factors supporting the reduction in the number of required parking spaces such as staggered hours or other opportunities for shared parking among different uses. 
iii. 	Uses within 250 feet of municipal parking garages or lots may be entitled to a 20% reduction in required parking. 
iv. 	
Parking waiver agreement between the applicant and the town in which a fee is paid by the applicant which would be set aside for the creation of future municipal parking facilities to service the district. 

v. 	
Uses within 200 feet of public transportation may be entitled to a 10% reduction in required parking. 


C) 	Bicycle Parking 
Long term bicycle parking shall be provided for all new mixed-use development projects in the CSOD. Long-term bicycle parking shall be at least 50% sheltered from the elements.  The following requirements apply to any new developments: 
i. 	Residential -at least one bicycle parking or storage space shall be provided. However, no bicycle parking is required for residential components where there are fewer than two residential units. 
ii. 	Business -at least two bicycle parking spaces shall be created. 
iii. 	Any property owner required to have bicycle parking may elect to establish a shared bicycle parking facility with any other property owner in close proximity to each development utilizing the shared parking. 
8.3.3 Design Standards 
A) 	General Guidelines 
The Planning Board shall consider the architectural and aesthetic compatibility of the 
proposed development project with the character of the Overlay District, taking into 
account appropriate scale, massing, and location of buildings on the lot, roof slopes, 
street façade, exterior building materials, historic significance and similar factors.  The following objectives and criteria shall be considered in reviewing development projects in the CSOD: 
i. 	Appropriateness of the proposed design and materials of proposed buildings; 
ii. 	Adequacy of the site in terms of the size of the proposed use(s); 
iii. 	Adequacy of the provision of open space, its accessibility to the general public, and/or its association with adjacent or proximate open space areas; 
iv. 	
Impact on traffic and pedestrian flow and safety; 

v. 	
Impact on the visual character of the Cushing Square commercial area and surrounding residential neighborhood; 


vi. 	Adequacy of utilities, including sewage disposal, water supply and storm water drainage; 
vii. 	Impact of the proposal on the existing mix of structures and businesses in the CSOD; 
viii. Determination that there will be no serious hazard to vehicles or pedestrians within the site or on adjacent streets or sidewalks; 
ix. 	
Adequacy of the arrangement of parking and loading spaces in relation to the proposed uses of the buildings; 

x. 	
Appropriateness of the proposed methods of disposal of refuse and other wastes resulting from the uses permitted on the site, including size, location and landscape screening of dumpsters or other trash receptacles; 


xi. 	Determination that the height and bulk of the proposed buildings will not be injurious to surrounding property; 
xii. Obtain appropriate evidence of compliance of the proposal with the applicable requirements of this By-Law other than this Section; and 
xiii. Adequacy of landscaping/site improvements. 
B) 	Building Design 
The detailed design standards below are intended to promote quality development consistent with the Square’s sense of history, human scale, and pedestrian-oriented character.  To provide additional guidance, the Planning Board may promulgate more detailed design guidelines. 
To the extent feasible, building and site design shall incorporate best-practices in energy efficiency, environmental protection, and storm water management; shall address current Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) standards (or other comparable standards), as promulgated by the U.S. Green Building Council; and shall incorporate Low Impact Development site design components. 
1. 	Scale 
The size and detailing of buildings shall be pedestrian oriented and shall reflect 
community preference for moderate-scale structures that reflect the residential 
character of the Town, rather than city blocks.  Building design shall incorporate 
features to add visual interest while reducing appearance of bulk or mass.  Such features include, as appropriate, varied facades, rooflines, dormers, roof heights, materials, and details such as brick chimneys or shutters. 
2. 	External Materials and Appearance 
Except for windows and minor trim, buildings shall avoid reflective materials such as porcelain enamel or sheet metal. 
Predominant wall materials shall have the appearance of wood, brick, or stone painted or coated in a non-metallic finish. Window openings shall be maximized in order to increase visibility into storefronts and add vibrancy to Cushing Square. 
Any alteration of, or addition to, an existing historic structure shall employ materials, colors, and textures that are compatible with the original structure. 
3. 	
Architectural Details 

Architectural features shall be compatible with other structures in Cushing Square. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques shall be utilized in the design of new buildings or additions.  Renovated structures shall maintain the unique architectural details of the building. 

4. 	
Awnings and Signs 


Sections 5.2.4 b) 1 and 5.2.4 b) 4 shall apply to signs. The following requirements shall also apply to awnings on buildings within CSOD development projects: 
i. 	Hardware should be hidden from view. Supports should be located on walls or window frames, and painted to complement the building’s color scheme. 
ii. 	Adequate ventilation should be provided around air conditioners. 
iii. 	Periodic maintenance is required for awnings, in addition to full replacement every ten years, depending on the color, exposure to the sun, and fabric. 
iv. 	
All awnings should have a similar design, function (fixed or retractable), material, shape, color, and appearance. 

v. 	
The preferred materials for awnings are canvas or acrylics. 


vi. 	Awnings should be practical, durable, and not impede other building functions. 
5. 	Preservation of Historic Structures 
Proposed CSOD development projects shall protect and preserve the historic and cultural character of Cushing Square by promoting the conservation of buildings that have historic significance or are determined by the Planning Board to contribute to the character of Cushing Square. When it deems appropriate, the Planning Board may consult with and request opinions and information from the Belmont Historic District Commission. 
To preserve and enhance Cushing Square’s historical resources, the Planning Board may consider the following guidelines when reviewing a proposed CSOD development project: 
i. 	That proposed new buildings respect adjacent historic structures. 
ii. 	Rehabilitation of historic structures shall be done with sensitivity to the historic character of the structure. 
iii. 	Proposals for a façade renovation or new building construction that use a particular historical style shall utilize accurate elements of that style. 
iv. 	Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize the historic property shall be preserved.  The renovation or alteration of historic structures shall: 
a. 	
Maintain size and proportions of windows and doors. Any new work shall fit within the scale of the existing windows and doors and repeat the window and door rhythms that already exist. 

b. 	
Maintain the original materials if possible; new materials shall reflect the original textures and visual effect. 

c. 	
Maintain, or replace if previously removed, building details such as molding, coping lines or parapets, columns and piers. 

d. 	
Install signage that is fitting with the image of the building. 

e. 	
Provide color schemes typical of the original building. 


6. 	Vehicle and Pedestrian Features 
Buildings should be designed to enhance the pedestrian environment.  The following vehicle and pedestrian guidelines apply to CSOD development projects: 
i. 	Curb cuts shall be allowed only at the discretion of the Planning Board. 
ii. 	The Planning Board may allow pedestrian and vehicular access to existing or future development on abutting properties in order to facilitate pedestrian access and to minimize curb cuts. 
iii. 	The provision of parking shall be designed taking into consideration the extent to which the design maximizes pedestrian flow within the development and maximizes the efficient use of existing and proposed parking facilities. 
iv. 	
Parking lots and driveways shall have landscaped “buffer zones” separating cars from pedestrians.  The Planning Board shall determine an adequate buffer zone for each project. 

v. 	
Underground parking is strongly encouraged where feasible. 


vi. 	Vehicle, pedestrian, and bicycle features shall be designed to provide a network of pathways and promote walking within the District. 
7. 	Lighting 
The following lighting requirements concerning lighting shall apply to buildings within a CSOD development project: 
i. 	Exterior signs should have lights for visibility at night. 
ii.  Landscaped paths and walkways should always be comfortably and safely lit. Consider low-placed lamps, wall sconces, and pedestrian-scale pole-mounted fixtures.  
iii.  Awnings and canopies may be illuminated from within to make them glow at night.  
iv.  Lights may be required to be appropriately screened so as to prevent them from reflecting in the eyes of people on the sidewalks, in buildings, or in cars.  
v.  Exterior light fixtures shall be shielded from view or blended into the building’s lines.  Decorative fixtures may be exposed as a design element.  
vi.  Building entries and display windows shall be lit with incandescent or warm-toned fluorescent lighting.  

vii. 	To highlight landscaping, up-light into trees or strings of lights among branches may be required. 
viii. Electrical conduit shall be concealed within the moldings and lines of the building. 
ix. 	There shall be no neon or flashing signs. 
8. 	Landscaping and Off-Site Improvements 
The applicant may be required to install street furniture and landscaping on public property abutting and within the proximity of the proposed development project to ensure the integrity of design in the Overlay District. Site improvements, such as window boxes or potted plants, may be installed outside a development project storefront. 
Street furniture includes benches, planters, trash receptacles, lamps, bike racks, and signs.  If a front setback is provided, those portions of the front yard not occupied by public amenities shall be landscaped to enhance the streetscape. 
The following landscaping and site improvement guidelines apply to the CSOD: 
i. 	All site open space (yards, parking lots, setbacks) should be planned carefully, with appropriate plantings or landscaping.  Open space shall be usable, open, and available to the general public and may consist of landscaped gardens, plazas, sitting areas, sidewalks or similar features. 
ii. 	Open spaces shall be utilized to break up a block of buildings in order to provide visual relief. 
iii. 	Street furniture shall be provided for public use. 
iv. 	
Street furniture should be made of solid wood or recycled plastic lumber to ease maintenance. 

v. 	
Trash receptacles shall be provided at all gathering places and properly maintained. 


vi. 	Window boxes, gardens, or hanging planters shall be located in appropriate locations. 
vii. 	Landscaping and plantings shall be maintained so as not to interfere with entry to stores or block visibility of signs. 
viii. Climate requirements, growth potential, and adaptability to the urban environment shall be considered when selecting plant types and species. 
ix. 	Landscaping shall be installed to properly screen dumpsters, transformers, air conditioning equipment, and other similar building equipment. 
8.4 Four Story Development Projects 
For CSOD development projects that meet the eligibility requirements specified below, the Planning Board may grant a Special Permit to allow an increase in building height and up to 48 feet and 4 stories. 
8.4.1 Eligible Development Projects 
a) 	The development project shall be located on either a single lot, or on a single premises consisting of an assemblage of lots, whether or not in common ownership having an area of or exceeding 15,000 square feet in size; or 
b) 	Development projects including underground parking areas on the site. 
8.4.2 Requirements 
All development projects proposed for a Special Permit under Section 8.4 are subject to the requirements of Section 8.3 with the exception of building heights. 
a) 	Building Heights 
By Special Permit under this Section, the Planning Board may allow the maximum height of buildings in a CSOD development project to be increased up to 48 feet and/or four stories (above ambient sidewalk grade). Said story shall be allowed for residential use only.  The Board, in granting a Special Permit, may require that development projects which abut residential property reduce building mass by providing stepped back buildings on the above ground floors, to minimize any impact to surrounding residential property. 
8.4.3 Additional Criteria 
Development projects with Special Permits under this Section shall also be subject to the Special Permit Criteria specified in Section 7.4.3. 
8.5 Submittal Requirements 
Any person seeking Design and Site Plan Approval or a Special Permit for a CSOD development shall submit 13 copies of the application in such form as the Planning Board may require which shall include the following: 
a) 	Development plans bearing the seal of a MA Registered Architect, MA Registered Landscape Architect, Registered Civil Engineer, or similar professional as appropriate; 
b) 	Narrative description of the proposed work affecting the exterior of the building or 
structure, including a description of the materials to be used; 

c) 	Site plans and specifications showing total square footage and dimensions of all buildings and site improvements, including: 
i. 	New buildings, additions, adjacent structures; 
ii. 	Streets, sidewalks and crosswalks; 
iii. 	Existing and proposed open spaces, including, existing and proposed walls, fences, outdoor lighting, street furniture, new paving and ground surface materials; 
iv. 	
Points of vehicular and pedestrian access/egress; 

v. 	
All utilities, easements or service facilities, insofar as they relate to the project; and 


vi. 	Proposed site grading, including existing and proposed grades at property lines. 
d) 	A certified plot plan less than 6 months old; 
e) 	Architectural Layout Plans at a scale of 1/8” = 1’ or appropriate scale. All spaces within the proposal must be properly labeled and all dimensions must be clearly shown; 
f) 	Site perspective, sections, elevations 1/8” = 1’; 
g) 	Detailed description of the proposed use of the building, including hours of operation, numbers of employees, method and types of deliveries, etc; 
h) 	Detailed plans for disposal of sanitary sewage; 
i) 	Detailed plans for landscaping; 
j) 	Parking plan; 
k) 	Plan for lighting, including the type of fixtures, and the off-site overspill (foot candles) of the lighting; 
l) 	Signage plans; and, 
m) The proposed method of storm water removal accompanied by calculations for a 20-year storm event. 
The Planning Board may also require the following prior to acting on the application: 
i.  Material boards of proposed buildings; and   
ii.  An estimate of municipal revenues and costs expected to be generated by the project, including anticipated real estate valuation and public service needs.  

The Planning Board may request additional information necessary in their deliberations relative to the application for the Special Permit. 
8.6 Procedures 
8.6.1 Design and Site Plan Review 
The Planning Board shall promulgate rules and regulations requiring an applicant for Design and Site Plan Review under this Section to pay a review fee in an amount to be determined by the Planning Board to cover the reasonable costs of the Planning Board for the employment of any independent consultants determined to be needed to assist in the review of the application for Design and Site Plan Review.  Such consultants shall be qualified professionals in the relevant fields of expertise as determined by the Planning Board. 
Review of a submitted application shall follow the procedures below and as specified in Section 7.3.3 of the Zoning By-Laws. Where there is a conflict in procedures, those specified below shall prevail.  The Planning Board, or its designee, shall review a submitted application for completeness and shall notify the Applicant within thirty (30) days of its submission whether the application is complete or, if not, what items are missing.  If the Planning Board fails to so notify the Applicant within such time, the application shall be deemed complete; provided that nothing herein shall be interpreted to limit the ability of the Planning Board to require additional information.  The time for holding a public hearing shall not commence until the Planning Board has received a complete application. 
An application for Design and Site Plan Review hereunder shall be approved if such application, as affected by such reasonable conditions as the Planning Board may impose, is consistent with the objectives in this Section and all other requirements of this By-Law.  The Planning Board may impose such reasonable conditions on its approval as it shall deem appropriate to assure the continuing consistency of the development project with the purposes of Section 8. 
An application may be denied where: 
a) 	An application is incomplete; or 
b) 	No reasonable conditions will ensure that the proposed development is consistent with the standards and criteria set forth in Section 8.3.  Such a denial shall be in writing and shall set forth the reasons for denial. 
Any proposed amendment to an Approval under this Section shall follow the procedures set forth herein for an initial application. 
Notwithstanding any provisions hereof to the contrary, Design and Site Plan Review shall not be required for alterations or repairs to an existing building in a previously approved CSOD development project which do not increase the height, bulk, or footprint thereof, which are not being performed to provide for its use for a substantially different purpose and which do not violate the conditions contained within any prior Design and Site Plan Approval applicable to such building. 
8.6.2 Special Permit Application 
All applications for a Special Permit in the CSOD will follow Sections 7.4.4 and 7.4.5 of the Town of Belmont Zoning By-Law for the application procedures. 
8.6.3 Coordination with Other Provisions of By-Law 
This Section 8 together with the rest of this By-Law constitutes the zoning regulations for the CSOD. Where conflicts exist between this Section 8 and the rest of the By-Law, the provisions of this Section shall govern. 


